
                              1 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Departing Rights Official Raised Volume on Issues

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 927 words

DATELINE: GENEVA


She has been doing a job with a mandate that many would call impossible: to
safeguard human rights around the globe. Yet as Louise Arbour steps down after
four years as the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, she is not
entirely pessimistic.

True, she has no illusions that human rights abuses are on the wane. She also
says plainly that the 47 members of the United Nations Human Rights Council
often use it as a forum for pushing national or regional interests rather than
defending people against assorted horrors.

Nonetheless, Ms. Arbour, 61, a former Supreme Court judge in Canada and, before
that, the chief prosecutor of the United Nations tribunals for war crimes in
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, said she saw some progress.

''It's a small miracle to see how far we have come since the 50 years of silence
after Nuremberg,'' she said, referring to the trials of Nazi war criminals after
World War II. ''All things considered, in human rights law we have achieved more
in the past 15 years than in the previous 50 in taking personal criminal
accountability to where it is now.''

In the view of some human rights groups, Ms. Arbour can share credit for this.
Although she had no powers to punish abusers,  she sharpened the profile of the
high commissioner's office, not only by almost doubling its annual budget to
nearly $100 million and widening its presence in the field, but also by
persistently raising her own voice.

Amnesty International said that Ms. Arbour, who formally left the job on Monday,
had been a champion for human rights and that replacing her would not be easy.
Ban Ki-moon, the United Nations secretary general, is expected to announce her
successor shortly.

Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, said Ms. Arbour had been
principled and outspoken. In a telephone interview from New York, he added,
''Our hope is that the next commissioner not be excessively inclined to practice
quiet diplomacy when outspokenness is called for.''

That said, Ms. Arbour's forthright views have angered many governments and
interest groups. This year, Zimbabwe's justice minister, Patrick Chinamasa, said
Ms. Arbour had turned her office into a ''deified oracle which spews out edicts
we all must follow.'' Some supporters of Israel have called her an idiot.

The Bush administration, too, has objected to her frequent complaints about its
use of torture, secret arrests and disregard of international law as part of the
campaign against terrorism.

Yet Ms. Arbour herself does not regard naming-and-shaming as the high
commissioner's most effective tool. On one of the last days in her office on the
banks of Lake Geneva, Ms. Arbour sounded almost defensive about sometimes using
quiet diplomacy.

''On my travels, I can see presidents and prime ministers and foreign
ministers,'' she said. ''A lot of nongovernmental organizations don't have this
kind of access. But that calls for a different tone of interaction. There's no
point in screaming if you cannot compel anything.''

She has, however, pressed her way into places like refugee camps and prisons, to
the discomfort of her official hosts.

''She'd ask to see political prisoners or rape victims,'' said Scott Campbell,
an aide who has often traveled with her. ''It's difficult to say no to Louise
Arbour.''

Some have said no. North Korea and Myanmar refused to let her in. China said she
was always welcome, but recently, when she wanted to travel to Tibet, she was
told it was not the right time. She visited Sri Lanka, but the government would
not let her open a field office there.

Pakistan kept postponing her trip, finally offering her a date three days before
she was to leave office. She accepted. Last week, she admonished the country's
president, Pervez Musharraf, and other high-ranking officials about human rights
issues, including ''disappearances'' and the lack of judiciary independence.

But it is what she calls ''a very serious erosion'' of safeguards against human
rights abuses in the United States that has haunted her work.

In many countries, Ms. Arbour  said, when she raises human rights concerns with
a president or prime minister: ''I can write the script. The first response I
get is, 'Why aren't you in Guantanamo? Why are you coming here?' ''

But, she added, when she had admonished the United States, she had heard the
opposing view. ''I recently had a meeting with a group of Congressional aides,''
she said, ''and they complained, 'Why aren't you criticizing Myanmar instead of
spending your time criticizing the United States?' ''

In Geneva itself, pure politics often seem to dominate the Human Rights Council,
which in 2006 replaced the politicized United Nations Commission on Human Rights
.

Ms. Arbour said she welcomed the council's new policy under which every
country's human rights record would be examined every four years, but she
lamented regular attempts in the council to gain control of her office.

The council's work has often been paralyzed and distorted by regional groups,
notably the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the African group, which
not only have focused overwhelmingly on Israel's treatment of Palestinians but
also have blocked discussion of such topics as sexual identity, female genital
cutting and so-called honor killings.

''It seems to me that anything that is related to full gender equality is a
fundamental human right,'' Ms. Arbour said. ''But the dictates of culture or
religion or tradition are often put forward as clashing with that. It's the
wrong debate.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: As the U.N. high commissioner for human rights, Louise Arbour
would ''ask to see political prisoners,'' an aide said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FABRICE
COFFRINI/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TORTURE (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%);
EXECUTIVES (74%); WORLD WAR II (74%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); JUDGES (70%);
BUDGETS (70%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%); COUNTERTERRORISM (60%); PRIME
MINISTERS (60%); TERRORISM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (57%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); CANADA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 30, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Changing the Rules of the Games

BYLINE: By ILAN GREENBERG.

Ilan Greenberg, an adjunct fellow with the Asia Society, reported on Central
Asia for The Times until last year. His last article for the magazine was about
Mikhail Saakashvili, the president of Georgia.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 52

LENGTH: 5137 words


On a morning in mid-February, the four staff members of Dream for Darfur sat in
silence in what they call their war room, contemplating posters of Beibei the
Fish and her four fellow Olympic mascots taped to the walls. In this cramped
office in a shared space on the 16th floor of a downtown Manhattan Art Deco
building, Beibei smiled welcomingly, as did Jingjing the giant panda, Huanhuan
the red Olympic flame, Nini the green swallow and Yingying the horned orange
Tibetan antelope: anime-style drawings that regardless of name appear strikingly
the same, Medusa hair fused on teddy-bear faces with little-girl expressions.
Once the Summer Games begin in Beijing on Aug. 8, Chinese Olympic officials plan
to sell millions of the mirthful mascots; the Chinese government has planted
them everywhere in the country, hanging like religious icons from the rearview
mirrors of Beijing taxis, greeting guests as stuffed toys atop hotel check-in
desks and buzzing above city skylines on huge billboards like hovering fairies.

''I don't know about the rest of you,'' said Jill Savitt, Dream for Darfur's
executive director, as she scanned the posters, ''but these cartoon creatures
creep me out.'' Scattered on the floor around her were boxes overflowing with
Dream for Darfur's own media salvo: white T-shirts emblazoned with ''Genocide
Olympics?''

Savitt, a peripatetic, hyperarticulate 40-year-old human rights activist, is the
mind behind a long string of organizations conducting campaigns to pressure
China to change its policies by threatening to tarnish this summer's Olympic
Games. Dream for Darfur orchestrates a coalition of the believing -- N.G.O.'s
committed to ending the continuing violence in Sudan, but also groups concerned
with government abuses inside China; Olympic athlete associations; organizations
concerned about Tibet or China's influence in Burma; and a spindly archipelago
of other China-related causes. ''We are happy to walk into space that's been
created by the Darfur people, because they have created something fresh,'' says
Mary Beth Markey, vice president for advocacy at the International Campaign for
Tibet in Washington. ''It's been opportunistic for us.'' But while Savitt's many
allies have adopted her strategy, Dream for Darfur still has just one goal: to
convince China's government that the Games are imperiled unless it halts its
support for Sudan's regime.

''China,'' Savitt told me proudly, ''is looking at the entire world calling its
cherished games the 'Genocide Olympics.' '' Nonetheless, shaping world opinion
is a tall order, especially with a staff of four; and the Olympics is not as
easy a target as it might appear. Who isn't rooting, at some level, for a
successful Olympics, a precious two weeks set aside for idealism and newly
minted heroes? Aren't the Games meant to eclipse issues of the moment, aspiring
to something universal and transcendent? Who would want to tarnish that? Why
would anyone want to ruin such a good party?

''People say there are a lot of problems in the world, so why single out Darfur
and why target China?'' Ruth Messinger, the former Manhattan borough president
who is now head of the American Jewish World Service, told me recently in her
Manhattan office. ''But this is the first genocide, since the word was coined,
where it was defined as genocide by the American government while it has been
happening,'' she added, referring to Colin Powell's statement in 2004 that the
Darfur killings were indeed a genocide and a Congressional resolution making the
same designation. Messinger is one among perhaps three dozen professional
political operatives and freelance agitators who have collaborated closely
behind the scenes with the Dream for Darfur team, participating in strategy
sessions and connecting Savitt with larger political networks. ''Darfur is
singular,'' Messinger told me. ''China is the reason Darfur is happening. And it
is happening now. There is nothing fast about the killing in Darfur.''

For those on board with Dream for Darfur, connecting the dots between the Summer
Games and hundreds of thousands of African corpses is not much more complicated
than that. The brief against China is by and large uncontested (except by
China): the Sudan government buys its weapons from China with the foreign
currency it makes from selling China its oil. China, meanwhile, protects Sudan
from excessive attention in the United Nations Security Council. ''The Olympics
is a unique lever with the Chinese, and we're not going to get another one -- it
ain't happening again,'' Savitt said one morning in January. (She has met five
times with Chinese diplomats, who each time, Savitt says, use the opportunity to
explain just how much the Chinese people like the Olympics and dislike street
demonstrations.) Now every form of opposition to the Beijing government seems to
have its Olympic angle; the repression of Tibetan protests earlier this month,
for example, immediately led to calls for a boycott of the Games

But Savitt is keenly aware that her approach has to be nuanced, and in her
speeches she is careful to say that she is a fan of the Games and that her
organization is against a boycott. In a recent conference call with other
activist groups, she quickly shot down a suggestion to publish a newspaper op-ed
essay asking President Bush to skip the opening ceremonies. ''He's not going to
do that, and I'm not in the business of asking for things I know I'm not going
to get,'' she snapped. The message to Olympic athletes has been so nuanced that
it verges on abstruse: they should speak out on human rights issues but steer
clear of politics; opposing genocide demands the ultimate in moral outrage from
everyone, yet athletes shouldn't jeopardize their medals. Speaking at a Dream
for Darfur rally on Feb. 12 outside the Chinese Mission to the U.N., the
Canadian Olympic swimmer Nikki Dryden (1992 and '96) put it like this: ''China
sullies everything the Olympics stands for because of what it allows to happen
in Darfur, but I would never ask athletes to go outside their comfort zone.''

Savitt's message to corporate sponsors is less ambivalent but in some ways
trickier. ''No company wants to be the first whale to spout'' is how she put it
to me. Dream for Darfur asks that the major sponsors like McDonald's,
Anheuser-Busch, Microsoft and Volkswagen take very small but potentially
significant actions: to meet privately with Chinese officials to express concern
over Darfur, for example, or to take a symbolic stand by calling publicly for
officials from Sudan who have been accused of crimes against humanity by the
International Criminal Court to be banned from attending the Games. ''These
companies aren't pushing guns in anyone's faces'' in Darfur, says Ellen
Freudenheim, a consultant working on corporate outreach for Dream for Darfur.
''We have to be careful in how we frame this. They are not directly responsible.
Yet the morality is, You are complicit when you do nothing to try to stop
genocide when you can.''

Savitt says that the sponsors are starting to take notice. Even executives at
Coca-Cola have privately expressed anxiety about their association with the
Games, according to Minky Worden, a veteran China specialist at Human Rights
Watch. (On Tibet, Lenovo, the Chinese computer giant, recently said it was
following the conflict there ''with concern and regret.'') ''Everything all
these groups are doing has massive popular support from inside China, which
isn't understood here,'' says Worden, who speaks fluent Cantonese and is focused
on internal Chinese issues -- like migrant-worker rights and press freedoms --
and holding the Chinese government accountable for the promises it made to the
International Olympic Committee in 2001. ''Here is the thing: our demands for
internal human rights are not something that Chinese people don't want, nor are
they anything the Chinese government hasn't explicitly promised to do. We're
pushing an open door. These companies are making a huge mistake in thinking the
Chinese respect them for saying what they think they want to hear. Just the
opposite. The Chinese government respects foreigners who repeatedly and reliably
tell them the truth. How hard is it really for G.E. or Microsoft to push for
something that the Chinese government already said it is receptive to doing?''

While the messaging to athletes and corporate sponsors is articulated
diplomatically, Savitt's overall campaign to bend the government of China to her
demands remains straightforward. ''Now we can really begin,'' she said with a
wide smile on the day in mid-February when Steven Spielberg resigned as a
creative consultant for the opening ceremonies. The actress Mia Farrow, who has
visited the greater Darfur region eight times and says that she may move
permanently to that part of Africa when her youngest child, now 14, gets a
little older, had originally identified Spielberg as a target. Farrow
communicates daily with Savitt and works on nearly every aspect of the campaign.
She popularized the Genocide Olympics slogan in an opinion column -- written
with her son Ronan Farrow, a 19-year-old Yale law student -- in The Wall Street
Journal a year ago. Farrow had decided that for the director of ''Schindler's
List'' to have a role in China's Olympics was unacceptable; she called him a
''key collaborator.'' She and Savitt relentlessly criticized Spielberg. He
didn't respond to their requests for a meeting; Farrow said she heard from back
channels that he was feeling the heat but that he doubted fate would hand him
''his Lillian Hellman moment,'' referring to the playwright's refusal in 1952 to
name names before the House Un-American Activities Committee. And then Spielberg
changed his mind, saying his ''conscience will not allow me to continue business
as usual.''

Spielberg's withdrawal from the Olympics lifted Dream for Darfur from a low in
its campaign. (Admittedly, the publication that same day of an open letter
signed by nine Nobel Peace Prize winners urging China to take action in Darfur
also lightened spirits somewhat.) Dream for Darfur was getting little in the way
of news coverage, and attempts to get the International Olympic Committee to
hold China to account for Olympic-related promises had failed. ''The I.O.C.
expressly and repeatedly told Human Rights Watch in January that it will not
speak in public about human rights abuses in China,'' says Worden. Days before,
Savitt had told me she thought she was losing. ''Darfur is getting worse,'' she
said one evening as we walked to the subway on which Savitt commutes to
Brooklyn, where she lives with her husband and their 8-year-old son. ''More
people are dying, not less. It's not like we can say, 'Well, at least we made
some difference in these people's lives.' Either there is security on the ground
in Darfur or there isn't. There is nothing we can achieve less than this that
means anything.''

Many of the corporate sponsors were also refusing in February to meet with
Farrow, who travels with a MacBook containing her PowerPoint presentation -- an
affecting narrative of grim statistics and photos she snapped of displaced women
and orphaned children with dancing eyes. Darfur remains to many an obscure,
opaque conflict, and Farrow's slide show is a powerful instrument of
communication in the Olympic campaign. Weaving statistics (''2.5 million
displaced people'') with personal stories of encounters with the people in her
photos (''this child had lost her entire family, yet she was able to laugh and
laugh''), she unleashes the presentation on TV chat shows and on her friends,
like Barbara Walters, whom Farrow is currently lobbying. In the car on the way
to a radio interiew, Farrow told me she wanted Walters to include Farrow's plan
for a ''Live From the Camps'' broadcast as a regular feature on Walters's
popular daytime gabfest, ''The View.'' ''Live From the Camps'' is envisioned, as
the name suggests, as a live broadcast of Farrow from inside one of the camps
housing Darfur refugees, to be transmitted as an alternative to watching
commercials during the Olympics.

Dream for Darfur is also giving a report card to corporate sponsors rating their
actions on Darfur. Those who earn lower than a C will be the focus of
demonstrations at their offices beginning next month. And a ''Turn Off/Tune In''
campaign will ask viewers of the Olympics to turn off the ads of flunking
sponsors and to watch Farrow's broadcast from refugee camps.

''From start to finish, what we want China to fear is death by a thousand
cuts,'' Savitt says. ''China thought it would only face a ham-fisted boycott. It
is getting something more sophisticated, more insidious.''

The Spielberg news came as Savitt and Farrow were speaking at a sidewalk news
conference in Midtown Manhattan. It was freezing cold, and Farrow's hands froze
tight while speaking into a bank of cameras. Savitt returned to the office to
find messages from dozens of news outlets requesting interviews. Ben Cohen, the
Ben in Ben & Jerry's ice cream, called with his congratulations. Cohen came to
New York in February to meet with Dream for Darfur to offer his resources. Cohen
said he would lend Dream for Darfur his three mobile billboard trucks, then on
loan to the Obama presidential campaign. ''And I told Jill and Mia that I would
like to focus on getting the attention of the corporate sponsors and work on
pre-emptively branding the Olympic mascots,'' Cohen said to me from his
cellphone in Vermont. ''I'm interested in running some sort of campaign that
introduces these little guys to the world as 'Looks cute -- supports genocide.'
There was a time at Ben & Jerry's -- we were still a small company -- we were
going up against Pillsbury, who owned Haagen-Dazs. We ended up attacking the
Pillsbury doughboy. And we won.''

In January 2007, an English professor named Eric Reeves went to Washington to
propose, for the first time, a large-scale Beijing Olympics campaign at a
meeting of Save Darfur, an umbrella group of some 180 organizations concerned
with the violence in Sudan, ranging from the N.A.A.C.P. and Amnesty
International to Yeshiva University and the Affiliation of Christian Engineers.
Reeves, a 6-foot-5 tenured professor at Smith College with an effulgent personal
presence who speaks in fluid, often lyrical paragraphs, had spent the previous
nine years working on Sudan issues -- publishing more than 200 newspaper and
magazine articles; writing a book called ''A Long Day's Dying'' that
comprehensively tallied the years of killing; sending thousands of e-mail
messages to politicians; supporting human rights workers on the ground; and
browbeating diplomats to do something about Darfur. Reeves, an expert on John
Milton and lately an investigator into the medieval origins of modern reading
habits, crisscrossed New England to speak on college campuses and to meet with
journalists, government officials and U.N. diplomats. He began, mostly from a
desktop computer in his restored Victorian home in Northampton, Mass., an
ultimately successful campaign to pressure international companies; at the same
time, by his count, some 80 universities and 22 states have divested from Sudan.

But at the Save Darfur meeting that January, Reeves's Olympic proposal was
immediately shot down as uninformed. ''Save Darfur was interested in selling
bracelets and in consciousness-raising,'' Reeves says. ''Let's remember that
Sudan has more than $25 billion in external debt. The country only survives
because of help from certain foreign governments. I didn't quite storm out, but
I left. And that's when I met Jill, who ran out after me.''

Over the next three months, Savitt, along with her colleague Nicky Lazar,
discussed the idea with Reeves. Savitt had a comfortable senior position with an
establishment human rights organization called Human Rights First. ''I go a lot
by intuition, and I knew this couldn't just be me, couldn't just be viral,''
Reeves says. ''Jill and Nicky wanted to do it, but they were cautious, too
cautious. They were timid in their presentations, and we got turned down for
funding.''

Around the same time, Savitt and Reeves connected with Humanity United, an
unusual grant-making organization in Redwood City, Calif., underwritten by Pam
Omidyar, the wife of the founder of eBay, Pierre Omidyar. It focuses on
financing efforts to stop contemporary slavery and mass atrocities around the
world and is committed to spending $100 million over five years. The
organization takes its cue from Silicon Valley's famed tolerance for failure,
according to Randy Newcomb, Humanity United's executive director. He says his
strategy is to make big bets on game-changing ideas, a philosophy that ''at best
annoys the elite policy community; at worst, it threatens them.'' Newcomb was
talking on the phone from Richard Branson's Caribbean estate, where he was
participating, along with Nelson Mandela and Peter Gabriel, in a conference on
conflict resolution. Newcomb drew a long breath and changed his tone: ''But
frankly, where were they? Where has the traditional foreign-policy establishment
been in pressuring China in relation to the Olympics about Sudan? A lot of
people tell me that we're wasting our money on this kind of long-shot campaign.
But our ethos is the willingness and ability to take a greater risk for the
ultimate yield that will come from that risk. We aren't saying that we do things
without rigor. But we're willing to absorb greater risk.''

Last spring, Humanity United wrote Dream for Darfur a check for $500,000. The
financing followed publication of Farrow's ''Genocide Olympics'' article --
Reeves and the actress were already closely collaborating. ''Now we had a
campaign, a phrase and a target,'' Reeves says. As Ruth Messinger explained to
me: ''Maybe China's vulnerability on the Olympics is starting to look obvious to
people now. But the amazing thing about this campaign -- and the genius of Jill
and Eric and Mia -- was in making the connection. They were the first and for a
long time the only ones to make it.''

Late last month, Savitt arranged a meeting with M+R Strategic Services, a
national consultancy specializing in high-tech campaigning that happens to have
its New York offices in the same building as Dream for Darfur. The goal was to
gather advice on how to better focus the campaign and to come up with a plan to
galvanize a grass-roots insurgency. She asked the consultants what actions to
take consistent with her resources and size. Michael Ward, who consulted for
Savitt when she was at Human Rights First, suggested making use of existing
databases of activists, sending out mass e-mail messages frequently and
leveraging free-marketing venues like social-networking Web sites. ''Facebook
should be the place,'' he advised.

''O.K.,'' Savitt said, looking pointedly at her staff, Allison Johnson and James
Dunham, both in their mid-20s.

Savitt next asked for advice to give Ben Cohen for his jihad against the Olympic
mascots. ''Tell him to keep his message short,'' Ward said. ''The message here
isn't hard: Genocide bad; China helping.''

Looking over a list of Olympic sponsors, Ward advised Savitt to streamline her
targets: ''Choose two or even one company and hammer it. Everyone had sweatshops
but it took that woman'' -- referring to Kathy Lee Gifford -- ''to make it real.
McDonald's is a phenomenal target; they are so retail. Johnson & Johnson is less
of a brand and therefore less useful. Same goes with General Electric.''

''O.K.,'' Savitt said. ''But then we have to give up on my crazy bumper-sticker
idea. She jumped to a white board and wrote ''(GE)nocide.'' She looked at Ward
and deadpanned, ''The only problem is G.E. isn't actually responsible for any
genocide''

''That's an issue,'' Ward said with a smile.

By the end of February, indications that the Olympic campaign was making inroads
with Chinese government officials began to surface in negative form: the Save
Darfur coalition met with F.B.I. agents to discuss what appeared to be
cyberattacks originating in China. Around the same time, curious e-mail messages
sent in Savitt's name began popping up in the in-boxes of people Savitt had
previously written: ''Dear (name of recipient),'' began the tersely worded
messages. ''There is no link between Darfur and the Olympics. Best Wishes, Jill
Savitt.'' Meanwhile, e-mail messages actually written by Savitt failed to arrive
at their intended destination.

Earlier this month, China sent a special envoy to Sudan, Liu Guijin, a senior
diplomat. ''Since last May, I have visited Sudan four times,'' Liu told
reporters. ''In the future, if it is necessary I will pay more visits. We have a
good relationship with Sudan, we have some advantages in talking to Sudan, so we
should use this as leverage.'' Then Liu said something no Chinese official has
ever said in the past: ''We will persuade them in a direct way to work with the
international community and be more cooperative,'' he told reporters, adding
that ''concerning the Olympic Games, any advice or comments, even if it contains
misunderstandings or criticism, we are open to and welcome this advice.

''We are willing to listen to any comments that contain reasonable elements,''
he went on to say, but warned that ''for those few who attempt to tarnish the
Olympic Games on the pretext of issues totally unrelated to the Olympics, like
the Darfur issue, we are firmly opposed to such attempts.''

Savitt was floored; it seemed that they were getting under China's skin. ''It's
stunning,'' she wrote in an e-mail message to me. The same week, Dream for
Darfur began developing a more focused message to Olympics sponsors -- several
of which had now agreed to meet with Farrow -- asking them to publicly call on
the United Nations to fully deploy, at long last, the authorized multinational
force in the Darfur region, with China taking the lead.

Dream for Darfur was now viewing the corporate sponsorship part of the campaign
as more crucial than before. A significant point of leverage that could tip the
balance: Olympic broadcasters and corporate sponsors account for 87 percent of
Olympic revenue. Microsoft, which is poised to become an even bigger player in
China if its acquisition of Yahoo goes through, responded in a written statement
that the company is ''shocked and horrified by the violence and human rights
violations in Darfur.'' The company further ''commend[ed] Dream for Darfur and
other organizations for their leadership in casting a spotlight on this atrocity
and the need for immediate international resolution. Governments and
international organizations -- the United Nations chief among them, as well as
humanitarian relief organizations -- will need to continue to work together
locally and globally to address the problems in the Sudan. Microsoft will
continue to support these organizations in their mission through technology
assistance and other resources.''

Sponsors of the torch relay that began last week, which include Coca-Cola and
Lenovo, are especially vulnerable. The relay will traverse Tibet, where in
mid-March police cracked down on protesters, including monks, leading to at
least 16 deaths. Indeed, the Tibetan conflict is threatening to supercede Darfur
as the driver of the Olympic campaign. Given the recent violence, Farrow is
considering backing groups like Reporters Without Borders in attacking heads of
state like Gordon Brown and George W. Bush, pressuring them to skip the opening
ceremonies to signal lack of support for China's policies. The way some
activists see it, the opening ceremony is distinct from the rest of the Olympics
and fair game for a boycott. But it is also possible that the Tibet situation
could deteriorate to a point where the Darfur activists will feel they have no
choice but to go along with a boycott.

''The conventional wisdom you continue to hear, in articles that are still
coming out today, is that these advocates are great, God bless them, but they
are misled, they are making the wrong calculation that China is going to move,''
says Sharon K. Hom, executive director of Human Rights in China, a leading
political pressure group on China that disseminates banned information to, and
advocates on behalf of, a vast network of reformers inside China, especially
Chinese lawyers working within the country's court system. Hom criticizes this
view as myopic and credits the Dream for Darfur team for penetrating the Chinese
government bubble, a piercing that may lead to unanticipated political
consequences down the road in China.

For the human rights organizations concerned with reform inside China, the key
date is Aug. 25 -- the first day after the Olympics. Their challenge is to try
to institutionalize their reform efforts. ''The minute the Olympics end, we lose
our leverage,'' says Worden of Human Rights Watch. ''Somehow we have to preserve
our gains and keep the attention on external players. Private diplomacy alone
does not work.''

According to Representative Sander M. Levin, ''There is consensus in Washington
that China should live up to the commitments they themselves made when seeking
the Olympics.'' Levin, who heads the joint Congressional-Executive Commission on
China, which has held hearings on the Beijing Olympics, continued: ''Their own
statements about progress and the spotlight of the Olympics disable some of
China's standard repertoire of available responses to criticism. In this case,
the international spotlight is going to remain on long after the closing
ceremony.''

As summer approaches and excitement builds for the start of the Games, no one
knows how Chinese authorities will respond to an escalating ''Genocide
Olympics'' campaign abroad or the actions of agent provocateurs at home. A
security consultant working on the Olympics for a media outlet told me that his
chief worry is an isolated overreaction, perhaps from a municipal police
officer, that then spins out of control. ''It just takes one banner and one
televised beating for everything to go to hell,'' he said. China watchers are
deeply concerned about the ramifications of China's massive installation of
surveillance technology across Beijing. The city-to-city torch procession that
is a lead-up to the Games is also a potential powder keg. Groups representing
aggrieved minorities in China, like the Falun Gong religious sect and the ethnic
Uighurs in China's western Xinjiang Province, hint at planned ''street actions''
almost certain to spark an angry police response. The torch-carrying route from
Greece leads to the summit of Mount Everest to Beijing -- and right through
Tibet.

Dream for Darfur has also publicized that it has a ''secret plan'' for drawing
attention to Darfur during the Games but is staying mum on details for security
reasons, according to Savitt. Another reason for the secrecy, however, might be
that Darfur's fate will be sealed months before, in April or in May. In order
for Dream for Darfur to reach its goal of security on the ground for Darfurians
by the start of the Olympics, U.N.-sanctioned troops, with their vital
helicopter support, will need at least two months to mobilize. ''You reach a
point of diminishing returns,'' Reeves says. ''If there is a point of ignition,
April is it.'' For Dream for Darfur, the consequences of the big street
demonstrations planned during early April will be critical, especially an
extended rally planned in San Francisco. The coalition of Darfur advocates wants
these demonstrations, designed to garner maximum media exposure, to set loose a
contagion of critical perceptions about the Olympics. The idea is that these
demonstrations will put the words ''Genocide Olympics'' on tens of millions of
lips around the world. ''The Chinese had underestimated us,'' Reeves says. ''I
seriously doubt they will underestimate us in April.'' No matter how it plays
out, the last day of the Olympics marks the end of existence for Dream for
Darfur, which will disband after the Summer Games wrap up on Aug. 24.

China has eased its opposition to Security Council action on Darfur, including
the joint United Nations-African Union force currently trying to patrol Darfur.
But China is not going to convince Dream for Darfur that gradualism is the
answer in Sudan.

Dream for Darfur may, however, have to wrestle with the price of its success in
leveraging China's desire for a problem-free Olympics: other organizations want
to share the stage, and the momentum of Tibetan activists could overwhelm the
cause of Darfur. ''The most climactic part of our campaign will be during the
Games themselves,'' says Tenzin Dorjee, the deputy director of a group called
Students for a Free Tibet, which claims 650 student chapters around the world.
Dorjee, who works out of New York, is planning a massive march from Dharamsala,
India, home to the Dalai Lama and a large exiled Tibetan population, to the
Chinese border. The group also plans to surreptitiously hang Free Tibet banners
on highly trafficked Chinese landmarks, as it did last year on the Great Wall.
''We plan to do more of the same: high-profile direct actions in prominent
places,'' Dorjee says. ''China will either have to let these protests happen or
crack down. And when it cracks down, it shows its true colors. It gets unmasked.
That's our plan.''

Savitt maintains that ''it's actually great there are more voices in the chorus
-- it puts exponentially more pressure on China to do something.'' In her view,
this will not necessarily detract from the Darfur cause. ''If there are going to
be immediate changes having to do with the Olympics,'' she says, ''I think it's
going to be with external issues -- it's more of a baby step. It's one reason
Darfur has gained so much traction.''

CORRECTION-DATE: March 30, 2008



CORRECTION:   An article on Page 52 of The Times Magazine this weekend about
this summer's Olympics in Beijing and the effects of political activists on them
and their sponsors omits a sentence from a statement from Microsoft, a sponsor
of the games, about the need for international organizations to intervene in
Sudan, which buys weapons from China. The passage containing the statement
should read: The company further ''commend[ed] Dream for Darfur and other
organizations for their leadership in casting a spotlight on this atrocity and
the need for immediate international resolution. Governments and international
organizations -- the United Nations chief among them, as well as humanitarian
relief organizations -- will need to continue to work together locally and
globally to address the problems in the Sudan. Microsoft will continue to
support these organizations in their mission through technology assistance and
other resources.''

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Jill Savitt and Mia Farrow in the Dream for Darfur offices in
New York
Liu Guijin, China's special envoy on Darfur, meeting with President Omar Hassan
al-Bashir of Sudan last year
Mia Farrow, top, leading demonstrators to the Chinese Embassy in December.
Bottom: The Nepali police driving back anti-Chinese protesters in front of the
U.N. building in Katmandu earlier this month. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JESSICA WYNNE
SHAO JIE/XINHUA/AP
 TOP: SAUL LOEB/AFP/GETTY IMAGES. BOTTOM: BRIAN SOKOL FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); SUMMER OLYMPICS
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); OLYMPIC TORCH PROTESTS (77%); GENOCIDE (69%); TOYS & GAMES
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); EXECUTIVES (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (92%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); KATHMANDU, NEPAL (74%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (91%); NEW YORK, USA (90%);
XIZANG, CHINA (88%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); SUDAN (93%); NEPAL (92%); TIBET (92%); UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Take Aid From China and Take a Pass on Human Rights

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1081 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


FOR 25 years, the dirty little war on this island in the Indian Ocean has
stretched its octopus arms across the world. The ethnic Tamil diaspora has
provided vital funding for separatist rebels; remittances from Sri Lankan
workers abroad have propped up the economy; the government has relied on foreign
assistance to battle the insurgency.

Today, a shifting world order is bearing new fruits for Sri Lanka. Most notably,
China's quiet assertion in India's backyard has put Sri Lanka's government in a
position not only to play China off against India, but also to ignore complaints
from outside Asia about human rights violations in the war.

The timing is propitious. The government jettisoned a five-year cease-fire this
year, and is now banking on a military victory over the Liberation Tigers of
Tamil Eelam. In so doing, it has faced a barrage of criticism over human rights
abuses and has lost defense aid from the United States and some other sources.
And, in recent months, government officials have increasingly cozied up to
countries that tend to say little to nothing on things like abductions and
assaults on press freedom.

Sri Lanka's foreign secretary, Palitha Kohona, put it plainly when he said that
Sri Lanka's ''traditional donors,'' namely, the United States, Canada and the
European Union, had ''receded into a very distant corner,'' to be replaced by
countries in the East. He gave three reasons: The new donors are neighbors; they
are rich; and they conduct themselves differently. ''Asians don't go around
teaching each other how to behave,'' he said. ''There are ways we deal with each
other -- perhaps a quiet chat, but not wagging the finger.''

The Tamil Tigers, for their part, have succeeded in getting themselves
classified as a terrorist group in many countries, including the United States,
Canada and the European Union, making it harder for the guerrillas to raise
money abroad.

At the same time, according to Mr. Kohona, Chinese assistance has grown fivefold
in the last year to nearly $1 billion, eclipsing Sri Lanka's longtime biggest
donor, Japan. The Chinese are building a highway, developing two power plants
and putting up a new port in the hometown of the president of Sri Lanka, Mahinda
Rajapaksa.

Sri Lanka also buys a lot of weapons from China and China's ally Pakistan.

Chinese diplomacy in South Asia, grounded as it is in a policy of ''harmony''
and deep pockets, is of obvious concern to India. So are the sentiments of
Tamils at home. Overt support from India for the Sri Lankan counterinsurgency
program can be explosive among India's Tamils. But coming down hard on the
government here could push Sri Lanka deeper into China's embrace.

''There is little choice,'' said Ashok Kumar Mehta, a retired general who was a
leader of an Indian peacekeeping force in Sri Lanka nearly 20 years ago.
''India's policy is virtually hands off.''

Mr. Kohona, the Sri Lankan foreign secretary, noted that India's contributions
had also grown, to nearly $500 million this year. India is building a coal-fired
power plant and Indian companies have been invited to build technology parks and
invest in telecommunications. New Delhi, like Washington, has shut the tap on
direct military support, but it can still help with crucial intelligence,
particularly in intercepting weapons smuggled by sea.

The picture in Sri Lanka is emblematic of a major shift from 20 years ago, when
India was the only power center in the region. Now come China's artful moves in
India's backyard. As C. Raja Mohan, an international relations professor at
Nanyang Technological University in Singapore, points out, China has started
building a circle of road-and-port connections in India's neighboring countries,
and it has begun to eye a role in the Indian Ocean, as its thirst for natural
resources makes it more important to secure the sea lanes.

That offers countries like Sri Lanka ample opportunities. ''Now the smaller
countries have increasingly turned to China to influence India's strategic
interests, and thus silence it on human rights issues,'' said Meenakshi Ganguly,
South Asia researcher for Human Rights Watch. She cited Burma, where, in the
1990s, India pressed for democracy and watched the military junta sidle up to
Beijing. ''Now India is concerned about China's role in Sri Lanka because of
control over the Indian Ocean,'' she said.

Iran is the latest entrant. Late last year came the promise of a whopping $1.6
billion line of credit, primarily to help Sri Lanka buy Iranian oil.

Washington still counts. Sri Lanka is sore at losing American military aid and
development assistance. The United States has also irritated the government by
pressing for United Nations human rights monitors after the visit last October
of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, Louise Arbour. She
said at the end of her visit that ''the weakness of the rule of law and
prevalence of impunity is alarming.''

That infuriated the government. Sri Lanka's mission in Geneva sent out acerbic
opinion pieces published in Sri Lankan newspapers. One, an editorial in the
pro-government newspaper, The Island, declared that ''those U.N. knights in
shining armor tilting at windmills in small countries should be told that the
protection of human rights is next to impossible during a fiercely fought war.''
Still, criticism over human rights continues to dog Sri Lanka.

Last Thursday, a report by Human Rights Watch blamed the government for a
pattern of disappearances. The same day, an international Group of Eminent
Persons that the government had invited to monitor Sri Lankan investigations
into human rights violations said it was leaving; it cited ''a lack of political
and institutional will.''

The attorney general's office responded by saying that the government would
reconstitute the panel with ''an alternate group of eminent persons.''

But however free Sri Lanka feels to dismiss Western concerns about human rights
these days, there are still long-range costs it may find itself confronting one
day. The real Achilles' heel for the government is looming economic trouble, as
its war chest expands and inflation reaches double digits.

And in that, the world matters. For its failure to ratify certain international
conventions, Sri Lanka already risks losing trade preferences with the European
Union at the end of this year. And, however much China has risen in importance,
Europe remains this country's largest trading partner.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Disappeared: Relatives of missing Sri Lankans protested last
October during a visit by a United Nations official.(PHOTOGRAPH BY GEMUNU
AMARASINGHE/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); EUROPEAN UNION (70%); TERRORISM (50%); ROAD
& BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (50%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (56%);
EUROPEAN UNION (54%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); CHINA (97%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CANADA
(92%); ASIA (92%); NORTH AMERICA (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (69%); SOUTHERN ASIA (57%)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Forecast Of Violence In a Neighbor Of Chechnya

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 582 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Though violence in Chechnya has decreased markedly in recent years, fighting
between Muslim insurgents and Russian troops threatens to engulf a neighboring
region, a human rights group said in a report released Wednesday.

The group, Human Rights Watch, asserted that a recent rise in insurgent attacks
in the region, Ingushetia,  has provoked a spate of kidnappings, torture and
arbitrary killings of  civilians by law enforcement officials reminiscent of
earlier rights abuses in Chechnya.

Government officials from the region have disputed the report's findings.

Ingushetia, a tiny Muslim republic on Chechnya's western border, has long been
considered a relatively peaceful enclave in the North Caucasus, a mountainous
region in Russia's south. Recently, however, it has become a haven for rebels
fleeing a counterinsurgency in Chechnya.

The aggressive anti-insurgent policies of Chechnya's president, Ramzan A.
Kadyrov, have brought a modicum of stability to the republic after two wars and
nearly half a decade of internecine fighting.

Ingushetia could suffer a similar, if less brutal, fate, according to the Human
Rights Watch report, which  is based on interviews conducted over the last year
with local officials and victims of violence.

The region's government recorded 86 attacks on members of law enforcement
agencies in 2007 and 28 attacks in the first three months of 2008. A total of 65
servicemen were killed in the republic in 2007.

In response, the Russian Interior Ministry has stationed thousands of federal
troops in the republic, who, along with local colleagues, often fail to
discriminate between legitimate insurgent targets and civilians when conducting
operations, Human Rights Watch said.

''Certainly you cannot fully compare Ingushetia and Chechnya,'' Tanya Lokshina,
the researcher for Human Rights Watch who wrote the report, said at a news
conference.

''At the same time,'' she said, ''the kind of abuses that we now see in
Ingushetia are the abuses that used to characterize Chechnya: extrajudicial
executions, torture, forced disappearances, abduction-style detentions.''

The report by Human Rights Watch describes several extrajudicial killings in
graphic detail, including the killing of Rakhim Amriev, a 6-year-old boy shot
when security forces raided his family's house on Nov. 9, 2007, in search of a
relative.

According to testimony from the boy's family and other witnesses in the report,
three servicemen, backed by about 100 soldiers and security officials, burst
into the family's home in the village of Chemulga with barely a warning and
opened fire, killing the child and wounding his mother.

The shooting  provoked a nationwide outcry, prompting the government to open an
investigation, something it rarely does in such instances.

After more than seven months, however, no suspect has been identified.

Officials in Ingushetia, including the Kremlin-backed president, Murat M.
Zyazikov, a former general with the Federal Security Service, have regularly
denied reports of human rights abuses, calling the situation in the republic
stable.

Kerim-Sultan A. Kokurkhaev, Ingushetia's government-appointed human rights
ombudsman, said at the news conference on Wednesday that the situation in
Ingushetia was ''no worse than in any other territory'' in Russia.

He called the work of Human Rights Watch and other rights groups ''fascist,''
adding that the Human Rights Watch report was ''meant to destabilize the
situation.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); SHOOTINGS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (76%); INTERVIEWS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); WITNESSES (64%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 30, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Lists Dead Civilians As Slain Rebels

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Jenny Carolina Gonzalez contributed reporting from
Bogota, Colombia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1705 words

DATELINE: SOACHA, Colombia


Julian Oviedo, a 19-year-old construction worker in this gritty patchwork of
slums, told his mother on March 2 that he was going to talk to a man about a job
offer. A day later, Mr. Oviedo was shot dead by army troops some 350 miles to
the north. He was classified as a subversive and registered as a combat kill.

Colombia's government, the Bush administration's top ally in Latin America, has
been buffeted by the killings of Mr. Oviedo and dozens of other young,
impoverished men and women whose cases have come to light in recent weeks. Some
were vagrants, others street vendors or  manual laborers. But their fates were
often the same: being catalogued as insurgents or criminal gang members and
killed by the armed forces.

Prosecutors and human rights researchers are investigating hundreds of such
deaths and disappearances, contending that Colombia's security forces are
increasingly murdering civilians and making it look as if they were killed in
combat, often by planting weapons by the bodies or dressing them in guerrilla
fatigues.

With soldiers under intense pressure in recent years to register combat kills to
earn promotions and benefits like time off and extra pay, reports of civilian
killings are climbing, prosecutors and researchers say, pointing to a  facet of
Colombia's long internal war against leftist insurgencies.

The deaths have called into question the depth of  recent strides against the
rebel Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, and have begun to haunt
the  military hierarchy.

On Wednesday, President Alvaro Uribe's government announced that it had fired
more than two dozen officers and soldiers -- including three generals -- in
connection with the deaths of Mr. Oviedo and 10 other young men from Soacha,
whose bodies were recently discovered in unmarked graves in a distant combat
zone. The purge came after an initial shake-up  Friday, when the army command
relieved three colonels of  their duties.

At a news conference on Wednesday, Mr. Uribe said an internal military
investigation appeared to have uncovered ''crimes that in some regions had the
goal of killing innocents, to make it seem as if criminals were being
confronted.''

''The armed forces of Colombia have well-earned prestige,'' Mr. Uribe said.
''When there are violations of human rights, that prestige is muddled.''

Professing his innocence in a telephone interview Wednesday night, Brig. Gen.
Paulino Coronado, one of the fired generals, said he lamented the way in which
the dismissals were done.

''The impression is as if I were a criminal or a murderer,'' he  said. ''It is
believable that there may have been mistakes in controls, but one must look at
the means available to command 8,000 men.''

The wave of  killings has also heightened focus on the American Embassy here,
which is responsible for vetting Colombian military units for human rights
abuses before they can receive aid. A study of civilian killings by Amnesty
International and Fellowship of Reconciliation, human rights groups, found that
47 percent of the cases reported  in 2007 involved Colombian units financed by
the United States.

''If the responsibility of the army is to protect us from harm, how could they
have killed my son this way?'' asked Blanca Monroy, 49, Mr. Oviedo's mother, in
an interview in her cinder-block hovel in Soacha. ''The official explanation is
absurd, if he was here just a day earlier living a normal life. The irony of it
all is that my son dreamed of being a soldier'' for the government.

Even before the most recent disappearances and killings, prosecutors and human
rights groups were examining a steady increase in the reports of civilian
killings since 2002, when commanders intensified a counterinsurgency financed in
no small part by more than $500 million a year in American  aid.

But more than 100 claims of civilian deaths at the hands of security forces have
emerged in recent weeks from nine areas of Colombia. Cases  include a homeless
man, a young man with epilepsy and a veteran who had left the army after his
left arm was amputated.

In some cases, victims' families spoke of middlemen who recruited their loved
ones and other poor men and women with vague promises of jobs elsewhere, only to
deliver them hours or days later to war zones where they were shot dead by
soldiers.

''We are witnessing a method of social cleansing in which rogue military units
operate beyond the law,'' said Monica Sanchez, a lawyer at the Judicial Freedom
Corporation, a human rights group in Medellin.

It says it has documented more than 60 ''false positives'' -- the chilling term
for cases of civilians who are killed and then presented as guerrillas, with
weapons or fatigues -- in Antioquia Department, or province.

Researchers have also obtained thorough descriptions of some killings in the
small number of cases -- fewer than 50 -- that have resulted in convictions this
decade.

One April morning in 2004, for instance, soldiers approached the home of Juan de
Jesus Rendon, 33, a peasant farmer in Antioquia, and shot him in front of his
son, Juan Esteban, who was then 10.

The soldiers placed a two-way radio and a gun near Mr. Rendon's body, court
records show, and told his son that his siblings would suffer the same fate
unless he said his father had fired at the soldiers.

Vilma Garcia, 35, Mr. Rendon's wife, said, ''I still fear this can happen
again.''  The five soldiers involved were recently convicted of homicide, and of
torture in connection with the threats to her son.

''The soldiers think we are poor and worthless,'' she  said in an interview in
Medellin, where she and her children fled, ''so nobody will care how we are
killed.''

The  killings have increasingly opened the United States to criticism because it
is required to make sure Colombian military units have not violated human rights
before giving  them  aid.

''If we are receiving aid and vetting from a government in Washington that
validates torture, then what kind of results can one expect?'' asked Liliana
Uribe, a  lawyer in Medellin who represents victims' families.

A senior official at the American Embassy in Bogota, the capital, said the
reports of civilian killings, in past years and in recent months, were  of
concern.

''If the facts in some cases do show that parts of the armed forces were taking
part in murder, that's wrong, and there should be mechanisms to prevent this
from happening and mechanisms to ensure that perpetrators are brought to
justice,'' said the official, who was not authorized to speak publicly on the
matter.

The official said the units involved in the most recent killings, of the 11 men
from Soacha, did not get aid because they had previously been deemed not
credible to receive it.

But the official neither confirmed nor denied the contention that almost half of
the reports of civilian killings in 2007 involved units that received American
aid. The official said a case-by-case review of the episodes had not been
carried out by two American contractors hired by the State Department to help
vet the  military units for  abuses.

Reports of civilian killings rose to 287 from mid-2006 to mid-2007, up from 267
in the same period a year earlier and 218 the year before that, said the
Colombian Commission of Jurists, a Bogota human rights group.

Altogether, the attorney general's office  said it was investigating the
killings of 1,015 civilians by security forces in 558 episodes unrelated to
combat. Prosecutors said the number of new cases under investigation rose to 245
in 2007 from 122 in 2006.

The increase in reported civilian killings spurred the Defense Ministry to issue
a directive last year  making it a priority to capture rebels rather than kill
them. In an interview, Gen. Freddy Padilla de Leon, the top commander of the
armed forces, said the policy shift, while largely intended to prevent human
rights abuses, also had strategic objectives.

''A terrorist captured alive is a treasure, while a dead terrorist is just
one-day news,'' General Padilla said, citing the example of Nelly Avila Moreno,
a FARC commander who surrendered this year and began collaborating with her
captors.  ''A terrorist converted into an informant is useful as long as he or
she lives,'' the general said.

Until the latest wave of killings, it appeared that the new policy was starting
to work. The Center for Research and Popular Education, a Jesuit-led group in
Bogota that maintains a database on human rights violations, documented 87
reports of so-called false positives in the second half of 2007, a 34 percent
drop from the first six months of that year.

But the emergence of cases in Soacha and elsewhere suggests that the problem may
be more systemic than once thought.

Some human rights researchers contend that the killings are tolerated by some
senior officers in the Colombian Army who chafe at greater scrutiny  when
security forces have made big  gains against guerrillas, including the killing
or capture of several top FARC commanders.

One case involves the commander of Colombia's Army, Gen. Mario Montoya. In March
2002, the army's Fourth Brigade, then under his command, killed five people in
their vehicle and presented them as guerrillas, their bodies dressed in
fatigues.

But the driver, Parmenio de Jesus Usme, testified this year that none were
guerrillas. According to a report by Cambio, a news magazine, Mr. Usme, a former
member of a  paramilitary group that opposed the guerrillas, said that two of
the victims were teenagers, Erika Castaneda, 13, and Johana Carmona, 14, and
that he had been driving them to a party when they picked up three other people.

Mr. Usme said that they were fired upon and that everyone in the vehicle was
killed but him. According to the report, General Montoya called the hospital
where the bodies were taken and said that they should be turned over only to
someone in his confidence, after which the bodies were presented to the media in
fatigues at a nearby building.

When asked specifically about the case, General Padilla, the armed forces
commander, said, ''There are preliminary investigations in which the different
declarations are being verified.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Blanca Monroy, with her daughter, says her son was killed by
Colombian troops but was no rebel, no matter what they say. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
CARLOS VILLALON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A10) MAP: The bodies of 11 Soacha
men were found far to the north. (pg.A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); MURDER (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); DISMISSALS (78%); SLUM DWELLINGS (78%); MEN (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); EMPLOYMENT (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (74%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (73%); HOMELESSNESS (70%); INTERVIEWS
(69%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (68%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (71%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (76%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); LATIN AMERICA (77%)

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              13 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 16, 2008 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Rights Investigator Expelled by Israel

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 670 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israeli authorities on Monday expelled Richard Falk, a United Nations
investigator of human rights in the Palestinian territories, saying he was
unwelcome because of what the government has regarded as his hostile position
toward Israel.

Mr. Falk, an American, arrived in Israel on Sunday. He was held at the airport
and placed on the first available flight back to Geneva, his point of departure.
A spokesman for the Israeli Foreign Ministry said that Mr. Falk had been
informed in advance that his entry would be barred. Mr. Falk was not immediately
available for comment.

Mr. Falk, a professor of international law at Princeton, has the title of United
Nations Human Rights Council special rapporteur for the Palestinian territories.
He has long been criticized in Israel for what many Israelis say are unfair and
unpalatable views.

He has compared Israel's treatment of the Palestinians to Nazi atrocities and
has called for more serious examination of the conspiracy theories surrounding
the Sept. 11 attacks. Pointing to discrepancies between the official version of
events and other versions, he recently wrote that ''only willful ignorance can
maintain that the 9/11 narrative should be treated as a closed book.''

In his capacity as a United Nations investigator, Mr. Falk issued a statement
this month describing Israel's embargo on Gaza, which is controlled by Hamas, as
a crime against humanity, while making only cursory reference to Hamas's rocket
attacks against Israeli civilian centers. Israeli officials expressed outrage.

When his appointment was announced by the Human Rights Council last spring, the
Israeli representative said it was ''impossible to believe that out of a list of
184 potential candidates,'' the members had made ''the best possible choice for
the post.''

The American and Canadian representatives also expressed concerns about Mr.
Falk's possible bias. The Palestinian representative said it was curious that
Israel was ''campaigning against a Jewish professor'' and called the nomination
''a victory for good sense and human rights.'' Israel objects to the mandate of
the special rapporteur on grounds that it ignores all human rights violations by
Palestinians, either against Israelis or against other Palestinians. More
specifically, it objects to Mr. Falk.

A statement issued on Monday by the Foreign Ministry noted that in the past
three years, Israel welcomed visits by seven special rapporteurs of the Human
Rights Council and two other senior United Nations representatives.

In Mr. Falk's case, it continued, his ''vehement publications'' made it ''hard
to square his appointment'' with the council's own requirements, which call for
envoys to be impartial and objective. The council's own procedures require its
envoys to operate with the consent of the state concerned.

A Foreign Ministry spokesman, Yigal Palmor, said that Mr. Falk had come to
Israel in June for what was supposed to be a personal visit, but had instead
carried out work  as a rapporteur. ''He lied,'' Mr. Palmor said.

Regardless of Mr. Falk's views, some Israelis questioned the wisdom of banning
him, noting that it would hardly make his reports more sympathetic.

Jessica Montell, the executive director of B'Tselem, an Israeli group that
monitors human rights in the occupied territories, said that even if Israel had
''legitimate concerns about Professor Falk's mandate,'' barring his entry was
''an act unbefitting of democracy.''

Also on Monday, Israel released 224 Palestinian security prisoners from its
jails as a gesture to the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas.

Most of those released were serving sentences of five years or less. None had
been convicted of deadly attacks on Israelis, and none were from Islamic groups
hostile to the Palestinian Authority, like Hamas.

Israel has released almost  1,000 Palestinian prisoners in the past 18 months in
an effort to strengthen the Western-backed administration of Mr. Abbas. At least
9,000 remain in Israeli jails.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: December 30, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on Dec. 16 about Richard Falk, a Princeton University
emeritus professor of international law who has also been an investigator of
Palestinian human rights for the United Nations, reported that Israeli
authorities had refused entry to him two days earlier when he tried to fly in
from Geneva. They said he was unwelcome because of what they called his hostile
position toward Israel and put him on a flight back to Geneva the next day. Mr.
Falk could not be reached before publication to defend himself. Given Professor
Falk's initial unavailability, The Times tried unsuccessfully to get comment
from United Nations officials in Jerusalem and Geneva before the article was
printed, but did not try as it should have done to reach United Nations
officials in New York.  A spokesman for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Human Rights, Rupert Colville, had said in a press release that
Mr. Falk ''should have been allowed to transit Israel to the Palestinian
territories to do his job.'' Professor Falk said last week that he was not
hostile to Israel, but critical of its occupation policy.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Richard Falk speaking in Istanbul in 2005. His positions have
angered Israeli officials.(PHOTOGRAPH BY CEM TURKEL/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); TERRORISM (73%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); CONSPIRACY (73%); APPOINTMENTS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HAMAS (82%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (59%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); UNITED STATES
(93%); TURKEY (79%); CANADA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Drops China From List Of Top 10 Violators of Rights

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The State Department no longer considers China one of the world's worst human
rights violators, according to its annual human rights report released Tuesday,
a decision that immediately earned the ire of human rights groups.

In the annual report on more than 190 countries, the State Department did say
that China's ''overall human rights record remained poor'' in 2007. China, the
report said, tightened media and Internet curbs and increased controls on
religious freedom in Tibet and the Xinjiang region. The report said  China's
abuses also included ''extrajudicial killings, torture and coerced confessions
of prisoners, and the use of forced labor.''

But the report dropped China from a list of 10 countries that it deemed the
worst offenders: North Korea, Myanmar, Iran, Syria, Zimbabwe, Cuba, Belarus,
Uzbekistan, Eritrea and Sudan.

At a news conference, Jonathan D. Farrar, acting assistant secretary of state
for democracy, human rights and labor, did not answer questions about why China
was dropped from the list. ''I think the report highlights that generally the
human rights record remains poor,'' he said.

When asked repeatedly why China was dropped from the list of worst abusers, and
whether that had anything to do with the Beijing Olympics this summer, Mr.
Farrar said: ''I would say China is listed under a section dealing with
authoritarian countries undergoing economic reform where the democratic
political reform has not kept pace. And that is a completely accurate
assessment.''

The press freedom group Reporters Without Borders denounced the decision. ''This
decision was announced even as it was learned that some one hundred Tibetan
monks have been arrested and Chinese authorities are refusing to release
activist Hu Jia and dozens of other freedom of expression advocates,'' the
organization said in a statement. ''U.S. authorities are depriving themselves of
yet another effective way to pressure China, without having achieved any
good-will gesture from Beijing.''

Other critics said that the United States would do well to look closer to home
when gauging human rights abuses.

Amnesty International USA complained that the Bush administration was giving lip
service to human rights around the world, while ignoring abuses by allies of the
United States.

''It is also shocking to read the horrific record of what amounts to torture and
cruel treatment of individuals held by allies of the United States in the war on
terror, knowing that the U.S. government has sent people to those countries for
interrogation through its extraordinary renditions program,'' the executive
director of Amnesty International USA, Larry Cox, said in a statement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(89%); TORTURE (89%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); FORCED
LABOR (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); FINANCIAL RESULTS (78%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (76%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (70%); SUMMER
OLYMPICS (65%); RELIGION (56%); ARRESTS (50%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%);
XIZANG, CHINA (73%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); TIBET (92%); ERITREA (79%); BELARUS
(79%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); SYRIA
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Despite Flaws, Rights in China Have Expanded

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH; Li Zhen contributed research from Beijing, and Fan
Wenxin and Zhong Zijuan from Shanghai.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2097 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI


For the past two decades, China's people became richer but not much freer, and
the Communist Party has staked its future on their willingness to live with that
tradeoff.

That, at least, is the conventional wisdom. But as the Olympic Games approach,
training a spotlight on China's rights record, that view obscures a more complex
reality: political change, however gradual and inconsistent, has made China a
significantly more open place for average people than it was a generation ago.

Much remains unfree here. The rights of public expression and assembly are
sharply limited; minorities, especially in Tibet and Xinjiang Province, are
repressed; and the party exercises a nearly complete monopoly on political
decision making.

But Chinese people also increasingly live where they want to live. They travel
abroad in ever larger numbers. Property rights have found broader support in the
courts. Within well-defined limits, people also enjoy the fruits of the
technological revolution, from cellphones to the Internet, and can communicate
or find information with an ease that has few parallels in authoritarian
countries of the past.

''Some people will tell you, look at the walls, and say they are still pretty
high, while others will tell you that there is a lot of space between the
walls,'' said Nicholas Bequelin, a China specialist at Human Rights Watch.
''Both things are true.''

Chinese who try to challenge the one-party state directly say authorities are no
more tolerant of dissent than they were in the 1980s, and in some cases they are
tougher on citizen-led campaigns to enforce legal rights or stop environmental
abuses.

On the other hand, the definition of what constitutes a political challenge has
changed. Individuals are far less likely to run afoul of a system that no longer
demands conformity in political views or personal lifestyles.

The shift toward a more diverse society helps explain some anomalies in
perceptions of life inside China. Amnesty International, the human rights group,
reported this week that the rights situation had deteriorated significantly in
the months before the Olympics despite China's pledges to improve its record as
a condition for hosting the games.

But a survey conducted by the Pew Global Attitudes Project this spring and
issued last month  found that an astounding 86 percent of Chinese said they were
content with their country's direction, double the percentage who said the same
thing in 2002. Only 23 percent of Americans polled in the survey said they were
satisfied with their country's direction.

The speeches of China's leaders, with their gray imagery and paternalistic
phrasings, have changed relatively little, emphasizing unity, harmony and
economic growth under party rule. The reality on the ground, though, has been
transformed, partly because a more dynamic economy necessitates a more dynamic
society, partly because money gives people options they did not have when they
were poor.

Arguably the most dramatic change in the freedoms enjoyed by most Chinese has
been the gradual erosion of a population registration system that tied people to
their places of birth, preventing internal migration or, at its height, even
tourism.

China has not formally abandoned the system, known as hukou, and it can still
prove a nuisance. But as hundreds of millions of people have moved from the
inland provinces to wealthier coastal cities in search of economic opportunity,
authorities in one place after another have found themselves making concessions
to this new reality.

Song Daqing, who lives in a single-room home here with his wife and three
children, counts himself as a beneficiary of these changes. Born into poverty in
Sichuan Province, he worked as a cattle herder, bricklayer and coal miner,
earning as little as 60 cents a day before coming to Shanghai in 1998. His early
years in this city were marked by frequent mass roundups of migrants by the
police, and he was twice held in crowded detention centers before being expelled
from the city.

''Now we all have residence permits,'' said Mr. Song, who supports his family by
selling vegetables. ''The police don't check our paperwork anymore,  and even if
they found you without a permit, they won't arrest you, but rather would suggest
you get one as soon as possible.''

Reality Trumps Ideology

The relative flexibility the government has shown in allowing this to happen is
more a matter of pragmatism than any overt ideological shift, a grudging
concession to economic reality.

''China's economic development relies on the flow of migrants into cities,''
said Wei Wei, the founder of Little Bird, an organization that runs a special
phone line to help migrant workers protect their rights. ''The country's growth
depends on it.''

Little Bird itself is an example of incremental openness. It is a
nongovernmental organization, one of thousands addressing social, economic and
environmental issues that the party once insisted it could handle by itself. The
leeway private groups have to influence public policy is still limited. Those
that cross unwritten lines into political opposition often are shut down.

But China's bureaucracy is more contentious  than it was under Mao. Policy
advocates within the government -- including officials representing weak
bureaucracies, like those charged with fighting pollution, improving education
and broadening women's rights -- often seek popular support to increase their
clout.

A recent example involved a revision of a law covering rights for the
handicapped, which the government undertook after several organizations banded
together in 2004 to advocate change on the issue. The activists also contacted
Chinese legislators and provided a report to the official Chinese Disabled
Person's Federation.

The government never publicly acknowledged the citizens' action, but a revised
law incorporating some of their recommendations was enacted earlier this year.
''The pressure came from both inside and outside,'' said Wu Runling, director of
the Beijing Huitianyu Information Consulting Center, one of the groups involved.
''You can't tell me that our appeal and calls for revision of the law had no
meaning at all.''

Although a powerful system of censorship remains a fact of life, and journalists
are frequently jailed and detained, feisty publications with mass audiences in
print and on the Internet report forthrightly about ills in society.

Greater access to information has emboldened people to assert some rights.
Homeowners in cities like Shanghai and Chongqing have resisted government
development schemes with some success, and the proliferation of petitioners with
all kinds of grievances presents the authorities with an informal check on their
power.

''After 30 years, everybody knows about democracy and freedom,'' said Wang
Xiaodong, a researcher at the China Youth Research Center, a wing of the
Communist Youth League. ''They know that as taxpayers, we support the
government, not the opposite.''

Before the Olympics, Beijing demolished a favorite pilgrimage spot for
petitioners who flow to the capital from all over the country to seek redress
from perceived injustice. According to a recent report in a Hong Kong magazine,
Phoenix Weekly, the government has also hired thugs to intimidate or kidnap
petitioners to prevent them from making their cases. Critics of such abuses say
that in an indirect way, the state is acknowledging the power of such protest.

''Human rights has become more than just a theory for the public,'' said Jiang
Qisheng, a student leader during the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and former
political prisoner. ''In the past they petitioned and complained about
injustice, but that wasn't about defending their rights. They let the higher
authorities to decide their rights.

''What they are asking for now is a change in the system, and this reflects a
widespread change in attitude,'' he said.

Even in the best of times, China's human rights improvements have been so
gradual as to be almost impossible to discern in any month-to-month sense. And
in the tense environment before the Olympics, which China fears could invite
uncontrollable protests or blemish its international image, the climate has
become noticeably more restrictive.

Lawyers have been sternly warned not to represent clients involved in delicate
political cases. Tibetans and Uighur Muslims have been subjected to arrests and
''re-education'' campaigns.

Hu Jia, a Beijing-based political activist who campaigned for years on behalf of
AIDS patients and for greater political openness, was arrested late last year
and sentenced to three and a half years in prison for ''inciting subversion of
state power.'' Many other dissidents have been warned to stay away from Beijing,
or have seen state surveillance and harassment extended to their family members.

The government relies on unwritten laws: political confrontation with the ruling
party remains a no-go area, and state stability trumps nascent notions of human
rights.

Blogs Subvert Propaganda

Yet even as the police tightened security before the Games, the power of new
information technologies to chip away at the official line was still on display.
In a poor county in Guizhou Province in the south, a teenage girl died under
mysterious circumstances, and rumors of police malfeasance and a cover-up spread
widely on the Internet, prompting public protests to demand a new investigation.

Local authorities initially tried to suppress news of the protests, which turned
violent, and impose an official account of events there. But people wielding
video cameras uploaded material to YouTube, and some Chinese journalists
disputed official accounts that the riots had been put down peacefully.

One of them was Wu Hanpin, a radio reporter who took pictures of the riot. They
showed that the police had fired rubber bullets and teenagers in detention whose
bruised foreheads suggested beatings.

''I saw a gap between the official story and the reality, which was
mind-blowing, like the presence of the armed police,'' Mr. Wu said. ''So I put
some of these things on the Internet, on my personal blog.'' Four days later,
after registering hundreds of thousands of visitors, his blog was closed by
censors.

''The media has made a huge step forward from the '80s,'' said Sun Jinping, a
veteran senior editor at a Beijing newspaper. The riot in Guizhou Province, he
said, ''would have been impossible for the public to know about in the past.''

A View of the Outside

For others, the impact of information about other countries has been just as
great. He Weifang, a professor of law at Peking University, said that before the
economic reform era began in 1979, the country was much like North Korea, where
people were indoctrinated to believe that Chinese were the better off than
people anywhere else.

''Today, even the farmers in remote areas have satellite TVs,'' Mr. He said.
''So whenever they see an election, such as the one held in Pakistan recently,
they may wonder why, even though we have approximately the same economic
conditions, they can elect their top leaders, and we can't even vote for the
leader of a small county. I think a consciousness of political rights has
increased more than anything.''

Even China's party-run legal system is a fulcrum for experimentation, though in
an ambiguous way that highlights the uncertainties in the country's transition.

Judges do not have the power to rule independently in China. Yet the country now
has 165,000 registered lawyers, a five-fold increase since 1990, and average
people have hired them to press for enforcement of rights inscribed in the
Chinese Constitution. The courts today sometimes defend property rights and
business contracts even when powerful state interests are on the other side.

In criminal law, progress is more grudging. Yan Ruyu, a former Beijing police
officer who quit the force and became a lawyer after the violent crackdown on
protesters at Tiananmen Square, said such cases remained unpopular with most
lawyers because the likelihood of prevailing over the state remains so slim.

''There has been progress, but it's so slow that sometimes one becomes
pessimistic,'' he said. ''It's empty talk to speak of having an independent
judiciary if the party leads everything.''

On the other hand, Mr. Yan says, party control turns every criminal case into a
human rights case. That gives every criminal defense lawyer the chance -- and
for some of them, the incentive -- to inch the system forward.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Mentally disabled people dance at Beijing Huiling Service for
the Handicapped, which pressed the government for changes in rights for the
disabled.
 New flexibility in rules that dictate where people live has allowed Song Daqing
to escape poverty in Sichuan to sell vegetables in Shanghai.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY
ARIANA LINDQUIST FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); POLLS & SURVEYS (86%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); OLYMPICS (72%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (69%); ECONOMIC
CONDITIONS (65%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (63%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (60%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

CITY: SHANGHAI, CHINA (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (92%); EAST CHINA (91%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%);
NORTHWEST CHINA (79%); SICHUAN, CHINA (79%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%); XIZANG,
CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); TIBET (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 25, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Attacks U.N. Report Alleging Torture of Detainees

BYLINE: By ANDREW JACOBS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


The Chinese government reacted angrily on Monday to what it called a slanderous
United Nations report that alleges systemic torture of political and criminal
detainees. The government said the authors were biased, untruthful and driven by
a political agenda.

The report, issued Friday by the United Nations Committee Against Torture,
documented what the authors described as widespread abuse in the Chinese legal
system, one that often gains convictions through forced confessions.

The report recounts China's use of ''secret prisons'' and the widespread
harassment of lawyers who take on rights cases, and it criticizes the
government's extralegal system of punishment, known as re-education through
labor, which hands down prison terms to dissidents without judicial review.

''The state party should conduct prompt, impartial and effective investigations
into all allegations of torture and ill treatment and should ensure that those
responsible are prosecuted,'' said the report, which was written by a 10-member
committee of independent experts.

Qin Gang, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, called the document ''untrue and
slanderous,'' and said that China cherished human rights and opposed torture.
''To our regret, some biased committee members, in drafting the observations,
chose to ignore the substantial materials provided by the Chinese Government,''
he said in a statement posted Monday on the ministry's Web site, adding that
they ''even fabricated some unverified information.'' The ministry did not
describe the material it had provided to the United Nations committee.

The report's publication is another embarrassment for the Communist Party, which
has been striving to demonstrate its commitment to human rights. Last month, the
government was infuriated by the European Union's decision to honor Hu Jia, one
of the country's best-known dissidents, who is serving a three-and-a-half year
prison term for subversion; last week, China was angered by a United States
Congressional report that criticized what it called China's failure to fulfill a
pledge to improve human rights leading up to the Olympic Games and during them.

''Illegal detentions and harassment of dissidents and petitioners followed the
Chinese government and Communist Party's instructions to officials to ensure a
'harmonious' and dissent-free Olympics,'' the report said. ''Individuals
detained for circulating a 'We Want Human Rights, Not Olympics' petition are now
serving sentences in prison and 're-education through labor' centers.''

Although China's Constitution includes provisions to protect human rights and
China has ratified numerous international conventions banning torture, public
security officials frequently use coercion to gain signed confessions. ''I have
yet to see a political case in which the person was not tortured or
mistreated,'' said Nicholas Bequelin, a researcher based in Hong Kong for Human
Rights Watch. Even though torture is technically illegal under Chinese law, he
added, there is no explicit prohibition against evidence obtained through
coercion.

Human rights advocates say that the government's crackdown on dissenters has not
let up since the Games, when petitioners seeking permission to demonstrate in
parks officially designated for protests were whisked away by the police.

The most recent cases include that of Guo Quan, an associate professor at
Nanjing Normal University, who was detained on Nov. 13 on suspicion of
''inciting subversion of state power'' after he established an independent
political party. Earlier, Liu Xueli, a farmer from Henan Province whose land had
been confiscated by local officials, sought a protest permit during the Olympics
and was sentenced to re-education through labor.

On Friday, a court in Chengdu handed down a three-year sentence to Chen Daojun,
a journalist and environmental advocate who was convicted of ''inciting to
subvert state power.'' Mr. Chen was detained in May after he published articles
on the Tibetan quest for greater autonomy and the spate of anti-Western
demonstrations that erupted across China after the Olympic torch relay was
disrupted by protesters in Paris, London and San Francisco.

Although prosecutors accused Mr. Chen, 40, of slandering the Communist Party,
his lawyer, Zhu Jiuhu, suggested that the authorities might have been especially
irked by Mr. Chen's participation in a demonstration this year opposing the
construction of a petrochemical plant near Chengdu. Mr. Zhu said he was denied
access to his client; the trial, he added, lasted less than an hour. ''We tried
our hardest,'' he said.

In an interview on Monday, Mr. Chen's wife, Zeng Qirong, said she had not seen
her husband since he was taken into custody. She said he had often written
literary criticism or articles about rural life.

The detention, she said, would be particularly onerous for the couple's
10-year-old son and Mr. Chen's sickly parents. ''The process was not fair,'' she
said of the trial. ''They were only articles. It was his own opinion. He was
only describing the way society is.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LIBEL & SLANDER (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(77%); LAWYERS (74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%);
JUDICIAL REVIEW (70%); OLYMPICS (65%); PETITIONS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); HONG KONG (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (75%)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 19, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a First, Gay Rights Are Pressed At the U.N.

BYLINE: By NEIL MACFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 655 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


An unprecedented declaration seeking to decriminalize homosexuality won the
support of 66 countries in the United Nations General Assembly on Thursday, but
opponents criticized it as an attempt to legitimize pedophilia and other
''deplorable acts.''

The United States refused to support the nonbinding measure, as did Russia,
China, the Roman Catholic Church and members of the Organization of the Islamic
Conference. The Holy See's observer mission issued a statement saying that the
declaration ''challenges existing human rights norms.''

The declaration, sponsored by France with broad support in Europe and Latin
America, condemned human rights violations based on homophobia, saying such
measures run counter to the universal declaration of human rights.

''How can we tolerate the fact that people are stoned, hanged, decapitated and
tortured only because of their sexual orientation?'' said Rama Yade, the French
state secretary for human rights, noting that homosexuality is banned in nearly
80 countries and subject to the death penalty in at least six.

France decided to use the format of a declaration because it did not have the
support for an official resolution. Read out by Ambassador Jorge Arguello of
Argentina, the declaration was the first on gay rights read in the 192-member
General Assembly itself.

Although laws against homosexuality are concentrated in the Middle East, Asia
and Africa, more than one speaker addressing a separate conference on the
declaration noted that the laws stemmed as much from the British colonial past
as from religion or tradition.

Navanethem Pillay, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights,
speaking by video telephone, said that just like apartheid laws that
criminalized sexual relations between different races, laws against
homosexuality ''are increasingly becoming recognized as anachronistic and as
inconsistent both with international law and with traditional values of dignity,
inclusion and respect for all.''

The opposing statement read in the General Assembly, supported by nearly 60
nations, rejected the idea that sexual orientation was a matter of genetic
coding. The statement, led by the Organization of the Islamic Conference, said
the effort threatened to undermine the international framework of human rights
by trying to normalize pedophilia, among other acts.

The Organization of the Islamic Conference also failed in a last-minute attempt
to alter a formal resolution that Sweden sponsored condemning summary
executions. It sought to have the words ''sexual orientation'' deleted as one of
the central reasons for such killings.

Ms. Yade and the Dutch foreign minister, Maxime Verhagen,  said at a news
conference that they were ''disappointed'' that the United States failed to
support the declaration. Human rights activists went further. ''The Bush
administration is trying to come up with Christmas presents for the religious
right so it will be remembered,'' said Scott Long, a director at Human Rights
Watch.

The official American position was based on highly technical legal grounds. The
text, by using terminology like ''without distinction of any kind,'' was too
broad because it might be interpreted as an attempt by the federal government to
override states' rights on issues like gay marriage, American diplomats and
legal experts said.

''We are opposed to any discrimination, legally or politically, but the nature
of our federal system prevents us from undertaking commitments and engagements
where federal authorities don't have jurisdiction,'' said Alejandro D. Wolff,
the deputy permanent representative.

Gay-rights advocates brought to the conference from around the world by France
said just having the taboo broken on discussing the topic at the United Nations
would aid their battles at home. ''People in Africa can have hope that someone
is speaking for them,'' said the Rev. Jide Macaulay of Nigeria.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); RELIGION
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
DECRIMINALIZATION (90%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (76%); TORTURE (75%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(69%); CHRISTMAS (64%); GENES & CHROMOSOMES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); ORGANIZATION OF THE ISLAMIC CONFERENCE (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); HOLY SEE (92%); CHINA (91%); FRANCE (90%); LATIN
AMERICA (79%); AFRICA (79%); ASIA (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);
EUROPE (79%); NETHERLANDS (57%)

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Conditions On U.S. Aid In Drug Fight Anger Mexico

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 693 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


Few slights irk Mexican politicians so much as when Washington treats Mexico
like a backward country in need of outside guidance, and that anger raged full
throttle this week as top Mexican officials threatened to walk away from a major
United States aid package to help defeat drug traffickers.

The reason: Democrats in the House and Senate have tied the aid to guarantees
that the police and military will not violate human rights. Officials from
President Felipe Calderon on down have assailed the idea that the United States
Congress would withhold a quarter of the aid for Mexico if it did not meet human
rights standards, calling it an attack on their sovereignty.

''The bills approved by both chambers of the United States Congress contain some
aspects that make them, in their current versions, unacceptable to our
country,'' Interior Minister Juan Camilo Mourino said Monday.

A day later, President Calderon said, ''My government will defend at all times
its national sovereignty and the interests of Mexicans and we will act strictly
in accordance with the Constitution, and, of course, we will not accept
conditions that simply are unacceptable.''

A chorus of similar protests went up this week from Mexican lawmakers,
prosecutors and law enforcement officials, who called the bills insulting and
reeking of Yankee arrogance. Some pointed out the United States had no room to
talk, given the detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.  Others said Mexico
had not asked for unilateral aid from America, but a partnership in fighting
crime.

Some politicians complained that drug consumption in the United States, along
with the sale of arms to Mexican drug dealers by American arms merchants, were
driving the violence here. ''The only thing we need is for them to stop selling
arms to narcotics traffickers,'' said Javier Gonzalez Garza, the leader of the
left-wing opposition party in the Chamber of Deputies.

Democratic leaders in the United States Congress, however, have stood firm.
They refused to hand over $350 million to $400 million in aid, including Black
Hawk helicopters, to military and police forces with a checkered human rights
history unless they got assurances that abuses would be prevented and
prosecuted.

One issue bothering officials here is that Mexican soldiers, under the
Constitution, cannot be tried in civil court. The Senate version of the bill
would impose that requirement. Human rights advocates in Mexico and in
Washington have urged Congress to use the bill to force Mexico to hold people
responsible for such abuses, just as Congress has done with aid to other
nations, like Colombia.

In 2007, five people were reported to have been arbitrarily arrested, tortured
and killed by Mexican soldiers, according to Amnesty International. In addition,
soldiers last year killed two children and three adults at a checkpoint,
apparently by mistake, according to news reports.

President Bush and his aides say the Democrats are wrong to insert human rights
conditions in an aid package that the administration thinks is vital for a
government in a death struggle with drug cartels.

Beyond the substance of the debate is a historic touchiness among Mexican
officials about what they view as preaching on human rights, democracy and other
ideals from the superpower that invaded them in the 19th century. Put bluntly,
they hate it.

Since Mr. Calderon came to office in December 2006, he has sent thousands of
federal police officers and troops to reclaim cities and states where
traffickers controlled local officials through bribes and threats.

The offensive has unleashed a war among different cartels that has killed more
than 4,000 people, among them about 450 soldiers, police officers and public
officials, the authorities here say.

The Mexican attorney general, Eduardo Medina Mora, said in an interview that his
government was committed to stopping abuses by the police and soldiers who have
intervened in areas once controlled by drug dealers.

''Mexico is the one most interested in human rights,'' he said. ''If we lose the
general public's respect, we lose the ability to fight this war.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMS TRADE (86%); LIBERALISM (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%);
POLICE FORCES (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); TORTURE
(76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (72%); APPROVALS (72%);
MILITARY HELICOPTERS (71%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (70%); HELICOPTERS (50%)

PERSON: FELIPE CALDERON (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

McCain Heads Today for Colombia, Where Adviser Has Long Had Ties

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER; Kitty Bennett contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 894 words


At a time when the role of lobbyists and special interests are at issue in the
presidential campaign, Senator John McCain leaves Tuesday on a trip to Colombia,
where a senior adviser to him has long had business and political ties.

Since 1998, the lobbying firm headed until recently by Charlie Black, one of Mr.
McCain's closest confidants, has earned more than $1.8 million representing the
Occidental Petroleum Corporation, the leading foreign producer of gas and oil in
Colombia. The lobbying firm, BKSH & Associates, has also represented Colombian
textile and apparel manufacturers and a former foreign minister and presidential
candidate who is also a prominent businesswoman.

According to official filings, Mr. Black, who resigned as chairman of BKSH in
March, lobbied Congress, the State Department and the White House on
Occidental's behalf regarding ''general energy issues'' and ''general trade
issues'' involving Colombia. His list of activities also included winning
''foreign assistance for Colombia'' and efforts to block an economic embargo
against the country, which has a questionable human rights record.

''Though he did not have high visibility, we encountered his shadow often,''
said Larry Birns, director of the Council on Hemispheric Affairs, an advocacy
group that monitors Latin American human rights and political issues from
Washington.

Mr. McCain is making the trip  in part to highlight his support for a free-trade
agreement with Colombia that the Bush administration wants to see approved by
Congress by year's end. The senator, a strong free-trade advocate,  has spoken
in  favor of the accord on the campaign trail.

His presumed Democratic opponent, Senator Barack Obama, opposes the deal and
frequently cites it in campaign speeches as an example of what he sees as the
administration's wrongheaded trade policies. Mr. Obama has expressed
environmental and human rights concerns, including what he describes as the
Colombian government's repression of labor unions.

Mr. Black has recently been at the center of campaign controversy over an
interview, published in June by Fortune magazine, in which he said that another
terrorist attack on the United States would benefit Mr. McCain's candidacy. The
McCain campaign declined to make him available to discuss his lobbying
activities on behalf of Colombia for BKSH.

''The campaign has no connection to that firm and therefore no connection to the
questions you are asking,'' said Tucker Bounds, a campaign spokesman.

Occidental's activities in Colombia have long been controversial, both within
that country and among human-rights, indigenous-rights and environmental groups
abroad. The groups have accused the company of complicity in the killing of
peasants thought to be sympathetic to the left-wing guerrilla groups that
operate in the area where Occidental has pipelines or drilling activities. They
have also blamed Occidental for the polluting of rural areas and have accused it
of intimidating Indian tribes seeking to prevent drilling on their ancestral
lands.

Occidental has long denied the accusations, maintaining that its practices are
environmentally sound and describing its critics as unrepresentative.

The most controversial episode dates from December 1998, when the Colombian Air
Force dropped cluster bombs on Santo Domingo, a village near an Occidental
pipeline, killing 18 people. Human rights groups and Colombian government
officials say the bombing was a mistake that occurred because three employees of
a Florida-based aerial security company employed by Occidental to monitor
guerrilla movements had provided incorrect coordinates to the Colombian military
pilots.

The American employees of the security company dropped out of sight, and
Colombian government efforts to have them handed over for questioning and
perhaps trial were fruitless. Frustrated by what they consider the security
company's stonewalling, human rights groups filed suit in California in 2003 and
2004 against Occidental, whose headquarters is in Los Angeles.

Occidental has denied any responsibility for the bombing of Santo Domingo,
saying when the first suit was filed that it ''has not and does not provide
lethal aid to Colombia's armed forces.''

Even as the Santo Domingo attack became a cause celebre among human rights
groups in Washington, as well as some lawmakers there, Congress approved a
special appropriation of nearly $100 million for the protection of oil pipelines
in Colombia in 2003, when Mr. Black's firm was lobbying on Occidental's behalf.

Atossa Soltani, executive director of Amazon Watch, a human rights group that
works on behalf of Colombian Indian tribes opposed to oil drilling and pipelines
on their lands, said Mr. Black was also ''very active'' while Congress was
debating a $1.3 billion military assistance package to Colombia that became law
in 2000. ''We'd be making the rounds in Congress,'' Ms. Soltani said, ''and Oxy
would be there making the rounds, too.''

Occidental has come under fire as well in connection with the 2003 killing of
three Colombian labor leaders who were initially and erroneously said to be
affiliated with one of the guerrilla groups that regularly attack Occidental's
installations. Three Colombian soldiers, all of them members of a special unit
that guards an Occidental pipeline, were charged with murder.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Charlie Black lobbied for years on behalf of Colombia's leading
foreign oil producer. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JEFF CHIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LOBBYING (92%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (91%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERVIEWS
(78%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (76%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (76%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (76%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (76%); GARMENT WORKERS (75%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); FREE TRADE
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); ENVIRONMENTAL &
WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TEXTILE MFG (71%); APPAREL MFG (71%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (69%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (68%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (67%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%); FARM LABOR (62%); TERRORISM (60%); LABOR
UNIONS (50%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (50%)

COMPANY: OCCIDENTAL PETROLEUM CORP (72%)

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL ON HEMISPHERIC AFFAIRS (55%)

TICKER: OXY (NYSE) (72%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325180 OTHER BASIC INORGANIC CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (72%);
NAICS325130 SYNTHETIC DYE & PIGMENT MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS211111 CRUDE
PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (72%); SIC2816 INORGANIC PIGMENTS (72%);
SIC2812 ALKALIES & CHLORINE (72%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (72%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (90%); BARACK OBAMA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              29 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Waiting for Justice

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1253 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


-- Let's pretend, for a moment, that you are Sudan's president, Omar Hassan
al-Bashir, sitting in Khartoum and likely to face charges of genocide and crimes
against humanity from the International Criminal Court for the last five years
of bloodshed in Darfur.

You're watching CNN International, and what comes on the screen but Radovan
Karadzic, the notorious Bosnian Serb leader, apprehended after 13 years in
hiding and about to be hauled to the United Nations-backed tribunal in The Hague
on war-crimes charges.

Now what, Mr. Bashir?

A) Do you get really nervous at this peek into your future and decide to
straighten up, do what the international community has been telling you to do,
sign a peace deal and let peacekeeping forces into Darfur?

B) Or do you get only mildly nervous at this peek into your future, figure that
you have some options, and decide that since there's a wanted poster with your
face on it, you might as well forget the peace deal and give the Janjaweed even
freer rein to attack civilians and maybe even a few relief workers?

The dueling war-crimes cases of July -- first Mr. Bashir is told that a
prosecutor is seeking a warrant for his arrest on war-crimes charges, and then
Mr. Karadzic actually gets arrested in Belgrade, Serbia, in a move that will
most likely send him to The Hague -- received two very distinct reactions from
the international community. The reason may well lie in the two very distinct
pathways that Mr. Bashir could choose in our opening puzzle.

Just about everyone except a few ubernationalistic Serbs appeared to cheer the
arrest of Mr. Karadzic, who was indicted for the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica in
which Bosnian Muslim men were singled out for slaughter. But curiously, the
request by the International Criminal Court's prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
for a warrant for Mr. Bashir's arrest was greeted with ambivalence among
international human rights activists.

''The problem is, it doesn't stop the war,'' said one human rights official, who
spoke on condition that his name not be used. Gary Bass, a Princeton professor
who wrote a book on the politics of war-crimes tribunals, said human rights
advocates were caught in a bind in the Bashir case because they worry that an
indicted Mr. Bashir might think he has no option but  to continue waging war; if
he makes peace, he will still have an indictment hanging over his head and could
end up in The Hague.

''From a human rights perspective, what's more important?'' Mr. Bass asks.
''Delivering justice for people who've been victimized, or preventing future
victimization?''

There is a strand of those within the human rights community who say that
war-crimes indictments should be used only after a conflict is resolved, because
such indictments, they say, can extend the length of a conflict. Advocates of
this view point to the case of Joseph Kony, head of the Lord's Resistance Army,
the guerrilla group that has been engaged in an armed resistance against the
Ugandan government since 1987. During peace negotiations in 2005, the I.C.C.
issued arrest warrants for Mr. Kony and his deputies, charging them with crimes
against humanity that include murder, rape, sexual slavery and the enlisting of
children as combatants.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo met with some human rights advocates before issuing the
warrants; the advocates said they urged him not to do it. Mr. Kony's advisers
said they would never surrender unless they were granted immunity from
prosecution, but the Ugandan government doesn't have the power to revoke a
war-crimes indictment. A tenuous peace is holding right now in Uganda, but human
rights advocates point out that Mr. Kony remains at large -- he is believed to
be hiding in eastern Congo -- and fighting could flare up again at any time.

International justice advocates say the don't-indict-until-the-conflict-is-over
argument is bogus. ''The push for justice is getting a bum rap,'' said John
Norris, executive director at Enough, a group that seeks to end genocide. ''What
they miss is what an indictment does to change the internal debate. It's a big
thing when the international community stands up and says 'this guy is
reprehensible and we're not going to do business with him.' ''

Mr. Norris worked on the Kosovo war for the State Department during the Clinton
administration. He said he was in Moscow for negotiations in 1999, while NATO
forces were bombing Serbia, when news came that the Serbian president, Slobodan
Milosevic, had been indicted for war crimes. Russian negotiators, Mr. Norris
said, ''saw this indictment as a disaster.''

''They said the war was never going to end,'' Mr. Norris said. ''Everybody was
gnashing their teeth about it.'' But, he argues, the indictment didn't change
Mr. Milosevic's calculations. In fact, it was only a week later that Mr.
Milosevic gave in to NATO's demands and the war ended.

Why? For one thing, Mr. Milosevic had endured a fierce bombing campaign. For
another, he believed -- rightly -- that he had other options. Indeed, it wasn't
until two years after he was indicted, in 2001 -- after he had lost elections --
that he was forced to surrender to Yugoslav security forces. He was then
transferred from a jail in Belgrade to United Nations custody just inside
Bosnian territory, and eventually to The Hague, where he died two years ago, his
trial incomplete.

Mr. Karadzic's case is even more striking. After the Bosnian war ended in 1995,
he lived as a fugitive for 13 years. It wasn't until Serbia elected a new
government  more interested in joining Europe than in nationalism that the
authorities arrested the Bosnian Serb leader.

Those cases suggest that one way war-crimes indictments are useful is not so
much to obtain justice, but as a tool to help shape the postwar behavior of a
country: its new leaders may need a way to re-engage the outside world. In the
case of Mr. Karadzic, Serbia's new leaders realized he was of more use to them
as a way to get back into the good graces of Europe.

An indictment also didn't change the calculations of Charles Taylor, the
Liberian president  indicted for war crimes in March 2003. But it did play a
role in clearing a path for peace, all the same.

Just a few months after he was indicted, Mr. Taylor agreed to a deal that forced
him to leave Liberia for what was supposed to be a safe haven in Nigeria. Part
of the deal, which Mr. Taylor struck with Nigeria's president, Olusegun
Obasanjo, was that he could stay, unarrested, provided he didn't meddle in West
African affairs and wars while in exile.

Prosecutors with the Special Court for Sierra Leone said that Mr. Taylor didn't
keep that promise, and Mr. Obasanjo rescinded Mr. Taylor's ''safe haven.'' He
was captured while trying to leave Nigeria in 2006, and was eventually carted
off to The Hague; meanwhile, in his absence, Liberians had elected a new
democratic leader, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who promised reconciliation.

Professor Bass of Princeton says that while he's not sure war-crimes indictments
are always the way to go in the midst of a conflict, he does think indictments
sometimes embolden a country's opposition, making a despot's reign more tenuous.
''It tells domestic political opponents that maybe the time is right to get rid
of you,'' he says.

And, he adds, no matter the problems it may create, there's something to be said
for justice.

''Does finding out the truth mean something?'' he asks. ''For a lot of people --
like the Armenians, for instance -- it does.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: CRIMES OF WAR: Evidence of killings by government troops abounds
in Sudan, top, as does evidence of the massacre of Srebrenica's Bosnian Muslims.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TOP, LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
ABOVE, STATON R. WINTER/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(WK1)
 (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN F. BURNS/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (WK4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
ARREST WARRANTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(89%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%);
PEACE PROCESS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (58%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA
(79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); NETHERLANDS (91%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); SERBIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 19, 2008 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Report Accuses Chavez of Abusing Rights

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO.

Maria Eugenia Diaz contributed reporting

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 593 words


As it settles into its 10th year, President Hugo Chavez's government has
consolidated power by eliminating the independence of the judiciary, punishing
critical news  organizations and engaging in wide-ranging acts of political
discrimination against opponents, a human rights group said in a report released
on Thursday in Caracas.

The report, by Human Rights Watch, which is widely known in Latin America for
condemning human rights abuses in Colombia, a top Latin American ally of the
United States and an ideological rival of Venezuela, was made public at a
delicate time for Mr. Chavez, who expelled the American ambassador last week in
an angry speech laced with expletives.

Before the release of the report, Mr. Chavez was already facing a backlash from
his opponents in Venezuela after supporting a blacklist to prevent opposition
candidates from running for office in regional elections this year and using his
decree powers last month to enact 26 laws further concentrating authority  in
his hands.

The detailed report by Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, described
political discrimination as a defining feature of Mr. Chavez's presidency, a
policy at times carried out with explicit endorsements from the president.
Purges of opposition personnel in the national oil company and state agencies
have been particularly thorough in recent years.

Jose Miguel Vivanco, the Americas director at Human Rights Watch who released
the report in Caracas, the capital,  acknowledged that Venezuela was a
relatively open society in which public debate still flourished. But he said
that Mr. Chavez, through his repeated demonization of opponents as
''putschists,''  had instilled what he described as an ''environment of fear.''

''Democracy needs the existence of institutions that are not cowed, which are
capable of exercising their constitutional mandate,'' Mr. Vivanco said.

He cited the Supreme Court as an institution that had been  reconfigured by
legislation drafted in 2004 by the National Assembly and signed by Mr. Chavez
that allowed the president to purge the court of his opponents and pack it with
subservient justices. Since then, the report said, the court had upheld Mr.
Chavez's positions and had not protected basic rights in cases involving
organized labor and the media.

Mr. Vivanco also singled out  the court's upholding of a measure that
disqualifies candidates from running for public office because of legal claims
against them. Leopoldo Lopez, the mayor of Chacao, a municipality in Caracas,
had challenged this measure in a recent public campaign only to have his
position rejected by the court.

''The disqualification of candidates is a yet another example of political
discrimination supported by the court,'' Mr. Vivanco said. ''One cannot hope for
an independent point of view.''

Mr. Chavez's government proclaims that it is advancing toward socialism partly
through the nationalization of foreign-owned companies. But the report said
public authorities had sought to remake Venezuela's labor movement with methods
that violated basic organizing freedoms.

The government has done this by using state agencies to interfere with unions
and by retaliating against workers for legitimate strike activity, the report
said. In addition, the government has intimidated unions through the creation of
cooperatives expected to be loyal to Mr. Chavez.

In one example, the report said  Caracas street cleaners had been  forced to
dissolve their  union and fragment their members into small cooperatives.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); ELECTIONS
(78%); NATIONALIZATION (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%);
LEGISLATION (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); MAYORS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (62%); LABOR UNIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (92%)

CITY: CARACAS, VENEZUELA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); COLOMBIA
(92%); LATIN AMERICA (91%); VENEZUELA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 5, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

European Court Rules Against Britain's Policy of Keeping DNA Database of
Suspects

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The European Court of Human Rights ruled unanimously on Thursday that Britain's
policy of gathering and storing the fingerprints and DNA of all criminal
suspects -- even those who turn out to be innocent -- was a violation of the
human right to privacy.

The ruling, handed down in Strasbourg, France, is a severe blow to the
law-enforcement policies of the Labor government, which has led Europe in
aggressively collecting and retaining personal information on its citizens.
Using unusually strong language, the court declared itself ''struck by the
blanket and indiscriminate nature'' of the police's policy of holding DNA
material indefinitely in its database.

Britain has several months to decide how to respond to the ruling, but the
current law will have to be amended. In a statement, the home secretary, Jacqui
Smith, said she was ''disappointed'' by the court's decision.

''I strongly believe DNA and fingerprints play an invaluable role in fighting
crime and bringing people to justice,'' she said. Britain's DNA Database
contains the profiles of more than 4.6 million people, some 860,000 of whom do
not have criminal records. Privacy experts say that this represents a higher
proportion of Britain's population than do similar databases in other countries.

''They're in the vanguard of doing this, is the polite way of saying it,'' said
Daniel P. Cooper, a partner at Covington & Burling, a corporate and business law
firm that filed an amicus brief in the case on behalf of Privacy International,
an advocacy group. ''They have the biggest database in Europe, and possibly
globally, for law enforcement purposes.''

Human rights groups applauded the court's decision as a welcome check on the
powers of the state.

''Forty percent of Britain's criminals are not on this database, but hundreds of
thousands of innocent people are,'' said Anna Fairclough, the legal officer of
Liberty, a British group that advocates for human rights. The court, she said,
''has protected the privacy of British people so poorly let down by our own
government.''

The government argues that information on the database collected from suspects
in past crimes has helped investigators solve thousands of fresh cases in the
past eight years, including at least 53 murders and 94 rapes.

Britain has a reputation for intruding in an increasingly heavy-handed way in
its citizens' private lives. It is said to have the most CCTV cameras per capita
in the world. A government plan to issue mandatory ID cards encoded with
personal information has stirred fierce opposition in a country that has long
celebrated individual liberty.

''There have been a number of recent government initiatives which have been very
worrying to privacy advocates,'' Mr. Cooper said. ''And there have been so many
massive data breaches and leaks of information that anytime the government
proposes something that would require collecting more data, people get very
concerned.''

The DNA case was brought by two Sheffield men who were arrested in separate
cases in 2001, but were both ultimately cleared of committing crimes. One,
identified as Mr. S., 19, was charged with armed robbery; he was later
acquitted. The other, Michael Marper, now 45, was arrested and charged with
harassment in 2001; the charges were eventually dropped.

In both cases, the suspects' fingerprints and DNA samples were taken by the
police. Both men asked later that the samples be destroyed, but the police
refused.

While most European countries allow the police to take fingerprints and DNA
samples in some criminal cases, England and Wales are alone in Europe in
allowing the samples to be taken as a matter of course, and in keeping them
indefinitely, experts say. Scotland has separate, less stringent, rules.

The two men took their case to the European court after losing a series of
battles in British courts, arguing that the police's decision to keep the
samples violated their right to privacy as set out in Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights. Having information on the DNA data base was
humiliating and stigmatizing, they said.

The court agreed, saying that Britain had ''overstepped any acceptable margin of
appreciation'' in striking a balance between individual rights and public
interests.

The current law, it said in stinging language, ''constitutes a disproportionate
interference in the applicants' right for respect to private life and cannot be
regarded as necessary in a democratic society.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%); DNA (91%); EVIDENCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); FORENSIC DNA
TESTING (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (78%); LEGAL SERVICES
(76%); LAWYERS (75%); BUSINESS & CORPORATE ENTITIES LAW (71%)

COMPANY: COVINGTON & BURLING LLP (57%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (57%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (57%)

PERSON: JACQUI SMITH (52%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (90%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); FRANCE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says U.S. Is Too Eager to Endorse Suspect Elections

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The advocacy group Human Rights Watch on Thursday said that the Bush
administration was giving lip service to the promotion of democracy around the
world by endorsing suspect elections while allowing human rights violations in
those countries to go unchecked.

In a scathing report, the organization blamed the United States and Europe for
undermining human rights by allowing autocrats to pretend they are democratic.
The report cited Bahrain, Jordan, Nigeria, Russia and Thailand as acting ''as if
simply holding a vote is enough to prove a nation democratic, and Washington,
Brussels and European capitals played along.''

Russia, Jordan and ''even China,'' the group said, have ''gotten into the game''
of merely using the word democracy to claim real democratic credentials.

The report cited President Hu Jintao's calls for more democracy within the
Chinese Communist Party. ''Yet that has not stopped him from barring independent
political parties, blocking legal efforts to uphold basic rights and shutting
down countless civil society organizations, media outlets and Web sites,'' the
organization's executive director, Kenneth Roth, wrote in the report's
introduction.

In an interview, Mr. Roth attributed much of this posturing by foreign
governments to the Bush administration's promotion of democracy while still
accepting the results of dubious elections. Mr. Roth said that the Bush
administration had chosen the trappings of democracy instead of human rights.

''They've abandoned democratic standards and reduced its requirements to just
holding an election,'' he added.

The State Department's spokesman, Sean  McCormack, disputed the allegations in
the report. ''We've seen progress in the Middle East,'' he said. ''Is it always
as fast as we would like to see? No. But, then again, you're not going to get to
the point where we all want to be if we attempt, or others attempt, to try to
impose a solution or some cookie-cutter approach to every country around the
world.''

Human Rights Watch specifically mentioned Pakistan, where President Pervez
Musharraf, one of President Bush's crucial regional allies, dismissed members of
the independent judiciary and put them under house arrest and installed his own
allies on the Supreme Court to make sure that he remained president. While the
Bush administration has called on Mr. Musharraf to hold elections, it has been
noticeably less vocal in calling for Mr. Musharraf to reinstate the independent
judiciary.

The assassination in December of Benazir Bhutto, the former Pakistani prime
minister who was expected to be Mr. Musharraf's chief opponent in the upcoming
elections, has intensified questions about whether Pakistan's elections,
rescheduled for Feb. 18, will be fair.

''It's now too easy for autocrats to get away with mounting a sham democracy,''
Mr. Roth said. ''That's because too many Western governments insist on elections
and leave it at that. They don't press governments on the key human rights
issues that make democracy function -- a free press, peaceful assembly and a
functioning civil society that can really challenge power.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); POLITICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); EXECUTIVES (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); ARRESTS
(72%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); SUPREME COURTS (60%);
HOUSE ARREST (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (79%); HU JINTAO (69%); BENAZIR
BHUTTO (52%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (93%); EUROPE (93%); CHINA (92%); BAHRAIN
(92%); NIGERIA (92%); JORDAN (90%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); BELGIUM (73%); THAILAND
(72%)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 16, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Urges Iraq to Address Human Rights During Lull

BYLINE: By ERICA GOODE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


The United Nations on Saturday called on the Iraqi government and the United
States to take advantage of a period of reduced attacks to address the human
rights problems that plague Iraq, including violence against civilians, abuse of
detainees, persecution of women and ethnic minorities, and a lack of food and
shelter for displaced people.

In a new human rights report, the United Nations noted some progress, including
''a marked decrease in violent attacks involving mass casualties'' from July to
December, the period covered in the report. It applauded the Iraqi government's
decision to ratify the United Nations convention against torture and the
government's efforts to alleviate overcrowding in prisons, and it took note of
new judicial safeguards for detainees.

But ''even with improvements, this is not enough,'' said Staffan de Mistura, the
United Nations' Special Representative to Iraq.

Among the concerns cited in the report were an increase in the number of
juveniles held in detention, the so-called honor killings of women in the
northern region of Kurdistan, the killing of civilians by private security
contractors -- among them, the shooting of 17 Iraqis by employees of Blackwater
in Nisour Square in September -- and ''continuing reports of the widespread and
routine torture or ill treatment of detainees, particularly those being held in
pretrial detention facilities.''

At the end of December, according to the report, 51,133 people were being held
in prisons across Iraq, either for security reasons or because of crimes,
including 24,661 by the American authorities, 16,607 by Iraq's Justice Ministry
and 3,673 by the Interior Ministry.

Among other recommendations, the report urged the Americans to allow human
rights monitors to visit detainee camps, something that the Iraqi government
already allows. And, noting that legal consequences had yet to result from the
Blackwater episode, the report called for private contractors to be prosecuted
when they kill civilians.

Past human rights reports by the United Nations have included overall statistics
on the deaths of Iraqi civilians, but the Iraqi Health Ministry now refuses to
provide such figures, said Said Arikat, a spokesman for the United Nations
Assistance Mission for Iraq.

Mr. de Mistura attributed a drop in violence in Baghdad and in other areas of
Iraq from October to December of last year to three factors: an increase in
American troops; the cease-fire called by the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr; and
what he characterized as ''a feeling of tiredness'' among Iraqis and an
increasing realization ''that violence has not produced anything except
violence.''

The Iraqi government has been critical of some previous human rights reports by
the United Nations. But government officials did not offer any response to an
earlier draft of the report -- a silence that Mr. de Mistura said he was
inclined to interpret as a positive thing.

In the autonomous Kurdish region in northern Iraq, human rights abuses have
included the arrest of journalists who have written unfavorable articles about
the government, the detainment of people for long periods without their being
charged, and the killing of women for adultery or other transgressions. Other
women have died, possibly in suicides, ''typically by burning, to protest
spousal abuse or after disputes with family members, while others were found
shot dead,'' the report said.

The report said it was difficult to find accurate numbers for such killings
because of underreporting and unreliable statistics. Data obtained by the United
Nations from a hospital in Erbil Province found 249 women were admitted as burn
cases there from January 2007 to August 2007. The report also called attention
to the practice, among some groups in Kurdistan, of genital cutting of women,
sometimes referred to as female circumcision.

The report noted that the Kurdistan regional government established a new
department last year to address violence against women.

Falah Mustafa, the head of the Kurdistan Regional Government's department of
foreign relations, said the government and the prime minister were ''personally
following'' the issue. ''Also, we have to educate society, and this process
should start from the individual and the family and therefore it is not just the
government's responsibility,'' he said.

In the city of Kut, in southern Iraq, Iraqi security forces once again fought
with members of the Mahdi Army militia, which claims loyalty to Mr. Sadr. Aides
for Mr. Sadr have renewed calls for both the government and militiamen to
observe the truce.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
ETHNICITY (72%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%);
INVESTIGATION & SECURITY SERVICES (66%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (63%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(57%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congress Trims Bush's Mexico Drug Plan

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


The United States Congress has scaled back on President Bush's anti-drug plans
for Mexico and put human rights conditions on some of the aid, drawing fire from
some Mexicans who accuse American lawmakers of meddling in their country's
internal affairs.

As part of a broader emergency appropriations bill that remains under discussion
and could face a presidential veto, the Senate on Thursday approved $350 million
to aid Mexico in what has become a pitched battle against drug trafficking. The
Senate would also give $100 million to countries in Central America that are in
drug wars of their own, as well as to the Dominican Republic and Haiti.

Besides reducing the Bush administration's request, which would have sent $500
million to Mexico and $50 million to Central America, the Senate adopted
language similar to that in a recently passed House bill that would hold up a
quarter of the money until the State Department ruled that Mexico was meeting
certain human rights markers. The House approved $400 million for Mexico, one of
several differences that will be worked out in a House-Senate conference in the
coming weeks.

The Senate measure still represents a major increase in aid to Mexico in a
single year, legislative aides said, reflecting bipartisan concern over the fact
that an estimated 90 percent of the cocaine entering the United States comes
through Mexican territory.

But at issue is the performance of Mexico's army and the police, which have been
accused by human rights organizations of engaging in abuses as they chase down
the country's drug cartels.

''Human rights abuses in the army are routinely investigated by the military
itself, and that leads to impunity,'' said Tamara Taraciuk, Mexico researcher
for Human Rights Watch. ''The big issue is accountability.''

To address that, the Congressional plans ask the secretary of state to report on
whether Mexico was prohibiting testimony obtained through torture and trying
soldiers accused of abuses in civilian courts, among other conditions.

Since President Felipe Calderon of Mexico started his drug war in 2007, more
than 200 law enforcement officers have been killed, among them at least two
dozen top commanders. The overall body count is estimated to be 1,300 people so
far this year, on track to exceed the roughly 2,500 drug-related killings in
2007.

The Bush administration has pointed to a recent surge of violence as evidence of
the need for the so-called Merida Initiative, which is the name given to the
spending deal struck last year by Mr. Bush and Mr. Calderon. But Congress was
left out of the initial deal making, resulting in hard feelings when Mr. Bush
submitted the plan.

The trims to the president's plan, and the strings attached by lawmakers in
Washington, clearly irked some Mexicans. The Mexican government was working
behind the scenes in Washington to soften some of the legislative language,
Congressional aides said. The newspaper La Jornada said in an editorial this
week that it was ''a grotesque and absurd pretension'' that the United States,
which has human rights issues of its own in its detention facility in Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, should be scrutinizing Mexico's armed forces.

Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, dismissed such criticism in a
speech on Wednesday introducing the spending plan.

''Since when is it bad policy, or an infringement of anything, to insist that
American taxpayer dollars not be given to corrupt, abusive police or military
forces in a country whose justice system has serious flaws and rarely punishes
official misconduct?'' he said. ''This is a partnership, not a giveaway.''

Mr. Bush's proposal called for spending for military hardware, mostly
helicopters, but also programs to root out corruption within law enforcement
agencies and increase the protection of witnesses. The Congressional plans would
scrutinize any money directed to the army.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Soldiers patrolling Culiacan, in Sinaloa State. Drug-related
deaths in Mexico are about 1,300 so far this year. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GUILLERMO
ARIAS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); ARMIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); DRUG POLICY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(86%); ARMED FORCES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SUPPLEMENTAL
APPROPRIATIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (78%); ILLEGAL DRUGS
(78%); TORTURE (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); VETO (78%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS
(77%); COCAINE (73%); CARTELS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (64%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); FELIPE CALDERON (58%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); HAITI (79%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
(79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (73%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2008 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Group Says Satellite Images Prove Rights Abuses in Ethiopia

BYLINE: By ANDREW C. REVKIN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 287 words


Human rights advocates on Thursday said that Ethiopia has been committing
''crimes against humanity,'' including the torture, murder, rape, and forced
eviction of civilians, in its crackdown on insurgents in the country's isolated
eastern Ogaden desert region.

The group Human Rights Watch, in a 130-page report released in Nairobi, Kenya,
and posted online at hrw.org, cited independent analysis of satellite
photographs by an American scientific group as support for its conclusion that
many villages had been razed.

The Ethiopian government has routinely rejected such claims. Calls and e-mail
messages to the Ethiopian Embassy in Washington were not returned.

The image analysis was led by Lars Bromley, the director of the science and
human rights program of the American Association for the Advancement of Science,
based in Washington.

Guided by eyewitness accounts gathered by the human rights investigators, the
scientists tracked down satellite images of particular villages in the region
from before the most recent army campaign and commissioned private providers of
satellite images to take fresh satellite photographs of the locations.

Comparisons confirmed that dozens of structures in eight communities identified
as attacked by witnesses had vanished, and the images also revealed signs that
buildings had been burned, Mr. Bromley said.

''The Ethiopian authorities frequently dismiss human rights reports, saying that
the witnesses we interviewed are liars and rebel supporters,'' Peter Bouckaert,
the emergencies director of Human Rights Watch, said in a statement. ''But it
will be much more difficult for them to dismiss the evidence presented in the
satellite images, as images like that don't lie.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); EYEWITNESSES (89%);
WITNESSES (88%); EVICTION (79%); EVIDENCE (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); TESTIMONY (73%);
DESERTS (57%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SCIENCE (56%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (90%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); KENYA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              43 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                            The New York Times Blogs
                                    (Green)

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday

Human Rights, Refugees and Climate Change

BYLINE: JAMES KANTER

SECTION: SCIENCE; earth

LENGTH: 281 words



HIGHLIGHT: Many environmental groups say one of the biggest costs to the planet
from climate change will be mass migration from areas that are vulnerable to
flooding and desertification.


Many environmental groups say one of the biggest costs to the planet from
climate change will be mass migration from areas that are vulnerable to flooding
and desertification.

The specter of refugees desperately clamoring for a safe haven in cooler parts
of the world is certainly a frightening one. Mass migration also could put
immense strain on regions like northern Europe or North America if they seek to
accommodate the refugees -- or to rebuff them.

But how close are we to this nightmarish vision of the future?

On Tuesday, Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, said
that the issue of climate change is becoming of greater concern to his group,
particularly because of the refugee issue.

"Migrants are among the most vulnerable to human rights abuses," Roth told
editors and reporters at the offices of the International Herald Tribune in
Paris.

But Roth cautioned against identifying conflicts, like the one in Darfur, as
purely driven by climate change. "I tend not to agree with the idea that God or
the weather is wholly responsible," he said, while adding that the loss of farm
land to climate change was a contributing factor to the African conflict.

Climate change is a "gradual process that's underway already," Roth said. But he
was unable to say when the effects of global warming would become a central
issue for Human Rights Watch.

Roth's caution highlights a grim reality for environmental activists: Even as
they sound the alarm about the catastrophes that await a warming planet, trends
like desertification may have to become more pronounced and flooding more
frequent before their message is heeded by some of the world's most important
policy makers.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Web Blog

SUBJECT: LAND DEGRADATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CLIMATE CHANGE (90%); REFUGEES (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CLIMATOLOGY (90%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (89%); GLOBAL WARMING
(78%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (78%) Consumers

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%); NORTHERN EUROPE (88%); SUDAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2012


                   Copyright 2008 The News York Times Company
                              All Rights Reserved


                              46 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Venezuela Expels 2 After Report on Rights

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 466 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela


President Hugo Chavez's government expelled two employees of Human Rights Watch
late Thursday night after chafing at their documentation of widespread political
discrimination, intimidation of union members and a subservient judiciary.

Armed men in uniforms apprehended Jose Miguel Vivanco, a Chilean citizen who is
the Americas director for the New York-based group, and Daniel Wilkinson, an
American who is deputy director for the Americas, and placed them on a flight to
Sao Paulo, Brazil, where they arrived on Friday morning.

''About 20 men, some of them in military uniform, intercepted us when we arrived
at our hotel after returning from dinner Thursday night,'' Mr. Vivanco said in a
telephone interview from Sao Paulo. He said he struggled briefly with the
security officials when he tried to send a message on his BlackBerry to The New
York Times about the expulsion.

The officials then disabled the BlackBerries of the two men and prevented them
from contacting anyone in Venezuela, including diplomats from the embassies of
Chile or the United States. ''They informed us of our apprehension and told us
they had entered our rooms and had packed our belongings,'' Mr. Vivanco said.

The expulsion, broadcast partly on state television here, comes at a time of
increasingly erratic actions by Mr. Chavez. In the last week, he expelled the
American ambassador, rounded up military officers and accused them of plotting
to kill him and clashed with the Vatican over its granting of political asylum
to a political opponent.

The Foreign Ministry said in a statement that Mr. Vivanco violated the law by
entering the country on a tourist visa to do human rights work. The ministry
also said that Human Rights Watch, which is an outspoken critic of the Bush
administration, was acting in concert with the United States government in a
campaign of aggression against Venezuela.

''Accusing us of being part of a conspiracy is a distraction tactic used to
attack the messenger,'' Mr. Vivanco said. ''We have never had this experience
anywhere in this hemisphere.''

The expulsion of the two men came after they released a long report here on
Thursday documenting rights violations in Venezuela. They pointed to Mr.
Chavez's dismantling of judicial independence and his use of a 2002 coup that
briefly ousted him from office as a pretext for consolidating power by weakening
rights protections.

The report also discussed the government's intimidation of local human rights
defenders and nongovernmental organizations, documenting the use of state
television to carry out attacks on advocates doing work that criticized Mr.
Chavez's creation of a military reserve under his command.

''Our expulsion reveals yet again the degree of intolerance of this
government,'' said Mr. Vivanco.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas director of Human Rights Watch,
met with reporters on Thursday in Caracas, Venezuela (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUAN
BARRETO/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (88%); US PRESIDENTS (79%); INTERVIEWS (79%);
LABOR UNIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PUBLIC
TELEVISION (71%); CONSPIRACY (70%); COUPS (69%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (64%);
POLITICAL ASYLUM (64%); RELIGION (50%)

COMPANY: BLACKBERRY LTD (56%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

TICKER: BBRY (NASDAQ) (56%); BB (TSX) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS334111 ELECTRONIC COMPUTER MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC3571
ELECTRONIC COMPUTERS (56%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (89%)

CITY: SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (88%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (70%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); BRAZIL
(94%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (71%); VENEZUELA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Gives Adviser Role to Militia Leader

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 463 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan


Sudan has appointed Musa Hilal, a leader of the Arab militia known as the
janjaweed, to a central government position. The move was condemned by
international human rights advocates.

The minister of federal affairs, Abdel Basit Sabderat, confirmed on Sunday that
Mr. Hilal had been appointed his new adviser. The president had earlier denied
the appointment.

''Yes, he is appointed,''  Mr. Sabderat said. He gave no further details.

Mr. Hilal leads a powerful Arab group in Darfur known as Um Jalul. He said that
he would be based in Khartoum, the capital, but added that  the position could
require that he travel to outlying regions. The ministry coordinates regional
administrations with the central government.

The Bush administration says that Mr. Hilal is the coordinator of the janjaweed,
which is accused of war crimes in Darfur. Mr. Hilal denies the atrocities, and
says that he mobilizes his tribesmen to defend their lands.

Human Rights Watch, which is based in New York, is urging the United Nations
secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, to pressure Sudan's president, Omar Hassan
al-Bashir, into revoking the appointment and investigating Mr. Hilal for crimes
in Darfur.

''Musa Hilal is the poster child for janjaweed atrocities in Darfur,'' Richard
Dicker, the director of the international justice program at Human Rights Watch,
said in a statement released Sunday.

''Rewarding him with a special government post is a slap in the face to Darfur
victims and to the U.N. Security Council,'' he added, noting that the United
Nations had issued a travel ban against  Mr. Hilal for his role in Darfur.

Gamal Nkrumah, an Egyptian journalist who covers the region, said Mr. Hilal's
appointment threatened to undermine coming peace talks between the government
and Darfur rebels and could strain Khartoum's already troubled international
relations.

''It was a surprise decision, and a very unpleasant surprise,'' Mr. Nkrumah
said. ''It's very negative, and it just shows the complete intransigence on the
government's part.'' He said the move would also alienate Darfur's rebels.

Human rights groups say  they have interviewed witnesses who said  Mr. Hilal was
at the scene of atrocities during the Darfur conflict, assertions that he
denies.

Some analysts suspect that Mr. Hilal could be charged by the International
Criminal Court, which has already issued arrest warrants for Ahmad Haroun, a
government minister, and Ali Kushayb, a janjaweed leader, for suspected war
crimes in Darfur.

The ethnic and political conflict has raged in the Darfur region  for more than
four years, killing at least 200,000 people and displacing 2.5 million. About
two-thirds of Darfur's population relies on the world's largest relief
operation for food, shelter or medical care.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: International observers have accused Musa Hilal, an Arab sheik,
of war crimes in Darfur. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL KAMBER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPOINTMENTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (79%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); POPULATION SIZE (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(73%); ARREST WARRANTS (68%); ARRESTS (68%); WITNESSES (60%); PEACE PROCESS
(51%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); UNITED NATIONS (55%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (51%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              49 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 4, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Empty Olympic Promises

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 407 words


Six months out from the 2008 Olympics, China has jailed another inconvenient
dissident. Hu Jia was dragged from his home by state police agents, and last
week he was formally charged with inciting subversion. To earn the right to host
the Games, China promised to improve its human rights record. Instead, it
appears determined to silence anyone who dares to tell the truth about its
abuses.

Mr. Hu and his wife, Zeng Jinyan, are human rights activists who spent much of
2006 restricted to their apartment. She used the power of the Internet to blog
about life under detention while he wrote online about peasant protests and
human rights cases.

Mr. Hu's recent testimony, by telephone, to the European Parliament about
Olympics-related rights violations may have been the last straw. Ms. Zeng and
the couple's two-month-old baby remain in their apartment under house arrest,
with telephone and Internet connections now severed.

Improving its human rights record isn't China's only unmet commitment to the
International Olympic Committee. It also promised to improve air quality. Now
athletes and their coaches are figuring out  how to spend as little time as
possible in China's smog-swamped capital, where they may need masks to breathe.

Beijing also made empty commitments about press freedoms. China has failed to
lift  fully the reporting restrictions on foreign journalists, including limits
on their ability to move freely about the country. Local journalists are as
restricted as ever. There has also been increased censorship of the Internet.

The Olympic Committee has not made public its formal contract with Beijing. But
a new book called ''China's Great Leap,'' edited by Minky Worden, media director
for Human Rights Watch, reports that Beijing sought to strengthen its bid by
telling the committee -- specifically -- that awarding it the Games would
facilitate human rights progress.

With the Games approaching, China has instead expanded its crackdown on
dissidents, tightened controls over nongovernmental organizations and rounded up
''undesirables,'' such as migrants and the mentally ill.

The United States and other major countries need China's help on many of the
most challenging issues of the day. But they must keep reminding Beijing,
publicly and privately,  that it will be judged as much on how it treats its
people as on the quality of the Olympics' made-for-TV spectacle. The whole world
will be watching.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: OLYMPICS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNET & WWW
(89%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); CENSORSHIP (75%); WRITERS (75%); AIR
QUALITY REGULATION (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); COACHES & TRAINERS (73%);
POLICE FORCES (73%); HOUSE ARREST (73%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (70%); AIR QUALITY (67%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(67%); SMOG (66%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (56%); INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (55%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 1, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkish Law Easing Curbs On Speech Wins Praise

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL


The European Union on Wednesday welcomed a vote by the Turkish Parliament to
soften a law restricting free speech.

But human rights groups said the law, approved after an all-night debate, should
have been scrapped.

Turkish legislators approved a government-backed proposal to amend Article 301,
which prohibits the denigration of Turkish identity or institutions. The law has
been used to prosecute the  Nobel laureate Orhan Pamuk and other intellectuals.

''This is a constructive step forward in ensuring freedom of expression, and we
look forward to its effective implementation,'' the European Union presidency,
which is now held by Slovenia, said in a statement. ''This step is both positive
for Turkey and an indication of Turkey's continuing commitment to the reform
process.''

The amendment angered hard-line nationalists in Turkey who say the government
succumbed to pressure from the European Union. Turkey's campaign to join the
union has slowed, partly because of political turmoil in Turkey and Turkish
bitterness over what many perceive as interference by the union.

Human rights groups said that the amendment did not go far enough, and that
changes were needed in other laws that restricted expression, including Turkey's
antiterrorism law and its laws on crimes against the national founder, Mustafa
Kemal Ataturk.

''It's a deeply disappointing revision,'' said Emma Sinclair-Webb of  Human
Rights Watch, based in New York. She said the amendment did not address
''enormous problems with the protection of free speech in Turkey.''

Legislators voted 250-65 to amend the law. The change cuts the maximum sentence
to two years in prison, possibly suspended for first-time offenders, from three
years. Investigations of possible violations of the law will be subject to the
approval of the justice minister.

The new version also prohibits insults to the ''Turkish nation,'' rather than
the more vague ''Turkishness,'' a definition that many prosecutors used to
silence dissident voices.

Feray Salman of the Ankara-based Human Rights Joint Platform speculated that the
amended law might not be used for a while and that the justice minister might be
hesitant to approve prosecutions under its provisions. But she said a change of
government could lead to a more vigorous use of the law.

''Political approaches and ideologies may change at any time in the country,''
Ms. Salman said. ''Therefore it doesn't protect freedom of expression at all.''

Hrant Dink, an ethnic Armenian journalist who was killed in 2007, was prosecuted
under Article 301 for referring to the mass killings of Armenians by Turks in
the early 20th century as ''genocide.''

The teenager accused of killing Mr. Dink had been influenced by extreme
nationalists, and mourners attributed the crime to the atmosphere of animosity
surrounding the journalist's legal problems. Mr. Dink had received many death
threats.

Mr. Pamuk, who won the Nobel prize for literature in 2006, also went on trial
over comments on the killings of Armenians, but the charges were dropped.

Turkey' governing Justice and Development Party was the only party that voted
for the amendment. The change is subject to the president's approval.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
APPROVALS (89%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (89%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%);
SENTENCING (76%); AWARDS & PRIZES (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); EU PRESIDENCY
(73%); NOBEL PRIZES (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); HOMICIDE (70%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (66%); JAIL SENTENCING (65%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); ARMENIA
(92%); SLOVENIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 14, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia Extradites 14 Paramilitary Leaders to the United States

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Maria Eugenia Diaz contributed reporting from Caracas,
and Jenny Carolina Gonzalez from Bogota, Colombia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1114 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela


Colombia extradited 14 jailed paramilitary leaders  to the United States on
Tuesday, in an effort by President Alvaro Uribe to take a hard line against the
warlords and defuse a scandal that has tied them to senior lawmakers in the
Colombian Congress and members of his own family.

The extraditions of so many paramilitary leaders at once was unprecedented in
Colombia's long history of trying to dismantle the hydra-headed syndicates that
export cocaine to the United States. They come at a delicate moment for
Colombia's government, which is trying to win approval of a trade agreement
with the United States.

Senior Democrats in Congress have opposed the trade deal, saying that Mr. Uribe
has not made enough progress in curbing human rights abuses and prosecuting
those responsible.

The extraditions seemed to indicate a new push by Mr. Uribe's government to
prevent the rearming of the paramilitary armies after years in which violence in
Colombia's internal war has waned.

The extraditions were carried out by surprise in the early hours of Tuesday with
dozens of elite police officers gathering the men from three high-security
prisons in Colombia. Interior Minister Carlos Holguin said the men were put
aboard a plane in Bogota bound for the United States, where they will face
drug-trafficking charges.

''Most of the top bosses are there,'' Mr. Holguin said, speaking on Colombian
radio. ''In some cases they were still committing crimes and reorganizing
criminal structures.''

The extraditions are likely to add fodder not only to the fierce debate around
the trade agreement, but also to the debate in Colombia about the best way to
prosecute those accused of committing some of the worst atrocities in Colombia's
long war.

Human rights groups say the extraditions will put the warlords outside the reach
of Colombia's judicial system. While the men may now face lengthy sentences in
the United States for drug-trafficking offenses, their crimes related to the war
in Colombia may go unpunished, they said.

''These men are not going to be held accountable for the human rights violations
they committed,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas director for Human Rights
Watch. ''Victims in Colombia will not be able to confront their tormentors and
receive the reparations they deserve.''

Still, some of the men extradited to the United States could  spend more time in
prison in the United States on drug trafficking charges than they would in
Colombia for their actions during the war. It was also clear that some warlords
had effectively controlled their armies from prison, thwarting efforts to
prevent a paramilitary resurgence.

Reports of an increase in extrajudicial slayings this year, in particular a rise
in killings of union members, have plagued Mr. Uribe's attempts to win approval
of the trade deal in the United States Congress. In the past, paramilitaries
were responsible for many of those killings, though it was unclear whether any
of the extradited leaders were directly linked to the recent crimes.

In any case, the move by Mr. Uribe demonstrates a resolve to confront the
paramilitaries despite a slow-burning scandal of revelations of ties to the
militias that had ensnared the president's political supporters, including top
lawmakers and  Mr. Uribe's former intelligence chief.

''This is an astonishing move for Uribe, who is trying to demonstrate to the
U.S. Congress that rumors of his ties to the paramilitaries are false,'' said
Bruce Bagley, an expert on the Andean drug war at the University of Miami.
''This should go over well with the Democratic Congress.''

Still, perceptions of justice will depend on the sentences meted out. Mr. Bagley
said human right groups would closely follow the sentencing, especially after
moves by the Bush administration to reduce prison terms for top drug traffickers
in exchange for information about the functioning of their networks.

American officials were vague as to whether prison sentences would be lenient or
long. The Justice Department in Washington said in a statement that it had
assured Colombia's government that it would not seek life sentences for any of
the defendants.

The paramilitary leaders extradited to the United States included a top warlord,
Salvatore Mancuso, who oversaw atrocities like the massacre of 15 civilians and
displacement of more than 600 people in 1997 in the town of El Aro, which has
come to symbolize the path undertaken by the militias  throughout the 1990s.

Mr. Uribe's government, the Bush administration's top ally in Latin America, has
already extradited more than 700 Colombians to the United States since 2002.
Most of those extraditions  were of low-level operators in Colombia's resilient
cocaine trade.

Despite the disbursement of more than $600 million a year in aid from the United
States to fight drug trafficking and leftist guerrillas, Colombia remains the
world's largest cocaine producer and the source of about 90 percent of the
cocaine consumed in the United States. Paramilitary leaders came to control many
of the thriving drug syndicates.

Landowners established the private armies in the 1980s to combat the leftist
insurgencies, but the paramilitaries eventually attained broad influence in
Colombia's economic and political structures. Disclosures of ties between the
paramilitaries and prominent political   supporters of Mr. Uribe have recently
shaken the country.

For instance, Mr. Uribe's cousin and close political collaborator, Mario Uribe,
a former senator, was detained in April on charges of collaborating with the
paramilitaries. And more than two dozen other members of the Colombian Congress
have been arrested on claims of having similar ties.

Some of these revelations were obtained from the jailed warlords as part of a
peace process that demobilized thousands of combatants in the private armies.
That process is now thrown into doubt with these extraditions.

''The idea that the United States will require the paramilitaries to collaborate
with the victims is a lie that is being sold to the country,'' said Eduardo
Bocanegra, the lawyer for Rodrigo Tovar Pupo, one of the extradited warlords.

''The reparations were not only monetary,'' Mr. Bocanegra said. ''They were also
symbolic; the paramilitaries were providing information about the bodies found
in mass graves.''

But Mr. Uribe said on Tuesday that an agreement had been reached for the
proceeds obtained from fines and confiscations of property from the paramilitary
leaders in the United States to go to Colombian victims or their families.
''This is notice,'' Mr. Uribe told reporters in Bogota, ''that the law must be
respected.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The paramilitary leader Edwin Mauricio Gomez Luna left prison in
Antioquia, Colombia, before his extradition on Tuesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RAUL
ARBOLEDA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (93%); EXTRADITION (93%); TRADE TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
PRISONS (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); CORRECTIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (76%); APPROVALS (75%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); COCAINE (71%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (90%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (59%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(79%); VENEZUELA (59%)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's Unreality TV

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 470 words


China has gone to extraordinary lengths to spruce up its image before next
month's Olympics: shuttering factories to reduce air pollution, mopping up algae
in sailing waters, harassing critics and threatening journalists.

To win the right to host the Games, Beijing promised to expand press freedoms
for foreign reporters and implied that opening China to the world would help
expand human rights more generally.

We will never know whether China's leaders intended to keep their word. What we
do know is that the International Olympic Committee, corporate sponsors and
governments around the world should have held China to its word. They have not,
and China has read their silence as complicity.

China has jailed critics, denied visas and threatened news organizations that
negative coverage could jeopardize their chance to cover the Games.

According to Human Rights Watch, at least 10 foreign journalists, including
Newsweek's China bureau chief, have received anonymous death threats since they
reported on the violence in Tibet. Government authorities have also used police
intimidation and bribery to try to silence parents demanding an accounting for
the reprehensibly shoddy construction that caused schools to crumble, killing
thousands of children in the May 12 earthquake in Sichuan Province. Thousands of
people have been evicted from their homes in Beijing as the city cleans up for
international TV crews.

Corporate sponsors for the Games seem determined to look the other way. Most
world leaders, including President Bush, also have been too silent. We accept
Mr. Bush's decision to attend the opening ceremonies, but we see no sign that he
got anything for it .

Mr. Bush has correctly denounced the genocide in Darfur and is pressing for
international sanctions on Zimbabwe's Robert Mugabe over brutally stealing last
month's presidential election. China, however, continues to enable both Mr.
Mugabe and Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir. Just last week,  Beijing
faulted the world court prosecutor for bringing charges of genocide against Mr.
Bashir for his role in Darfur's many horrors, and it vetoed an American-backed
United Nations Security Council resolution to put sanctions on Mr. Mugabe and
his henchmen.

Apart from China, no one deserves criticism more than the International Olympic
Committee, the so-called guardian of the Olympic movement, which has indulged
Beijing at every turn.

The committee still has time to put in place minimal protections -- like a
24-hour hot line for journalists to report violations of media freedoms. Even
with all of the intimidation, human rights advocates (and maybe some athletes)
will likely try to use the Games to protest China's repression. Beijing needs to
know that the world will be watching how it handles that bit of reality TV.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (89%); SPORTS GOVERNING BODIES (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); NEWS REPORTING (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); GENOCIDE (76%); AIR POLLUTION (73%); SICHUAN EARTHQUAKE
(73%); SEAWEED & ALGAE (73%); CHILDREN (72%); EVICTION (71%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (71%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); ELECTIONS (70%);
SPONSORSHIP (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); VETO (69%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (68%); BRIBERY (67%);
REALITY TELEVISION (65%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (71%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (95%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (95%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (89%); SICHUAN, CHINA (79%);
XIZANG, CHINA (59%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); SUDAN (93%); ZIMBABWE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); TIBET
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Cambodia, Land Seizures Push Thousands of the Poor Into Homelessness

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1006 words

DATELINE: ANDONG, Cambodia


When the monsoon rain pours through Mao Sein's torn thatch roof, she pulls a
straw sleeping mat over herself and her three small children and waits until it
stops.

She and her children sit on a low table as floodwater rises, bringing with it
the sewage that runs along the mud paths outside their shack.

Ms. Mao Sein, 34, was resettled by the government here in an empty field two
years ago, when the police raided the squatters' colony where she lived in Phnom
Penh, the capital, 12 miles away.

She is a widow and a scavenger. The area where she lives has no clean water or
electricity, no paved roads or permanent buildings. But there is land to live
on, and that has drawn scores of new homeless families to settle here, squatting
among the squatters.

With its shacks and its sewage, Andong looks very much like the refugee camps
that were home to those who were forced from their homes by the brutal Communist
Khmer Rouge three decades ago.

Like tens of thousands of people around the country, those living here are
victims of what experts say has become the most serious human rights abuse in
the country: land seizures that lead to evictions and homelessness.

''Expropriation of the land of Cambodia's poor is reaching a disastrous level,''
Basil Fernando, executive director of the Asian Human Rights Commission in Hong
Kong, a private monitoring group, said in December. ''The courts are politicized
and corrupt, and impunity for human rights violators remains the norm.''

With the economy on the rise, land is being seized for logging, agriculture,
mining, tourism and fisheries, and in Phnom Penh, soaring land prices have
touched off what one official called a frenzy of land grabs by the rich and
powerful. The seizures can be violent, including late-night raids by the police
and military. Sometimes, shanty neighborhoods burn down, apparently victims of
arson.

''They came at 2 a.m.,'' said Ku Srey, 37, who was evicted with Ms. Mao Sein and
most of their neighbors in June 2006.

''They were vicious,'' Ms. Ku Srey said of the police and soldiers who evicted
her.

''They had electric batons'' -- and she imitated the sound made by the devices:
''chk-chk-chk-chk.'' She said, ''They pushed us into trucks, they threw all our
stuff into trucks and they brought us here.''

In a report in February, Amnesty International estimated that 150,000 people
around the country were now at risk of forcible eviction as a result of land
disputes, land seizures and new development projects.

These include 4,000 families who live around a lake in the center of Phnom Penh,
Boeung Kak Lake, which is the city's main catchment for monsoon rains and is
being filled in for upscale development.

''If these communities are forced to move, it would be the most large-scale
displacement of Cambodians since the times of the Khmer Rouge,'' said Brittis
Edman, a researcher with Amnesty International, which is based in London.

That, in a way, would bring history full circle.

Like other ailments of society -- political and social violence, poverty and a
culture of impunity for those with power -- the land issues have roots in
Cambodia's tormented past of slaughter, civil war and social disruptions.

The brutal rule of the  Khmer Rouge, during which 1.7 million people are
estimated to have died, began in 1975 with an evacuation of Phnom Penh, forcing
millions of people into the countryside and emptying the city. It ended in 1979
when the Khmer Rouge was driven from power by a Vietnamese invasion, sending
hundreds of thousands of refugees  into Thailand.

Many of the refugees returned in the 1990s, joining a rootless population
displaced by the Khmer Rouge and the decade of civil war that followed in the
1980s. Many ended their journeys in Phnom Penh, creating huge colonies of
squatters.

Now, many of these people are being forced to move again, from Phnom Penh and
from around the country, victims of the latest scourge of the poor: national
prosperity.

Whichever way the winds of history blow, some people here say, life only gets
worse for the poor. If it is not ''pakdivat,'' revolution, that is buffeting the
poor, they say, it is ''akdivat,'' development.

The Cambodian economy has at last started to grow, at an estimated 9 percent
last year. And Phnom Penh is starting to transform itself with modern buildings,
modest malls and plans for skyscrapers. It is one of the last Asian capitals to
begin to pave over its past.

From 1993 to 1999, Amnesty International said in its report in February, the
government granted commercial development rights for about one-third of the
country's most productive land for commercial development to private companies.

In Phnom Penh from 1998 through 2003, the city government forced 11,000 families
from their homes, the World Bank said in a statement quoted by Amnesty
International.

Since then, the human rights group said, evictions have reportedly displaced at
least 30,000 more families.

''One thing that is important to note is that the government is not only failing
to protect the population, but we are also seeing that it is complicit in many
of the forced evictions,'' Ms. Edman, of Amnesty International, said.

The government responded to the group's report through a statement issued by its
embassy in London.

''Just to point out that Cambodia is not Zimbabwe,'' the statement read. ''Your
researcher should also spend more time to examine cases of land and housing
rights violations in this country, if she dares.''

Here in Andong, the people have adapted as best they can.

Little by little, they have made their dwellings home, some of them decorating
their shacks with small flower pots. A few have gathered enough money to buy
concrete and bricks to pave their floors and reinforce their walls.

But this home, like the ones they have known in the past, may only be temporary.
The outskirts of Phnom Penh are only a few miles away. As the city continues to
expand, aid workers say, the people here will probably be forced to move again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A boy checked his feet as he walked through waste and trash in a
slum for displaced people on the outskirts of Phnom Penh. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROBERT
JAMES ELLIOTT FOR THE INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE) MAP: Andong, 12 miles from
the Cambodian capital, has drawn new homeless families.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); HOMELESSNESS (90%); EVICTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FAMILY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(87%); EMINENT DOMAIN (76%); LAND USE PLANNING (75%); REFUGEES (72%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (68%); LAKES (68%); REAL ESTATE VALUATIONS (68%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (67%); PRICE INCREASES (64%); ARSON (62%); ARMED FORCES (62%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); HONG KONG (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 29, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinian Factions Escalate Arrests

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Tensions between the main rival Palestinian groups, Hamas and Fatah, spread from
Gaza to the West Bank on Monday with reports of the Fatah-dominated Palestinian
Authority security forces detaining more than 50 activists  and academics
associated with Hamas.

The timing of the detentions, which were focused in the northern West Bank city
of Nablus, smacked of retaliation for a broad Hamas sweep against Fatah members
and institutions in Gaza over the weekend.

The Hamas campaign followed a deadly bomb attack late Friday that killed five
Hamas militants and a young girl at the Gaza beachfront. Hamas, the Islamic
group that controls Gaza, blamed Fatah, whose leaders denied involvement from
their headquarters in the West Bank.

In Gaza, 200 Fatah members or supporters were said to have been arrested by
Hamas security forces since Friday, and many Fatah-affiliated offices have been
raided and closed.

The Palestinian Center for Human Rights, an independent organization based in
Gaza, said the detention of Hamas supporters in the West Bank started late
Saturday in the areas of Tulkarm and Qalqilya.

Citing unnamed security officials, an independent Palestinian news agency, Maan,
said that those arrested on Monday included the acting mayor of Nablus, Hafiz
Shaheen, and his son, Qadri. The elected mayor and his deputy are in Israeli
custody.

The Palestinian Authority, whose president, Mahmoud Abbas, is also the chief of
Fatah, arrested waves of Hamas supporters in the West Bank after the Islamic
group took over Gaza following a brief factional war in June 2007. Many of the
detainees were released shortly thereafter.

Much of the Hamas leadership of the West Bank is already in jail in Israel. The
Israeli Army retains overall security responsibility in the area and has
recently stepped up its activity against Hamas, a militant Islamic group that
Israel and the United States  consider a terrorist organization.

Earlier this month the Israeli authorities ordered the closure of a shopping
mall in Nablus, saying the company that runs it is associated with Hamas. On
Sunday, Israeli security forces killed a Hamas militant who they said was hiding
in a house in Hebron, and who was wanted for his role in a double suicide
bombing in the Israeli town of Dimona that killed an elderly woman in February.

But the latest tit-for-tat arrests by Hamas and Fatah were criticized by local
and international human rights organizations. The arrests coincided with growing
criticism of the behavior of both Palestinian factions over the last year.

Al Haq, a Palestinian rights group based in the West Bank city of Ramallah,
released a report on Monday on what it called a ''horrifying and blatantly
illegal trend'' of arbitrary arrests, torture and other cruel or degrading
treatment against individuals in the West Bank and Gaza by ''various Palestinian
security or military agencies and personnel.'' Al Haq said the maltreatment had
resulted in three deaths in Gaza and one in the West Bank since June 2007.

Human Rights Watch is to release a report on Wednesday documenting abuses by
Hamas against Fatah in Gaza, and by Fatah against Hamas in the West Bank, in the
past year.

Fred Abrahams, a senior researcher with Human Rights Watch and the primary
author of the report, said Monday that the recent flare-up of arrests by both
sides was ''an intensification of the patterns we've seen since the takeover of
Gaza.''

Speaking by telephone from Gaza, where he and another Human Rights Watch
representative met with senior Hamas officials, Mr. Abrahams said the Hamas
leaders explained the violations as ''mistakes.''

Talal Okal, a political analyst in Gaza and a member of the board of trustees of
Al Azhar University, which is   affiliated with Fatah and whose offices were
among those raided by Hamas, said in an interview over the weekend that the
latest events were only ''serving the interests of Israel'' by deepening
Palestinian divisions.

The factional tensions coincided with new signs that a Palestinian-Israeli peace
agreement sought by President Bush before his term expires is more and more
unlikely. As Israeli and Palestinian negotiators prepared to travel to
Washington for talks with American officials, Israel's prime minister, Ehud
Olmert, told a parliamentary committee that the future status of Jerusalem was a
major obstacle.

Mr. Olmert stated that negotiations over the city had not even started yet,
according to an Israeli official who attended the committee meeting. Mr. Olmert
said he hoped to reach an agreement with the Palestinians on a mechanism to deal
with the issue in 2009.

The Palestinians demand the eastern part of Jerusalem, which Israel conquered in
the 1967 war and later annexed, as the capital of a future Palestinian state.

The Bush administration has urged the Israelis and Palestinians to try to
resolve the core issues of the conflict by the end of this year, but a spokesman
for Mr. Olmert already expressed doubts in early June about the prospects.

Nabil Abu Rudeineh, a spokesman for Mr. Abbas, said this meant that ''Israel
isn't serious about reaching an agreement.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (94%); HAMAS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); MAYORS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ARRESTS (88%); ARMIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); WAR
& CONFLICT (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); RELIGION (75%); TORTURE
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); TRENDS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 23, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Beijing's Bad Faith Olympics

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 473 words


The Beijing Olympics still have one more day to run. But the final gold medal --
for authoritarian image management -- can already be safely awarded to China's
Communist Party leadership.

Beijing got what it wanted out of this globally televised spectacular. It reaped
a huge prestige bonanza that it will surely use to promote its international
influence and, we fear, further tighten its grip at home.

It pocketed these gains without offering any concessions in return. When it
increased repression -- rather than loosening up -- a supine International
Olympic Committee barely offered a protest. Most world leaders, including
President Bush, were nearly as complicit.

In Beijing for the opening ceremony, Mr. Bush seemed eager to play the role of
the apolitical sports fan, instead of publicly pressing China's leaders on the
ongoing Olympics crackdown. That nicely fit into the Chinese script of talking
up sports while shutting down politics.

To win the right to host these Games, China promised to honor the Olympic ideals
of nonviolence, openness to the world and individual expression. Those promises
were systematically broken, starting with this spring's brutal repression in
Tibet and continuing on to the ugly farce of inviting its citizens to apply for
legal protest permits and then arresting them if they actually tried to do so.

Along the way, government critics were pre-emptively rounded up and jailed,
domestic news outlets tightly controlled, foreign journalists denied full access
to the Internet and thousands of Beijing's least telegenic residents were
evicted from their homes and out of camera range. On Friday, the Chinese police
confirmed that six Americans protesting China's rule in Tibet had been sentenced
to 10 days of detention.

Surely one of the signature events of these Games was the sentencing of two
women in their late 70s to ''re-education through labor.'' Their crime? Applying
for permission to protest the inadequate compensation they felt they had
received when the government seized their homes years ago for urban
redevelopment.

A year ago, the I.O.C. predicted that these Games would be ''a force for good''
and a spur to human-rights progress. Instead, as Human Rights Watch has
reported, they became a catalyst for intensified human-rights abuse.

Mr. Bush has taken some note of China's appalling human-rights record this
summer -- privately meeting with Chinese dissidents in Washington just before
his visit to the Games and gently nudging his hosts on religious freedom while
in Beijing. With these repression-scarred Olympics now drawing to a close, Mr.
Bush and other world leaders must tell Beijing that its  failure to live up to
its Olympic commitments will neither be ignored nor forgotten.

The medal count and DVD sales cannot be the last word on the Beijing Games.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); SPORTS AWARDS (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); SENTENCING (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); EVICTION (76%); OLYMPIC
COMMITTEES (73%); SPORTS FANS (73%); ARRESTS (70%); JOURNALISM (69%); WRITERS
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (65%); RELIGION
(60%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT (51%); ECONOMIC NEWS (51%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (98%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (98%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (92%); XIZANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); TIBET (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              63 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 9, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Afghans Being Killed, Report Says

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 384 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Civilian deaths caused by United States and NATO airstrikes in Afghanistan
nearly tripled last year from 2006, fueling a public backlash, a report by Human
Rights Watch said Monday.

The report also blamed the Taliban, who have staged a broad offensive across
half the country since 2006, for endangering Afghans' lives ''by deploying their
forces in populated villages'' and by using civilians as human shields.

Human Rights Watch, a New York-based group, said the behavior of insurgents did
not excuse those dropping the bombs and firing the missiles.

''Mistakes by the U.S. and NATO have dramatically decreased public support for
the Afghan government and the presence of international forces providing
security to Afghans,'' Brad Adams, the group's director for Asia, said in a
statement.

The report singled out Special Operations forces for using tactics that cause
civilian casualties, like working in small, lightly armed units that rely on air
support for backup.

The report said that an estimated 321 civilians died from American and NATO
airstrikes in 2007, compared with 116 in 2006. In the first seven months of
2008, the latest period with data available, the number of Afghans killed in
airstrikes reached 119, it said.

American and NATO forces instituted tactical changes that reduced the rate of
civilian casualties in the latter months of 2007 and into this year, though the
numbers spiked again this summer, Human Rights Watch said. Most of the deaths
occurred when troops came into contact with insurgents and requested air
support, not as a result of planned strikes, it said.

Human Rights Watch said it had gathered the casualty numbers from news reports
and the Afghanistan NGO Safety Office, or ANSO, a nongovernmental organization
that collects and analyzes information on the security situation for aid
organizations. The airstrikes have also caused extensive damage to homes and
displaced large numbers of people, Human Rights Watch said.

American forces serve under two separate command structures in Afghanistan: a
United Nations mandate as part of the NATO-led International Security Assistance
Force, and an American military command as part of Operation Enduring Freedom,
which includes counterterrorism operations and training of the Afghan Army and
the police.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tales of Torture Overseas in a Case Testing U.S. Law

BYLINE: By YOLANNE ALMANZAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 708 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


One witness described having flaming plastic melted onto his skin. Others
accused Liberian soldiers of cutting their genitals or forcing prisoners to play
''stone football,'' kicking large stones until their bare feet were bruised and
bleeding.

''They would stab us with their weapons, step on our hands,'' said Momoh Turay,
one of seven witnesses this week to testify against Charles McArthur Emmanuel,
the son of the former Liberian president Charles Taylor. ''So many
punishments.''

Mr. Turay had flown in from Sweden for a trial that marks the first test of a
1994 law that makes it a crime for United States citizens to commit torture
overseas.

Chuckie, as Mr. Emmanuel is known by the witnesses, is accused of commanding a
military unit known as the Demon Forces, which prosecutors say tortured
opponents of Mr. Taylor's regime.

Mr. Emmanuel, 31, has pleaded not guilty to conspiracy, torture and carrying a
firearm during a violent crime. He faces life in prison if convicted. His
lawyers say the witnesses fabricated their stories for financial gain and to win
political asylum.

The case coincides with the trial of Mr. Emmanuel's father in a war crimes
tribunal in The Hague, and Elise Keppler, senior counsel for the International
Justice Program at Human Rights Watch, said the case could be the beginning of a
trend for greater accountability for human rights abuses in Liberia and in other
countries.

''It signals an effort by the Department of Justice to prosecute human rights
violations, no matter where they occur, and to ensure that the U.S. is not a
safe haven for these perpetrators,'' she said. ''As the first case, it's an
important first step. But they're going to need a lot more like this to solidify
the Department of Justice's commitment to seeking justice for these
atrocities.''

In court, Mr. Emmanuel sat quietly, often with his hands in his lap, and
listened to the testimony without any expression.

Born in Boston, he spent most of his life in Orlando with his mother, stepfather
and older sister. He joined his father in Liberia as a teenager, a few years
before Mr. Taylor won the 1997 presidential election, and was arrested on
charges of carrying a false passport when he arrived in Miami from Trinidad in
March 2006.

The witnesses brought the war in Liberia to life in the courtroom here.

Sulaiman Solo Jusu, a refugee from Sierra Leone who had been living in Liberia
for more than a year, described a 1999 attack in the Liberian town of Voinjama
and his arrest by security forces at a bridge checkpoint.

He said the prisoners were accused by Mr. Emmanuel of being rebels sent to
overthrow his father's government, and he asked those who were guilty to step
forward. When no one did, he said, Mr. Emmanuel selected and shot his friend and
two other men in the heads. He then ordered their bodies to be dragged away and
displayed two of the heads at the checkpoint posts.

''I don't know how to describe that feeling,'' said Mr. Jusu, shaking his head.
''You can just think of you being the next one. I was so afraid.''

Mr. Jusu said he was tied up, his elbows touching behind his back, and beaten by
Demon soldiers and Mr. Emmanuel himself before being thrown into a dirt pit at
the force's training base. ''It was better for me to be killed than to be in
that position. It was more than painful,'' he said.

Mr. Turay, another refugee from Sierra Leone and a friend of Mr. Jusu, was also
detained on the bridge that day. He said he was beaten and thrown naked into a
pit filled with water and bones.

At one point, when he tried to escape and was caught, he begged the soldiers to
kill him. ''Better for us to die than to be alive,'' he said.

Witnesses testified that Mr. Emmanuel was present and laughed during some of
these acts.

In opening statements, defense lawyers said they planned to call witnesses who
would testify that Mr. Emmanuel had not committed any acts of torture.

An assistant federal public defender, John Wiley, said that if this case were a
newspaper headline, it would read: ''Desperate and disgruntled Africans accuse
American to escape war-torn Liberia.''

The trial is expected to last up to eight weeks, said Judge Cecilia M. Altonaga
of Federal District Court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); TORTURE (90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); LAWYERS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); ARRESTS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (74%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (74%);
CONTUSIONS (72%); ELECTIONS (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%); STEPPARENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (54%)

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (92%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); ORLANDO, FLORIDA, USA (79%);
THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (71%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); NETHERLANDS
(71%)

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              67 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 16, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Toxic Mystery Surfaces in France Over a Prominent Russian Rights Lawyer

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SCHWIRTZ and ALAN COWELL; Michael Schwirtz reported from
Moscow, and Alan Cowell from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 667 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


The French police are investigating the discovery of toxic mercury pellets in
the car of a human rights lawyer who was taken ill in Strasbourg on Tuesday, a
day before pretrial hearings in Moscow into the killing of one of her best-known
clients, the journalist and Kremlin critic Anna Politkovskaya.

The case recalled events almost two years ago when Alexander Litvinenko, a
former K.G.B. officer and a vocal critic of Vladimir V. Putin, died after
ingesting a highly radioactive toxin, polonium 210. Scotland Yard said he had
been murdered.

Ms. Politkovskaya, who had chronicled allegations of abuse in Russia's wars in
Chechnya, was shot to death in her apartment building in Moscow a few weeks
before Mr. Litvinenko was poisoned. Critics of Mr. Putin, then president and now
prime minister, said the two killings were part of a pattern of Kremlin-backed
actions against its foes.

On Wednesday, pretrial hearings into Ms. Politkovskaya's killing began behind
closed doors in a military court in Moscow. But her lawyer, Karinna Moskalenko
-- a prominent Russian human rights lawyer -- was not there.

The Strasbourg police said Ms. Moskalenko's husband, a chemist, had discovered
''about 10 little pellets of liquid metal'' in the family car on Sunday, on the
floor of both the driver and the passenger sides of the vehicle, the newspaper
Le Figaro reported, quoting an unidentified person close to the police inquiry.
Analysis by toxicologists identified the substance as mercury, which can damage
organs and the immune and nervous systems.

Ms. Moskalenko complained of headaches and vomiting on Tuesday. Doctors examined
her and her family on the same day.

''People do not put mercury in your car to improve your health,'' Ms. Moskalenko
told Ekho Moskvy, a Russian radio station, later on Tuesday.

A police officer said the presence of mercury might have been a  result of an
accident before the Moskalenko family bought the car, used, in August.

Anna Stavitskaya, another lawyer representing the Politkovskaya family, said the
mercury might have been part of an attempt to intimidate Ms. Moskalenko.

In New York, the Committee to Protect Journalists said it was ''deeply
concerned'' about her welfare, citing news reports saying Ms. Moskalenko ''was
the target of an apparent poisoning in Strasbourg'' and ''had felt weak for
several days.''

Ms. Moskalenko spends much of her time in Strasbourg, in eastern France,
pursuing cases at the European Court of Human Rights, according to the radio
station.  Some of her cases have been on behalf of Chechens complaining of human
rights abuses. She has represented Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, the jailed oil
tycoon. According to the Committee to Protect Journalists, Ms. Moskalenko's
clients included Garry Kasparov, the former chess champion who has become an
opposition political leader in Russia, and Mr. Litvinenko, the former K.G.B.
officer.

At the hearing  in Moscow, a judge refused a request by lawyers for Ms.
Politkovskaya's family that the session  be delayed because of Ms. Moskalenko's
illness.

Two Chechen brothers, Dzhabrail and Ibragim Makhmudov, are accused of conducting
surveillance of Ms. Politkovskaya. A former police officer, Sergei
Khadzhikurbanov, is accused of providing technical help. All three deny the
charges.

Ms. Politkovskaya's supporters argue that a third Chechen, suspected of shooting
her, is on the run.

The court failed to decide whether to allow news media access to cover the
trial, which is being held at a military court in Moscow, the authorities say,
because of Mr. Khadzhikurbanov's former ties to law enforcement.

Ms. Stavitskaya said that while she would like the trial to be opened to
journalists, she did not think the court would allow it.

''They have no basis for closing the trial,'' she said. ''We want this to be
accessible to the people, so that they can reach their own conclusions.''

The next hearing is set for Nov. 17, with jury selection scheduled for the
following day.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); POISONINGS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%);
WRITERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MURDER (78%); TOXICOLOGY (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (72%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); BOARD GAMES (65%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (60%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (71%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); FRANCE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 19, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghans' Toll Shakes Generals

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1336 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


-- A generation ago, when the Soviets were in Afghanistan, they lost the battle
for hearts and minds quickly by showing scant concern for human rights.
Estimates run as high as 1.5 million dead and 10,000 villages destroyed. Now,
Americans labor in the shadow of that history, and that helps to explain why
alarm bells are ringing in the NATO headquarters here over the latest accounts
of air raids that went wrong, causing dozens of civilian casualties.

When such things happen, within an Afghan population deeply traumatized by the
Soviet years, there is a quick resort to comparisons of the past occupier with
the present one, even though the scale of casualties caused by Western forces --
even taking the worst figures compiled by human rights groups -- are but a
fraction of the abuses committed by the Russians.

For Gen. David D. McKiernan, the American who commands 65,000 foreign troops
from 39 nations in Afghanistan, concern over civilian casualties, especially
from aircraft-launched bombs and missiles, has become the issue of the moment.
Only if it is tackled effectively, senior officers here are now saying, can the
hearts and minds of 30 million Afghans -- many of them increasingly skeptical
about the Western military presence, and angry about the civilian death toll --
be won.

The NATO command has been intently focused on the issue since an attack in
western Afghanistan on Aug. 22, when an AC-130 gunship mounted a nighttime raid
on what the United States intelligence has identified as a meeting of about 30
Taliban fighters with a ''high value'' Taliban commander. Lethal cannon fire
from the aircraft devastated several buildings in the mud-brick village of
Azizabad, leaving more civilians dead than Taliban.

A similar pattern, according to Afghan officials and townspeople, was seen
Thursday in the Nadali district of Helmand Province, where a coalition airstrike
hit three houses sheltering families who had fled a Taliban assault. According
to the Afghan accounts, the strike killed between 25 and 30 civilians, most of
them women and children. The NATO command acknowledged that an airstrike had
taken place and announced there would be an investigation, but said it could not
confirm that there had been civilian casualties.

The timing of the airstrike and the ensuing accusations could scarcely have been
worse for the NATO command. At the very moment when the Nadali incident was
taking place, senior American and British officers were briefing Western aid
representatives and reporters in Kabul on a new, more-thorough system for
reducing civilian casualties.

''Our military forces are here to protect the civilian population, not to damage
them,'' said Lt. Gen. Jonathon Riley, the British deputy to General McKiernan,
as he and other officers outlined  tighter orders for ''proportionality,
requisite restraint and the utmost discrimination'' in the use of firepower,
particularly in airstrikes. The directives also call for accurately chronicling
-- and promptly admitting -- when civilians are killed.

''We want to make it an absolute rule that we acknowledge our mistakes when they
happen,'' said Col. Gordon (Skip) Davis, an American officer who leads a
strategic advisory group to General McKiernan. ''Regardless of the number of
deaths, we'll come out and say, 'We're responsible, we are the ones who did it.'
'' A British colonel, Mike Newman, set out requirements that battlefield
commanders report civilian casualties by radio as soon as an engagement is
completed and file a fuller account within four hours of returning to base or,
at the latest, within 24 hours.

A new unit led by a civilian will monitor the reports, as well as ''credible
allegations'' of civilian deaths from ordinary Afghans, aid agencies and news
accounts. Where coalition forces are judged responsible, the command will
acknowledge that responsibility, and relatives will be offered ''condolence
payments'' set by the nation whose troops were involved. In the case of Britain
and the United States, the standard is a payment of $2,500 for each death and
more at the discretion of commanders.

A theme that ran through the Kabul briefing was that the NATO command -- in
particular General McKiernan, who took command here in June -- has concluded
that previous approaches to the problem were seriously flawed. For General
McKiernan, the realization appears to have come with the Azizabad airstrike.

Initially, he insisted that only five to seven civilians had been killed, and
dismissed reports by local residents, Western aid groups and reporters that as
many as 90 civilians had died. But 16 days after the attack, amid the storm of
anger that arose among Afghans, he ordered a second investigation by a
Pentagon-based general. That report, released two weeks ago, said that the dead
included about 22 Taliban fighters and 33 civilians, among them at least 3 women
and 12 children.

The report concluded that the firepower used at Azizabad was ''in self-defense,
necessary and proportional.'' Nevertheless, one indication that Azizabad had
been a wake-up call was an acknowledgment at the Kabul briefing that, until
June, statistics on civilian deaths kept by the NATO command were not generally
viewed as reliable, even within the command. Now, officers at the briefing said,
the system for reporting casualties has been tightened, giving a more authentic
sense of how broad the problem is. ''We are getting a lot better at capturing
the situation,'' General Riley said.

According to statistics disclosed at the briefing, 156 civilians have been
killed in coalition attacks so far this year, compared with 161 in all of last
year. The statistics showed far higher civilian deaths from insurgent attacks,
757 so far this year as opposed to 690 last year. Both sets of figures were
dwarfed by the command's accounting of how many insurgents were killed in combat
with coalition troops -- 4,282 so far this year and 6,500 last year. But the
total for the numbers of civilians killed by coalition forces since the start of
2007 -- 317 -- was still far below estimates made by some human rights groups.

Last month, the United Nations Assistance Mission in Afghanistan said reports
gathered by the organization's human rights representatives in Kabul showed that
629 civilians had been killed by ''progovernment forces'' in 2007, and 477 in
the first eight months of this year -- a total of 1,106.  The United Nations
figures, however, include people killed by Afghan security forces, while the
NATO figures are for those killed by foreign troops only.

General McKiernan has instructed that the new tactical directive issued to field
commanders on avoiding civilian casualties apply equally to the NATO and
separate American forces he leads. It will not, however, apply to American
special forces in Afghanistan, who are not under his command, nor to the
145,000-strong Afghan Army and police force, whose operations have drawn their
own harsh criticism from human rights groups.

But the strongest criticism of the new NATO policy has come from those who say a
high civilian death toll is inevitable in a war in which NATO commanders with
insufficient ground troops must rely heavily on airstrikes. Critics also say the
risks are compounded by a reliance on intelligence given by Afghans when
choosing targets, because clan, tribe and ethnic rivalries among the Afghans
have been identified in some errant bombings as a factor in skewing the
intelligence.

But the NATO officers at the briefing rejected the notion that airpower has been
used indiscriminately, and General Riley, the British commander, said foreign
troops were the victims of exaggerated claims of wrongdoing, some of them from
Taliban fighters. ''Allegations against us, however wild, tend to be believed,
and they cause great anger,'' he said. Still, he said, it was crucial to reduce
the incidence of attacks causing civilian losses. ''This,'' he said, ''goes to
the heart of the credibility of our mission.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: GRIEF: An Afghan woman shows pictures of relatives she says were
killed Aug. 22 during an air attack in Azizabad. A deadly airstrike this week
has again put NATO under scrutiny. (PHOTOGRAPH BY FRAIDOON POOYAA/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); ARMED FORCES
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION
(78%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); FAMILY (69%); CHILDREN (67%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (67%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 31, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Son of Ex-President of Liberia Is Convicted of Torture

BYLINE: By YOLANNE ALMANZAR; Carmen Gentile contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


A federal jury on Thursday convicted the son of the former president of Liberia
of torturing suspected opponents of his father's government. It was the first
case brought under a 1994 law that makes it a crime for United States citizens
to commit torture overseas.

During the trial, witnesses said the defendant, Charles McArthur Emmanuel, 31,
stood by and laughed as soldiers forced prisoners to play ''stone football,''
kicking large stones until their bare feet were bruised and bleeding.

One witness described having flaming plastic melted onto his skin, and another
said soldiers had cut his genitals.

Mr. Emmanuel, who was known in Liberia as Chuckie and commanded a military unit
known as the Demon Forces, was convicted of conspiracy and torture after two
days of jury deliberations. He faces a possible life sentence.

The case coincides with the trial of Mr. Emmanuel's father, Charles Taylor, in a
war crimes tribunal in The Hague for atrocities in West Africa during his
presidency.

Elise Keppler, senior counsel for the International Justice Program at Human
Rights Watch, said that the verdict was a milestone in the fight against human
rights abuses around the world and that she hoped to see more prosecutions like
it.

''That's going to be the key here,'' Ms. Keppler said. ''This can't be an
anomaly in U.S. practice, but should be the beginning of a trend where the
United States actively prosecutes human rights violations committed abroad.''

When the case began a month ago, defense lawyers said the witnesses had
fabricated their stories for financial gain and to win political asylum.

In opening statements, an assistant federal public defender said that if this
case were a newspaper headline, it would read, ''Desperate and disgruntled
Africans accuse American to escape war-torn Liberia.''

The witnesses shared gruesome stories about Mr. Emmanuel.

Sulaiman Solo Jusu, a refugee from Sierra Leone who had been living in Liberia
for more than a year, described a 1999 attack in the Liberian town of Voinjama
and his arrest by security forces at a bridge checkpoint.

Mr. Jusu said Mr. Emmanuel accused the prisoners of being rebels sent to
overthrow his father's government, and he described Mr. Emmanuel shooting three
men in the head.

''I don't know how to describe that feeling,'' Mr. Jusu testified. ''You can
just think of you being the next one. I was so afraid.''

In court, as the guilty verdict was read aloud, Mr. Emmanuel sat quietly with
his hands in his lap. When all 12 jurors agreed he was guilty, he looked over at
his lawyer, who gently patted him on the back. He refused to stand when the jury
was dismissed and seemed impatient to leave.

In a news conference afterward, United States Attorney R. Alexander Acosta said
of Mr. Emmanuel, ''The acts of which he was convicted were horrific.''

Born in Boston, Mr. Emmanuel spent most of his life in Orlando, Fla., with his
mother, stepfather and older sister. He joined his father in Liberia as a
teenager, a few years before Mr. Taylor won the 1997 presidential election. He
was arrested on charges of carrying a false passport when he arrived in Miami
from Trinidad in March 2006.

He will be sentenced in January 2009.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JURY TRIALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); EYEWITNESSES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (77%); REFUGEES (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%);
CONTUSIONS (75%); ARRESTS (73%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (63%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%);
WESTERN AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 9, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo Bay, After Jan. 20, 2009

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 764 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Next President Will Face Test on Detainees'' (front page, Nov. 3):

While it is likely that the Guantanamo prison camp contains some very dangerous
people, the American public and the rest of world may never know the real truth.
After years of torture and abuse, the confessions of anyone still held at
Guantanamo Bay are highly suspect, and the unconstitutional military commissions
set up to try them make achieving justice impossible in any real sense of the
word.

No responsible person who is calling for Guantanamo's closure would argue that
those suspected of terrorist activities should be automatically set free if
Guantanamo is closed down.

What we're demanding is that the Guantanamo prison camp be closed, the flawed
military commissions be shut down and a real system of justice, based on the
Constitution, be used to determine the guilt or innocence of those held there.
Such a system will not rely on torture, secret evidence and hearsay.

Only by closing Guantanamo and trying detainees in civilian courts or in
military courts, governed by the Uniform Code of Military Justice, will justice
prevail. Guantanamo can be shut down with the stroke of a president's pen
through executive order on his first day in office.

Anthony D. Romero   Executive Director  American Civil Liberties Union   New
York, Nov. 3, 2008

To the Editor:

Although the Bush administration has long misled the public about the
dangerousness of many Guantanamo detainees, there is little doubt that some have
committed serious crimes. The question is what to do with them.

Detaining them endlessly without trial has marred America's reputation,
providing a boon to terrorist recruiters and discouraging cooperation with
international law-enforcement efforts, particularly by those most likely to
learn of suspicious activity.

It has also allowed the detainees to glorify themselves as combatants rather
than bear the opprobrium of being labeled convicted criminals.

The best solution is to close Guantanamo and provide suspects fair trials in
regular federal courts, not the discredited military commissions that allow
convictions based on coerced testimony.

Under the Classified Information Procedures Act, federal courts have long
experience striking the proper balance between a suspect's due process rights
and the need to safeguard intelligence sources and methods.

Such criminal prosecutions are the best way to neutralize dangerous suspects
while allowing America to regain the moral high ground so necessary for the
long-term success of the fight against terrorism.

Kenneth Roth   Executive Director  Human Rights Watch  New York, Nov. 3, 2008

To the Editor:

I almost always agree with what Nicholas D. Kristof has to say, and that
includes his contention that the prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, should be
closed (''Rejoin the World,'' column, Nov. 2).

May I suggest, however, that rather than turning it into ''an international
center for research on tropical diseases that affect poor countries,'' it would
be more appropriate -- and a clear repudiation of the policies of the Bush
administration -- to convert the base into an international center for human
rights.

That kind of a Guantanamo would not only represent an affirmation by the United
States against torture, it would also make Guantanamo a very different kind of
thorn in the side of Cuba than it has been over most of the last 100 years, and
might be what brings human rights to the Cuban people.

It could be a place for cultural exchange, academic study and conferences, and
stand as a beacon for people all over the world who are or have been victims of
torture and other violations of human rights. It would stand as a reminder to
all governments that torture is a violation of international law and is not to
be tolerated anywhere.

Bruce L. Wilder  Pittsburgh, Nov. 2, 2008

To the Editor:

I disagree with the first of Nicholas D. Kristof's three ways for the United
States to ''rejoin the world.''

After the necessary closure of the Guantanamo prison, all of Guantanamo should
be returned to Cuba as a gesture of friendship and reconciliation after more
than 40 years of hostility. Our continued presence there is militarily
unjustifiable and politically stupid.

If the place were to be turned into ''an international center for research on
tropical diseases,'' the Cubans could do that themselves. Their expertise in
tropical medicine is internationally respected, and the United States could
learn much from them.

Robert Skloot   Madison, Wis., Nov. 3, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY FRANCESCO BONGIORNI)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); EXECUTIVES
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (76%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (76%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); DUE PROCESS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%);
TERRORISM (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); HEARSAY (72%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(69%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%); TROPICAL MEDICINE
(50%); TROPICAL DISEASES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: November 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 12, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saudi Arabia, Missing Pluralism at Home, Seeks U.N. Platform to Promote It
Abroad

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


Saudi Arabia, which deploys a special police force to ensure that a narrow sect
of Islam predominates in the kingdom, is sponsoring a discussion at the United
Nations on religious tolerance starting Wednesday.

More than a dozen world leaders are scheduled to attend the meeting, including
President Bush; the British prime minister, Gordon Brown; the Israeli president,
Shimon Peres; and the heads of seven Arab states. King Abdullah, the Saudi
monarch, and Mr. Peres were both expected as guests of Ban Ki-moon, the
secretary general, at a dinner Tuesday night, a rare chance for an encounter.

The United Nations avoids religious discussions, so the two-day session of the
General Assembly is officially being labeled as a meeting about the ''culture of
peace.'' Most of those attending are political rather than religious figures.

But human rights groups are crying foul that Saudi Arabia is being given a
platform to promote religious tolerance abroad while actively combating it at
home.

''It's like apartheid South Africa having a conference at the U.N. on racial
harmony,'' said Ali al-Ahmed, a Shiite Muslim dissident from Saudi Arabia based
in Washington.

Human Rights Watch issued a statement calling on Saudi Arabia to start the fight
against religious intolerance at home by ending ''systemic religious
discrimination.''

The position taken by Western leaders, including Mr. Bush, is that any attempt
by the leader of a Muslim state to promote tolerance, especially one as
influential as Saudi Arabia, merits support. Mr. Bush is due to address the
session on Thursday.

''He is hopeful that this dialogue will provide a platform for voices from many
different religions to foster tolerance,'' said Gordon D. Johndroe, a White
House spokesman, noting that tolerance will be the theme of the president's
speech.

Mr. Bush believes in ''the importance of people, especially people in the Muslim
world, being empowered to say that suicide bombings are not O.K. and to make
that case especially to the young people of the Muslim world,'' Mr. Johndroe
said.

Neither the Saudi Embassy at the United Nations nor in Washington responded to
phone and e-mail messages seeking comment about the criticism of the kingdom's
record on religious discrimination.

An extended argument also has erupted between Western and Muslim delegates over
whether the discussion would result in a declaration including a condemnation of
''the derision of what people consider sacred.''

That wording was included in a declaration issued after an interfaith dialogue
sponsored by the kingdom in Madrid in July. It was an attempt to condemn
anything that might echo the cartoons published in Denmark that disparaged Islam
and the Prophet Muhammad. But Western states considered that wording a knock
against freedom of speech.

''We are arguing human rights, they are arguing values,'' said Jean-Maurice
Ripert, France's ambassador to the United Nations. ''The reconciliation of those
two differences is very complicated.''

The compromise formula is that there will be no formal resolution, but an oral
statement that condemns disparaging other religions.

Saudi Arabia bars its citizens and its sprawling expatriate community, including
tens of thousands of Christians, from any public worship outside Islam. The more
than two million Saudi Shiites face widespread discrimination in worship,
education and employment.

A special police force, the Society for the Promotion of Virtue and the
Prevention of Vice, ensures that Muslims go to prayer five times a day and that
the Wahhabi sect of Sunni Islam prevails.

The Saudi government portrays King Abdullah as a reformer wrestling with a
puritanical religious establishment. It cites the interfaith dialogue as a prime
example, because the extremist fringe has been grumbling about reaching out to
''infidels.''

But critics point out that the kingdom promotes interfaith dialogue abroad, not
at home. They maintain that the long alliance between the ruling Saud dynasty
and the clerical establishment remains robust.

The senior ulema, or religious scholars, endorse the absolute rule of the
princes as mandated under Islam in exchange for the religious establishment's
near monopoly over social and religious policy, they say.

The rise of Al Qaeda has been a disaster for Saudi Arabia, because the terrorist
group's teachings are rooted in the same puritanical traditions debasing
anything foreign that circulate freely in the kingdom.

''It is a public relations exercise, they want to shed the image that they are
the kingdom of intolerance and extremism and xenophobia,'' Mr. Ahmed said about
the interfaith dialogue. ''The government controls the whole religious
establishment, that is the problem. The problem is that the Saudi government
doesn't want to change anything.''

Meanwhile, Neither the White House nor Mr. Ban was willing to predict the
outcome of the dinner being attended by King Abdullah and Mr. Peres. Mr. Ban
said the discussion on religious tolerance was meant to encourage such
encounters.

''The purpose of the meeting itself is to promote mutual understanding and to
address all differences of opinion, either political or religious,'' Mr. Ban
said at a news conference, while avoiding any comment about the lack of
religious freedom inside Saudi Arabia itself.

Diplomats around the building noted that because the Saudi government recently
donated $500 million to the World Food Program, no one was likely to confront it
openly about domestic issues of religious freedom.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Secretary General Ban Ki-moon with King Abdullah of Saudi Arabia
in New York on Tuesday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY SAUDI PRESS AGENCY, VIA REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); SPONSORSHIP (90%); CHURCH & STATE (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); POLICE
FORCES (73%); RACE & RACISM (72%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (72%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (50%); BOMBINGS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ (79%); BAN KI-MOON (72%); SHIMON PERES (71%);
GEORGE W BUSH (58%); GORDON BROWN (56%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL (92%); SPAIN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Jesuit Killings In El Salvador Could Reach Trial in Spain

BYLINE: By VICTORIA BURNETT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 673 words

DATELINE: MADRID


Nearly 20 years after the Salvadoran Army killed six Jesuit priests in one of
the most notorious events of El Salvador's civil war, a criminal complaint filed
in the Spanish High Court has revived hopes that those behind the massacre could
face trial.

Human rights lawyers filed a complaint on Thursday against the Salvadoran
president at the time, Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, and 14 former members of the
Salvadoran military, for their roles in the killings of the priests and two
female employees, and in the official cover-up that followed. International
outrage over the murders proved to be pivotal in sapping American support for
United States military assistance to the Salvadoran Army.

''We hope this case helps to reawaken the memory and the conscience of El
Salvador's people,'' said Almudena Bernabeu, a lawyer for the San
Francisco-based Center for Justice and Accountability, a human rights law
center, which filed the case along with the Spanish Association for Human Rights
.

The Spanish High Court must decide whether to press charges against the men and
seek their extradition to Spain, Ms. Bernabeu said.

The crusading Spanish judge Baltasar Garzon  made legal history in 1998 when he
secured the arrest in Britain of the Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet using a
Spanish legal principle that crimes against humanity can be prosecuted anywhere.
General Pinochet narrowly escaped extradition to Spain by pleading ill health.
Since then, Spain's High Court has received cases connected to rights abuses in
several countries, including Argentina, Chile and Guatemala.

In the early hours of Nov. 16, 1989, members of the Salvadoran Army forced their
way into the Jesuit priests' residence on the campus of the Central American
University in San Salvador. They ordered five of the priests to lie face-down in
the garden and shot them, and then searched the house, killing another priest,
the housekeeper and her 16-year-old daughter. But another housekeeper witnessed
the attack.

A 1991 report by a United Nations-sponsored Truth Commission said Gen. Rene
Emilio Ponce, then army chief, ordered the killing of one of the priests,
Ignacio Ellacuria Bescoetxea. General Ponce ordered soldiers to leave no
witnesses to the murder of Father Ellacuria, who had promoted peace talks
between the right-wing military government and Marxist guerrillas.

The complaint filed on Thursday accuses former President Cristiani of helping
cover up a crime against humanity. It accuses General Ponce and the 13 other
former military officials and soldiers of crimes against humanity, murder and
state-sponsored terrorism for their involvement in the slaughter.

Carlos Martin-Baro, whose brother was one of the priests killed, said the case
had rekindled his hopes of justice. However, he said he was past seeking
retribution for his brother's murder and hoped any legal process would
contribute to a wider fight against injustice in El Salvador.

Despite the witness account, the investigations and circumstantial evidence,
efforts to make El Salvador's military account for the killings have been
largely fruitless. In a 1991 trial held in El Salvador, two military officials
were convicted of murder and conspiracy to commit acts of terrorism and
sentenced to 30 years in prison. The two were released under a 1993 amnesty.

Gisela de Leon, a lawyer with the Center for Justice and International Law in
Costa Rica, said she was cautiously optimistic that Thursday's court filing
could result in the defendants' facing trial in Spain.

''It will put pressure on the Salvadoran authorities and remind them that there
is an international community out there and they have to respect its norms,''
she said by telephone.

Even if the suspects were not extradited, the Spanish case could force a trial
in El Salvador, Ms. Bernabeu said. Any prosecution would serve as some form of
justice and help strengthen calls for a repeal of the country's controversial
amnesty law, she said.

''Remember, Pinochet died a criminal,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: November 22, 2008



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Nov. 14 about a criminal
complaint filed by human rights lawyers in the 1989 killing of six Jesuit
priests in El Salvador erroneously included two people among those the lawyers
accused of having had a role in the murders or in the cover-up that followed.
The complaint named the Salvadoran president at the time, Alfredo Cristiani
Burkard, who was accused of a cover-up, and 14 former members of the Salvadoran
military; it did not implicate two female employees of the priests. The two were
victims of the attack and died along with the priests.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Early on Nov. 16, 1989, six priests, a housekeeper and her
16-year-old daughter were killed by the Salvadoran Army on the campus of the
Central American University in San Salvador. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (91%); ARMIES (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (89%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); WITNESSES (89%); MILITARY RULE (78%); LAWYERS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (76%); TERRORISM (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); WOMEN
WORKERS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); JUDGES (72%); WOMEN (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (61%); MURDER (58%); PEACE PROCESS (50%)

CITY: SAN SALVADOR, EL SALVADOR (90%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); EL SALVADOR (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHILE (92%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (90%); ARGENTINA (79%); GUATEMALA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

McCain Draws Criticism on Torture Bill

BYLINE: By MICHAEL COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 816 words


Senator John McCain's vote last week against a bill to curtail the Central
Intelligence Agency's use of harsh interrogation tactics disappointed human
rights advocates who consider him an ally and led Democrats to charge that he
was trying to please Republicans as he seeks to rally them around his
presidential bid.

The bill, which the Senate passed Wednesday by 51 to 45, would force the C.I.A.
to abide by the rules set out in the Army Field Manual on Interrogation, which
prohibits physical force and lists approved interrogation methods.

Mr. McCain, who was tortured as a prisoner of war in Vietnam, has led the battle
in recent years on a number of bills to end torture by the United States. He
said he voted against the bill Wednesday because legislation he had helped to
pass  already prohibits the C.I.A. from ''cruel, inhumane or degrading
treatment.''

Mr. McCain, of Arizona, said he believed it would be a mistake to limit C.I.A.
interrogators to using only those techniques that were enumerated in the Field
Manual, which he noted was a public document.

''When we passed the Military Commissions Act, we said that the C.I.A. should
have the ability to use additional techniques,'' Mr. McCain told reporters
Friday in Oshkosh, Wis. ''None of those techniques would entail violating the
Detainee Treatment Act, which said that cruel, inhumane and degrading treatment
are prohibited.''

The problem, human rights advocates say, is that disagreement remains over which
tactics are prohibited. Mr. McCain, for example, said waterboarding -- a
simulated drowning technique -- was an illegal form of torture. But while the
C.I.A. says it no longer uses waterboarding, the Bush administration has not
ruled out its use in the future.

''It's disappointing,'' said Jennifer Daskal, a senior counsel at Human Rights
Watch, ''that Senator McCain, who has long made it clear that Congress had
intended to outlaw abusive interrogation techniques including waterboarding,
won't stand up to an administration that continues to say waterboarding is O.K.
in certain circumstances.''

Although Mr. McCain has battled the Bush administration over whether
waterboarding is illegal, his vote on Wednesday allied him with President Bush,
who has threatened to veto the bill.

Democrats have used the vote to suggest that Mr. McCain was trying to curry
favor with conservatives in the Republican Party, who have viewed him with
suspicion and whose support he needs as he tries to unite the party behind his
presidential campaign. The Democratic National Committee said in a statement
last week that Mr. McCain had chosen ''pandering over his principles.''

Mr. McCain said the vote was consistent, noting in a statement he submitted to
the Congressional Record that when Congress voted in 2005 to apply the Army
Field Manual to the entire Department of Defense, it deliberately excluded the
C.I.A.

Mr. McCain, according to a Senate aide of his, believes that while the C.I.A.
should be -- and is -- prohibited from using cruel and inhumane and degrading
tactics, it should have the flexibility to use acceptable tactics that are not
listed in the Field Manual.

Elisa Massimino, the Washington director of Human Rights First, said given the
administration's refusal to clearly ban abusive techniques, it made sense for
Congress to be more explicit about what should and should not be allowed.
Requiring the C.I.A. to follow the Field Manual, Ms. Massimino added, would be a
welcome step in that direction.

''We're very disappointed in his vote,'' she said of Mr. McCain. ''Because of
his personal history and his leadership on this issue, it sends a terrible
message to the rest of the world, to Americans, to the troops.''

Mr. McCain, in his statement to the Congressional Record, faulted the Bush
administration for declining to declare waterboarding illegal. He said Congress
intended to outlaw the practice when it passed the Military Commissions Act in
2006 and was even reassured by the administration that it had been.

''Staging a mock execution by inducing the misperception of drowning is a clear
violation of this standard,'' Mr. McCain said in the statement. ''Indeed, during
the negotiations, we were personally assured by administration officials that
this language, which applies to all agencies of the U.S. government, prohibited
waterboarding.''

''It is unfortunate,'' he continued, ''that the reluctance of officials to stand
by this straightforward conclusion has produced in the Congress such frustration
that we are today debating whether to apply a military field manual to
nonmilitary intelligence activities. It would be far better, I believe, for the
administration to state forthrightly what is clear in current law -- that anyone
who engages in waterboarding, on behalf of any U.S. government agency, puts
himself at risk of criminal prosecution and civil liability.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); ARMIES
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); VETO (78%); CONSERVATISM
(72%); POWS & MIAS (70%); MILITARY COURTS (70%); VIETNAM WAR (70%)

COMPANY: DEMOCRATIC NATIONAL COMMITTEE (50%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (93%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS813940 POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (50%); SIC8651 POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%)

STATE: WISCONSIN, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); VIET NAM (57%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              78 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Veto and America's Image

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 626 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Bush Vetoes Bill on C.I.A. Tactics, Affirming Legacy'' (front page, March
9):

The torture victims from all over the world whom my colleagues and I care for
each day remind us of the brutal reality that is torture and its devastating
physical and psychological health consequences.

Methods innocuously referred to as enhanced interrogation techniques, such as
waterboarding, exposure to temperature extremes, sexual and cultural
humiliation, and prolonged forced standing, which would have been banned under
the proposed legislation, should be seen for what they are -- torture -- and we
should not in any way be condoning or using them. The military has already
agreed to this.

The president's veto does not make us or the world safer. To the contrary, it
puts civilians living under despotic regimes at greater risk of being tortured,
and sends a chilling message to humanity, including to the estimated 400,000
torture survivors now living in the United States.

Allen S. Keller New York, March 9, 2008

The writer, a medical doctor, is director of the Bellevue/N.Y.U. Program for
Survivors of Torture.

To the Editor:

President Bush on Saturday vetoed a bill that would have explicitly prohibited
the C.I.A. from harsh interrogation methods like waterboarding, which makes
bound prisoners feel as if they are drowning.

Reputation, like life itself, is a complex affair, difficult to sustain but
simple to destroy. Mr. Bush has reduced the moral reputation of the presidency
and the country by allowing procedures that violate basic principles upon which
our Republic was founded regarding the sanctity of the individual principles
that have served as the template for all subsequent elaborations of human rights
around the globe.

The political and social movement for recognition of human rights began in
earnest in the second half of the 18th century, particularly with the Jean Calas
affair in France (1760s): he was broken on the wheel and waterboarded.

Through the emotional reaction to cruel torment and violation of the body, human
rights became self-evident. This helped to define the concepts of individual and
humanity for Enlightenment thinkers, including Voltaire, Adam Smith and Thomas
Jefferson, and for the natural rights in our own Declaration of Independence and
Bill of Rights, the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the United
Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights.

America is currently caught in a battle between the competing rhetorics of
homeland tribalism and of humanity. Given our singular military and cultural
power in today's world, no less than the future of 250 years of human rights
development rests on how this internal American battle is resolved.

Americans sense that this is a fateful election for our Republic; they may not
realize how important it is for the world as a whole.

Scott Atran New York, March 9, 2008

The writer is a research scientist at the John Jay College, New York City, the
University of Michigan, and the National Center for Scientific Research in
France.

To the Editor:

In issuing his veto of the bill prohibiting extreme interrogation techniques
(read: torture), President Bush said, ''We have no higher responsibility than
stopping terrorist attacks.'' In fact, he does have one.

He took an oath on the Bible to protect and defend the Constitution. His
presidency has been an unending demonstration of how little that pledge matters
to him.

His legacy as the worst modern president is now secure. One can only hope that
the voters will see through his deceit in November and elect a president who
will actually adhere to the oath of office. This must be a central campaign
issue for both parties.

Jason Warren New Paltz, N.Y., March 9, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VETO (93%); TORTURE (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WRITERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (76%); US PRESIDENTS (74%); MENTAL HEALTH (71%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (69%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (68%); EXPERIMENTATION & RESEARCH (67%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (66%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (73%); ADAM SMITH (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); FRANCE (72%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Election Officials in Zimbabwe Begin Partial Recount of March Vote

BYLINE: By THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 662 words


Zimbabwe's election officials, at the government's behest, began a partial
recount on Saturday of disputed election results, while a human rights group
accused members of the ruling party of running ''torture camps'' to punish
opposition supporters.

Zimbabwe's election was three weeks ago, but presidential results still have not
been released. Nonetheless, government officials insist there was vote
tampering, and the recount in 23 of 210 constituencies could overturn the
results of the parliamentary election, in which the ruling party lost control of
the lower house of Parliament for the first time in 28 years.

Opposition leaders went to court on Friday to try to block the recount, saying
the government had not applied for it within 48 hours of the vote on March 29,
as prescribed by law. But they lost their case, and now opposition leaders fear
the recount could be used to peel back their parliamentary victory.

Reports were mixed on Saturday about whether observers from other African
countries were allowed to watch the recount, as the government had promised.
According to Zimbabwe's state-owned newspaper, one office where ballot boxes
were being stored was attacked on Friday by a homemade bomb that did not
explode.

The recount results are supposed to be released in a few days.

Zimbabwe has been swallowed by fear and uncertainty since the election. The
leading opposition party, the Movement for Democratic Change, appeared to get
the better of Robert Mugabe,  84, the  liberation hero who has ruled this
country since independence in 1980. Mr. Mugabe has presided over the collapse of
the economy, which is racked by corruption, shortages and a yearly inflation
rate of more than 150,000 percent.

Early, unofficial results had the opposition sweeping many of Mr. Mugabe's
allies out of Parliament and the opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai leading in
the presidential race. But it was unclear if Mr. Tsvangirai had passed the 50
percent mark. Now, many Zimbabweans fear that if a runoff is necessary, it will
take place amid rising political violence.

On Saturday, Human Rights Watch issued a report accusing members of Mr. Mugabe's
party, known as ZANU-PF, of rounding up opposition supporters and bringing them
to camps at night where they are beaten with wooden sticks and army batons.

''Torture and violence are surging in Zimbabwe,'' said Georgette Gagnon, Africa
director at Human Rights Watch, in the report. ''ZANU-PF members are setting up
torture camps to systematically target, beat, and torture people suspected of
having voted for the M.D.C. in last month's elections.''

Human Rights Watch said it had interviewed more than 30 people who had been
brutalized, and some Zimbabweans who recently fled to South Africa have said
that some opposition supporters had been killed.

Kofi Annan, the former secretary general of the United Nations, on Saturday
urged African leaders to step in and resolve the election crisis in Zimbabwe,
warning that it posed a threat to neighboring countries.

''It is a rather dangerous situation, it is a serious crisis with impact beyond
Zimbabwe,'' Mr. Annan told reporters in Nairobi, Kenya. ''We do have a
responsibility to work with them to find a viable solution.''

Also on Saturday, a cabinet minister in  Mozambique said a Chinese ship carrying
arms to Zimbabwe was heading to Angola in hopes of docking there after being
turned away from South Africa, according to Reuters.

The ship left South African waters on Friday after a court refused to allow the
weapons to be transported across the country; an Anglican archbishop had
appealed to the court to bar the arms shipment for fear the weapons would be
used against Zimbabweans.

Paulo Zucula, Mozambique's minister of transport and communications,  said his
country had not allowed the ship into its waters because it did not have ''prior
arrangements,'' Reuters reported. The arms shipment was ordered from China
before the elections.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ballot boxes in Murombedzi, west of Harare, Zimbabwe's capital.
A partial recount of the March 29 election is under way.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
TSVANGIRAYI MUKWAZHI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)
 Election officials counting ballots in Domboshawa, a village north of Harare,
in the recount of 23 parliamentary races.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
VOTERS & VOTING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%);
CORRUPTION (78%); POLITICS (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (66%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (64%); INFLATION (64%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (61%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (59%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (92%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (97%); AFRICA (92%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amnesty International Seeks Guantanamo Bay Closing

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING HUMAN RIGHTS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 118 words


In an annual report on human rights worldwide, Amnesty International again urged
the United States to close the Guantanamo Bay detention camp. It also said
''flash points'' in the Darfur region of Sudan and in Zimbabwe, Gaza, Iraq and
Myanmar ''demand immediate action'' from world leaders. Amnesty, a human rights
watchdog group, accused the European Union of complicity in the practice of
rendition, the transporting of terrorism suspects secretly to other countries
for interrogation; urged China to ''live up to the human rights promises it made
around the Olympic Games;'' and said Russia should ''show greater tolerance for
political dissent, and none for impunity on human rights abuses in Chechnya.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (69%); TERRORISM
(53%); OLYMPICS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (94%); EUROPE (92%); ZIMBABWE (91%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); SUDAN (90%); IRAQ (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (69%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              89 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Courage to Bear Witness To Man's Infinite Cruelties

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; FILM; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 782 words


''A Promise to the Dead: The Exile Journey of Ariel Dorfman,'' the opening-night
selection of this year's Human Rights Watch International Film Festival, may not
be the strongest of the program's 19 feature-length films, but its rambling
portrait of Mr. Dorfman, the Chilean playwright (''Death and the Maiden''),
novelist and essayist, is a profile in courage colored with the anxiety of a
human rights activist faced with painful moral choices.

To die a martyr or to live to bear witness: that is the question. You can read
about men and women who stand up to injustice and feel a shuddering admiration.
But to absorb a documentary film about such a person is a more intense and
potentially life-changing experience.

Sober contemplation of man's inhumanity to man and those who combat it is the
essential value of the festival, at the Walter Reade Theater  through June 26.
The films take you to perilous places while raising fundamental questions about
the moral accountability of individuals, governments and institutions.

One theme of ''A Promise to the Dead'' is the pain of exile. Mr. Dorfman, who
was born in Argentina, grew up in New York and settled in Chile in 1954, was a
cultural adviser to the Chilean president Salvador Allende, whose democratic
socialist philosophy he embraced wholeheartedly. He now teaches at Duke
University.

Directed by Peter Raymont, who also made the excellent Rwanda-based documentary
''Shake Hands With the Devil: The Journey of Romeo Dallaire,'' the movie follows
Mr. Dorfman around the streets of Santiago on a return trip to Chile. He meets
old friends and recalls the tumultuous time before the military coup that ousted
Allende and installed the repressive regime of Augusto Pinochet. Under Pinochet
thousands were murdered and Mr. Dorfman was driven into exile.

He pointedly compares the events on the day of the coup, Sept. 11, 1973, to
America's more recent 9/11 trauma. He had promised other Allende supporters that
he would survive to tell the tale, and there came a critical moment when he had
to flee or face certain execution. He kept his promise and told the story, but
at a heavy price of survivor's guilt.

''Traces of the Trade: A Story From the Deep North,'' a far-reaching personal
documentary examination of the slave trade directed by Katrina Browne with Alla
Kovgan and Jude Ray, also addresses history and accountability. Ms. Browne, who
grew up in Bristol, R.I., discovered that her ancestors, the DeWolfs, were one
of the busiest slave-trading families in the United States. Researching local
archives, she learned that the slave trade and its related enterprises not only
made the family rich, they were also a cornerstone of the New England economy.
Shaken, she organizes a party of the few relatives willing to participate, and
together they retrace the steps of the triangular trade route, from the coast of
Ghana to Cuba to New England.

The implications of the film are devastating.  The North was the South's
complicit economic enabler, and the movie suggests that the North's high-toned
abolitionist rhetoric was a cover story. The old saying that ''behind every
great fortune there is a crime'' echoes silently through the movie, which
extends that notion to implicate an entire society.

Just as devastating is ''The Betrayal'' (''Nerakhoon''), directed by Ellen Kuras
and Thavisouk Phrasavath, which was filmed over 23 years and follows a Laotian
family's migration from Asia to a slum in a dangerous Brooklyn neighborhood. The
betrayals multiply, beginning with the story of Mr. Phrasavath's father, who,
after working with American forces during the secret bombing of Laos, was left
to fend for himself when the Vietnam War ended. He was imprisoned and presumed
dead.

The refugee family's dream of American streets paved with gold became a
nightmare when they found themselves dumped in a violent, gang-infested
neighborhood and given scant help. Somehow the children grew up, having survived
almost unimaginable hardship.

''Traces of the Trade'' and ''Betrayal'' are 2 of an unprecedented 20 films
(including shorts) in the festival directed by women. Its centerpiece, ''The
Sari Soldiers,'' directed by Julie Bridgham, follows the struggle of Devi, an
intrepid Nepalese woman, and five other women to find her daughter after she is
kidnapped by members of the Royal Nepalese Army in retaliation for Devi speaking
publicly about the torture and murder of her niece. Like so many of the films in
the festival, it gives new meaning to the words courage and resilience.

The festival runs through June 26 at the Walter Reade Theater, 165 West 65th
Street, Lincoln Center; (212) 875-5600, hrw.org/iff/.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: ''Traces of the Trade: A Story From the Deep North'' is a
wide-reaching personal documentary history of the slave trade. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
EBB POD PRODUCTIONS)
 ''A Promise to the Dead: The Exile Journey of Ariel Dorfman'' is among 19
feature films in the Human Rights Watch film festival. (PHOTOGRAPH BY WHITE PINE
PICTURES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MOVIE
INDUSTRY (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%); FESTIVALS (90%); FILM (89%);
WRITERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); SLAVERY (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%);
MARTIAL LAW (78%); THEATER & DRAMA (77%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (77%); NOVELS
& SHORT STORIES (76%); FAMILY (73%); DRAMA LITERATURE (72%); MILITARY RULE
(68%); COUPS (68%); ARMED FORCES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); DUKE UNIVERSITY (54%)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); NORTHEAST USA (74%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (90%); RWANDA (79%); ARGENTINA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Police Kill 9 Inmates At a Prison In Syria

BYLINE: By HOUWAIDA SAAD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 395 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon


Syrian military police officers fired on Islamist inmates early on Saturday
during a riot at a prison outside Damascus, the Syrian capital, leaving at least
nine inmates dead, human rights officials here said.

Inmates at the prison also took hostage a group of military police and prison
officials and were holding them as of Saturday afternoon, according to officials
at Human Rights Watch, who said they were receiving information through
cellphone calls with an inmate inside the prison.

The Syrian authorities did not release any statement on the events at Saydnaya
Prison. Located about 20 miles outside Damascus, the prison is believed to have
about 1,500 inmates, most of them Islamists.

''We have the names of nine prisoners who were shot and apparently killed, and
inmates say at least 25 prisoners were killed in all,'' said Nadim Houry, the
Syria and Lebanon researcher for Human Rights Watch, a group based in New York.

Mr. Houry gave the following account of the riot, as told by an inmate. Military
police arrived early on Saturday to do a security sweep. A group of Islamist
prisoners protested what they called ill treatment, leading to a confrontation
in which the police fired on them, killing nine. The prisoners took nine prison
officials and guards hostage. A group of military police then agreed to drop
their weapons and were also taken hostage.

The Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, is scheduled to meet President Nicolas
Sarkozy of France in Paris on Saturday,  resuming high-level contacts between
Syria and France. Syria has drawn criticism in recent months over a renewed
crackdown on dissidents, including the arrest and imprisonment of a former
Parliament member, Riad Seif,  and 13 other signers of a petition calling for
democratic change in Syria.

Saydnaya, the prison where the riot took place, ''is a symbol of repression in
Syria, and it's very difficult to get clear information about what goes on
there,'' Mr. Houry said. ''It's the place where everyone tried by the state
security court ends up serving their sentence, and inmates are often tortured
and ill treated there.''

During the 1980s, the Syrian government fought an internal war with Islamists.
In 1980, security forces killed hundreds of Islamist inmates at another prison
after an assassination attempt against President Hafez al-Assad, Mr. Assad's
father.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RIOTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING
(78%); SENTENCING (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); PETITIONS (66%); ASSASSINATION
(66%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (56%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (79%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (50%)

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (93%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (53%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (94%); LEBANON (92%); FRANCE (86%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arrest Helps Tribunals Prosecuting War Crimes

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE and MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 669 words


The arrest of Radovan Karadzic on Monday gave badly needed credibility to
international war crimes tribunals that have struggled for years to bring
fugitives to justice, according to former prosecutors, legal experts and human
rights groups.

Mr. Karadzic will be the third high-profile figure to be brought before a United
Nations-backed tribunal on war crimes charges in the past six years, following
in the footsteps of Charles Taylor of Liberia and Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav president.

But Mr. Karadzic, who remained free for nearly 13 years, made a mockery of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, which in 1993 became
the first such body established by the United Nations.

Although repeatedly seen in public when American and NATO forces entered Bosnia
in 1996, he was not arrested, in part because of fears that seizing him could
provoke a violent reaction against NATO forces.

Instead, the United States and the European Union tried to use economic and
diplomatic pressure on Serbia to force his arrest. Until Monday, that policy
appeared to be a failure.

''For international justice, this is a very good thing,'' Richard Dicker,
director of Human Rights Watch's International Justice Program, said of the
arrest, especially because Mr. Karadzic's evasion of the court for so long had
come to ''personify impunity.''

Other war crimes tribunals established by the United Nations have  come under
fire. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has been criticized as
being hugely expensive, exceedingly slow and largely detached from the country
itself. And the establishment of the International Criminal Court -- a permanent
tribunal intended to prosecute war crimes globally -- was delayed for years by
tortuous negotiations and fierce opposition from the Bush administration.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the International Criminal Court's chief prosecutor, called
Mr. Karadzic's arrest a ''great achievement'' and predicted that it would aid
his efforts to prosecute war crimes in the Darfur region of Sudan, including his
genocide case against Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.

Other legal experts agreed that Mr. Karadzic's arrest had the potential to
significantly bolster the power of the tribunals.

''It's not clear how exactly Bashir could wind up in The Hague,'' said Gary
Bass, a Princeton professor who wrote a book on the politics of war crimes
tribunals,  but ''the Karadzic example has got to make Bashir think hard.''

Officials from the war crimes tribunals have argued that the United States and
its allies have lacked the political will to make arrests or use diplomatic and
economic measures to bring fugitives to justice.

Critics also argue that the amount of time it took to put pressure on Serbia to
arrest Mr. Karadzic shows how easy it is for states to defy and divide the
international community. Sudan has flatly refused to turn over war crimes
suspects.

For years, many of survivors of the 1995 massacre in Srebrenica --  in which Mr.
Karadzic was indicted  -- mocked the Yugoslavia tribunal as a toothless and
expensive show put on by the international community.

To rectify that, Richard Goldstone, a South African jurist who was the
Yugoslavia tribunal's first chief prosecutor and indicted Mr. Karadzic in 1995,
said it was critical that Serbian officials also arrest Mr. Karadzic's
co-defendant, Gen. Ratko Mladic, who is believed to be hiding in Serbia as well.
''I just hope that Mladic is not that far behind,'' he said.

Similarly, the Rwanda tribunal, created in 1995 in neighboring Tanzania, has
secured the arrest of more than 70 people accused of high-level involvement in
the mass killings of more than 800,000 Rwandans in 1994. Yet 13 people accused
of being architects of the massacres have not been caught.

Even so, the tribunal secured the first genocide conviction against a head of a
government: former Prime Minister Jean Kambanda, who led the campaign to
exterminate ethnic Tutsi and moderate Hutu.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); POLITICS (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ECONOMIC POLICY (72%); ECONOMIC NEWS (72%); EUROPEAN
UNION (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%);
EUROPEAN UNION (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA (93%); LIBERIA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (56%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Pressure on Beijing

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 392 words


President Bush is finally beginning to complain -- gingerly -- about China's
disgraceful wave of pre-Olympics repression. With the start of the 2008 Games
less than two weeks away, we hope that he keeps speaking out and enlists others
to join him, including world and corporate leaders and the International Olympic
Committee -- if that troubled organization is not already beyond redemption.

After playing Beijing's game and declining to condemn China's latest crackdown
on critics and journalists, Mr. Bush deserves credit for holding talks on
Tuesday with five prominent Chinese dissidents.

Although the meeting was private, the White House announced it and said that
President Bush spoke of his ''concerns'' about human rights in China. Mr. Bush
also attended a separate meeting between his national security adviser and the
Chinese foreign minister and advised how the Olympics present an ''opportunity
to demonstrate compassion on human rights and freedom.''

The problem is that Mr. Bush's approach is still too deferential given China's
reprehensible and defiant behavior. On Wednesday, authorities confirmed that
they will censor the Internet during the Games, violating previous assurances.
Foreign journalists have already found that they could not reach sites like
Amnesty International and Radio Free Asia.

Making matters worse, the I.O.C., which has enabled China at every step,
apparently acquiesced in Web sites being blocked. Those responsible for such a
disgraceful deal should be forced to resign. The committee must demand that
China live up to its pre-Games pledges.

To win the coveted right to hold the Olympics, China promised to expand press
freedoms for foreign journalists and dangled the prospect that, more broadly,
human rights might also be improved. Instead, authorities have harassed and
locked up critics, intimidated journalists, selectively denied visas, silenced
grieving parents who lost children in the May 12 earthquake and relocated
thousands of Chinese whose homes or businesses were seen as marring Beijing's
image.

President Bush cannot go to the Olympics in silence next week. As the House of
Representatives said in a resolution, approved 419 to 1, he must insist that
China act immediately to cease rights abuses, allow promised press freedoms and
permit peaceful political activities during the Games.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM
(90%); OLYMPICS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); FREEDOM
OF PRESS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(76%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (73%); CENSORSHIP (73%); SICHUAN
EARTHQUAKE (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); INTERNET & WWW (71%); APPROVALS
(66%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (58%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                              99 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 30, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Accusations Against Leader Of Sudan Fuel Debate

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 523 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The possibility that the International Criminal Court might indict President
Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan on charges of genocide and war crimes in the
coming months prompted an intense tug of war at the United Nations General
Assembly that ended Monday.

Although Darfur took a back seat to other issues at the General Assembly, United
Nations officials emerged with a commitment for 18 helicopters for the
peacekeeping force there from Ukraine. There were so many conditions attached by
Ukraine, however, including using private contractors and getting approval from
the embattled Parliament, that it remained unclear whether a solution for the
long quest for 24 helicopters had really been found.

African and Arab leaders denounced President Bashir's possible indictment from
the podium and sent a request via Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to the Security
Council that it suspend any such court action.

Although the court, based in The Hague, is not expected to act until the end of
the year at the earliest, deferring the indictment is ''the most expedient thing
to do now,'' said Jakaya Mrisho Kikwete, the president of Tanzania and current
chairman of the African Union. Allowing an indictment to proceed would endanger
humanitarian aid and peacekeeping operations, he said.

Mr. Ban has tried to remain neutral, telling African and other leaders that the
court is independent and outside his purview. His legal counsel advised him to
avoid interaction with Mr. Bashir as much as possible to preserve his
neutrality, aides said.

The African Union forwarded to the Council an 18-page Sudanese government report
outlining its efforts to end the Darfur crisis. It said those being investigated
for crimes included Ali Kushayb, a militia leader already indicted by the
international court.

Human rights organizations dismiss Sudan's Darfur court as a smoke screen
occasionally deployed by Mr. Bashir's government.

Ultimately, only the Council can direct the international court's actions, and
the court's supporters on it say they are counting on the fact that they enjoy a
thin 8-to-7 edge over opponents as likely to prevent any intervention for now.

Still, human rights activists continue lobbying. Two Nobel peace laureates, Jody
Williams and Wangari Maathai, came to the United Nations on Monday with the
actress Mia Farrow to support the court.

Although Africa has come a long way since the days of the murderous Ugandan
dictator Idi Amin, Ms. Maathai, a Kenyan, said, ''It is completely unacceptable
that an African leader would be tolerated to commit genocide or gross violations
of human rights and be accepted within the African leadership.''

British and French leaders were also questioned about reports that they were
negotiating  to suspend the indictment if, in exchange, Mr. Bashir turned over
two senior aides already indicted and improved the overall situation in Darfur.
The French president, Nicolas Sarkozy, said last week that the main aim was to
change the situation on the ground, so there was no possibility of a suspension
''unless there is a radical and immediate change in Sudanese policies.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAWYERS (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
HELICOPTERS (71%); LOBBYING (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); NOBEL PRIZES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); AFRICAN
UNION (82%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: NICOLAS SARKOZY (58%); BAN KI-MOON (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); AFRICA (93%); UKRAINE (93%); FRANCE (90%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); KENYA (79%); UGANDA (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             100 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 26, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Torchbearer, Then and Now

BYLINE: By JAKE MOONEY

SECTION: Section CY; Column 0; The City Weekly Desk; DISPATCHES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 743 words


THE urge, at times, can be almost overwhelming: Ahmad Batebi will be walking
down a New York street, engrossed in some serious business, and he will spot a
basketball game. In that moment, he wants more than anything to join in. In the
next, he feels a pang of regret for seeming childish. Sometimes, he says, he
feels that he has left himself behind.

Nine years ago, when Mr. Batebi was a 21-year-old film student in Tehran, he was
swept up in a protest against the government and arrested. A photographer from
The Economist had spotted him holding up the bloody shirt of a fellow protester,
and the magazine published the picture on its cover, transforming Mr. Batebi
into a symbol of the 1999 student protests.

Retribution was harsh: He said he was held in solitary confinement, beaten, cut
and tortured. At one point, the authorities led him to a gallows and put a noose
around his neck. He saw fellow prisoners killed, he said. Last year, he had
several seizures and what was probably a stroke, and was released on medical
furlough. Ordered last March to return to prison, he instead fled the country
and arrived in the United States, where he is seeking asylum.

Here, Mr. Batebi's life as a symbol continues. He is tall, with a dark goatee
and a long ponytail, and he has been recognized on the street and on the bus to
Philadelphia. He is scheduled to speak on Thursday to the local Amnesty
International chapter, which had worked to free him since 2002. (The event will
be held at Advent Lutheran Church on Broadway at 93rd Street.) Mr. Batebi
understands the attention, he said a few days ago through an interpreter. But,
he added quietly, with a small smile, he wishes it would end.

''I am 30 years old,'' he said. ''I have spent 10 years of it in prison, and my
life has not been really normal since the age of 16 or 17. So at some point I
would like to have a normal life.''

That, so far, has meant blogging about Iranian society and politics for
international news Web sites  and undergoing treatment at the Bellevue/N.Y.U.
Program for Survivors of Torture. Though he shuttles among various places on the
East Coast, when he is in the city he stays at a friend's apartment in Prospect
Heights, Brooklyn. And he maintains a sense of responsibility to those he left
behind.

This manifested itself in a subtle wince at questions about his long ordeal in
an interview at the Brooklyn Heights office of the International Campaign for
Human Rights in Iran. He leaned forward and then, lowering his voice, spoke in
Farsi to Hadi Ghaemi, the group's coordinator, who interpreted.

''He wishes to put an end to the story of Ahmad Batebi as an individual,'' Mr.
Ghaemi said. ''Within his own eyewitness experience, what happened to him
happened also to 98 percent of the other prisoners. You see violations of human
rights in Iran that are actually much more extensive than being able to describe
in words. He believes that there are things that people here cannot even dream
of taking place.'' (When his story came to light in July, Iran's
state-controlled news media suggested that Mr. Batebi had long been in league
with Israel and the United States, claims that human rights groups dismiss.)

Mr. Batebi knows he has had experiences that set him apart from Americans his
age -- not just his imprisonment but the realities of growing up in Iran. The
country leads the world in juvenile executions and has one of the highest rates
of traffic deaths, Mr. Ghaemi said. Two million of its people are believed to be
heroin addicts.

Most Americans, Mr. Batebi realizes, are only dimly aware of this. When they do
think of Iran, they think in terms of nuclear proliferation or the Arab-Israeli
conflict. In truth, Mr. Batebi admitted, since his arrival he has been
distracted -- with work, with everyday tasks, even with following the
presidential election.

Americans, he said, should be proud of their ability to doubt their government,
and to change it. That is what he wants for Iran, he said, and it is one reason
he still speaks up, suppressing urges for privacy and for the youth he fears he
has missed.

On this point, he spoke slowly and carefully, so every word could be translated.

''If people could stand up and have the right to challenge their government, and
not be put down by the government, and know that they have the international
community behind them,'' he said, ''then they would change their government's
policy and behavior.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARILYNN K. YEE/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (88%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); BASKETBALL (77%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (76%); POLITICAL PROTESTS
(75%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (71%); VISUAL
ARTISTS (71%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (66%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (72%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); IRAN (72%)

LOAD-DATE: October 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 18, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Faults All Parties in War in Georgia

BYLINE: By ELLEN BARRY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW


Russian, Georgian and South Ossetian forces failed to protect civilians, and in
some cases singled them out for attack, during the war in Georgia, according to
a report released Tuesday by Amnesty International.

The report calls for an independent investigation into ''serious violations of
international humanitarian and human rights law'' that Amnesty International
contends were committed by all sides during the war in August.

The conflict has been muddied by exaggeration and prejudice from its first
hours, said John Dalhuisen, one of the report's authors. But he said, ''The
truth will out, eventually.''

Amnesty International, a London-based human rights group, studied satellite
imagery of damage around the separatist enclave of South Ossetia and interviewed
witnesses and victims during four visits to the region.

The report said that in attacking Tskhinvali, the South Ossetian capital, on
Aug. 7 and 8, Georgia fired Grad missiles that seemed to miss their targets and
hit civilian areas. It also criticized Russia for bombarding Georgian territory
later and for allowing South Ossetian forces to loot ethnic Georgian villages
for weeks.

Both sides, the report concludes, used cluster bombs.

Russian and Georgian officials could not be reached for comment early Tuesday.

The report makes no attempt to determine who started the war, noting that ''all
sides have declared their actions to be 'defensive,' even when civilians bore
the brunt of their military operations.''

Researchers in Tskhinvali concluded that Georgian forces had aimed Grad rockets
at military targets -- a Russian peacekeeper base, fuel depots and munitions
stockpiles, among others -- but that the targets were adjacent to civilian
areas. The impact of the rockets had a radius of as much as 500 feet, and in
some cases missiles struck a third of a mile away from what appeared to be their
targets, the report said.

The researchers also found that several thousand civilians were in Tskhinvali
the night of the attack, Aug. 7, and that 182 structures in the city were
damaged, mostly in the first hours of the war.

Unlike the Georgian attack -- described as ''a fixed, localized incident that
took place over eight hours'' -- the Russian bombardment that followed was
sporadic and lasted for days, Mr. Dalhuisen said. The Georgian authorities
commented on their military strategy to Amnesty International's researchers, but
Russian leaders did not.

The report found that Georgian towns, villages and civilians were hit during
Russian bombing raids, sometimes ''in the apparent absence of nearby military
targets,'' which would violate international law.

Russian infantry treated civilians in a disciplined fashion, but the Russians
allowed South Ossetian forces to loot and set fires  in the ethnic Georgian
villages north of the separatist capital, the report determined. Amnesty
International's researchers ''documented unlawful killings, beatings, threats,
arson and looting'' by armed South Ossetian groups, the report said.

''It is clear that the Russian authorities singularly failed in their duty to
prevent reprisals and serious human rights abuses carried out by South Ossetian
forces and militia units,'' the report said. In South Ossetia in late August, it
said, researchers observed ''scenes of total destruction, with houses pillaged,
burnt and many in ruins.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Fires burned Aug. 12 in a Gori apartment where an attack had
killed civilians. Gori is in Georgia just south of South Ossetia.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS
(89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (88%); ARMED FORCES (86%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
ARSON (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); WITNESSES (73%); FIRES
(72%); HOMICIDE (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (59%)

COUNTRY: GEORGIA (98%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%)

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Massacre Unfurls in Congo, Despite Nearby Aid

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1770 words

DATELINE: KIWANJA, Congo


At last the bullets had stopped, and Francois Kambere Siviri made a dash for the
door. After hiding all night from firefights between rebels and a
government-allied militia over this small but strategic town, he was desperate
to get to the latrine a few feet away.

''Pow, pow, pow,'' said his widowed mother, Ludia Kavira Nzuva, recounting how
the rebels killed her 25-year-old son just outside her front door. As they
abandoned his bloodied corpse, she said, one turned to her and declared,
''Voila, here is your gift.''

In little more than 24 hours, at least 150 people would be dead, most of them
young men, summarily executed by the rebels last month as they tightened their
grip over parts of eastern Congo, according to witnesses and human-rights
investigators.

And yet, as the killings took place, a contingent of about 100 United Nations
peacekeepers was less than a mile away, struggling to understand what was
happening outside the gates of its base. The peacekeepers were short of
equipment and men, United Nations officials said, and they were focusing on
evacuating frightened aid workers and searching for a foreign journalist who had
been kidnapped. Already overwhelmed, officials said, they had no intelligence
capabilities or even an interpreter who could speak the necessary languages.

The peacekeepers said they had no idea that the killings were taking place until
it was all over.

The executions in Kiwanja are a study in the unfettered cruelty meted out by the
armed groups fighting for power and resources in eastern Congo. But the events
are also a textbook example of the continuing failure of the world's largest
international peacekeeping force, which has a mandate to protect the Congolese
people from brutality.

In this instance, the failure came from a mix of poor communication and
staffing, inadequate equipment, intelligence breakdowns and spectacularly bad
luck, said Lt. Col. H. S. Brar, the commander of the Indian peacekeepers based
in Kiwanja.

But the killings and the stumbling response to the rebel advance were
symptomatic of problems that have plagued the United Nations peacekeeping force
in Congo for years, said Anneke Van Woudenberg, a senior researcher for Human
Rights Watch, who investigated the slayings this month. The rebel onslaught was
even led by a commander who is wanted on war crimes charges by the International
Criminal Court.

''Kiwanja was a disaster for everyone,'' Ms. Van Woudenberg said. ''The people
were betrayed not just by rebels who committed terrible war crimes against them
but by the international community that failed to protect them.''

In the past year alone, hundreds of thousands of people have been forced to flee
their homes as the rebels, led by a renegade army general, have waged a fierce
insurgency against the government and its allied militias.

In an interview, the rebel general, Laurent Nkunda, denied that his troops had
executed civilians here, accusing militias allied with the government of trying
to make his rebel movement look bad.

''We cannot kill the population,'' he said. ''It is not in our behavior to kill
and to rape.''

But extensive interviews with victims, aid workers and human-rights
investigators showed that Mr. Nkunda's men carried out a door-to-door military
operation over two days in which young men and others were executed.

The trouble began on Oct. 28, when Congolese Army troops fled the town, fearful
of the advance of Mr. Nkunda's troops.

The soldiers, who had already been routed by Mr. Nkunda's men farther south,
looted and raped as they ran, taking everything of value and even forcing some
residents to help them carry the spoils, according to witnesses and
investigators. Fearful residents had to choose between two bad options: follow
the rampaging army or wait to see what the rebels might bring.

With the soldiers long gone, Mr. Nkunda's troops took the towns of Kiwanja and
Rutshuru without firing a shot. Immediately, they ordered the residents who
remained to torch sprawling camps that held about 30,000 people displaced by
earlier fighting, proclaiming that it was now safe for the camp dwellers to
return to their villages, witnesses said.

''They said there was security, so everyone should go home,'' said Francois
Hazumutima, a retired teacher who had been living in a nearby camp. ''But none
of us felt safe.''

A week later, on Nov. 4, a group of militia fighters known as the Mai Mai
carried out a surprise attack on Kiwanja. But the rebels soon routed the Mai Mai
-- and ordered all residents to leave.

The soldiers then went house to house, saying they were searching for militia
fighters who stayed behind to fight. But many residents who stayed were scared
their houses would be looted or were too old or infirm to flee, according to
witnesses. Others had simply not gotten the message to leave.

The rebels came to the door of a 25-year-old trader, banging and threatening to
shoot their way in.

''There were gunshots everywhere,'' he said, speaking on condition of anonymity
for fear of retribution. ''They asked for money. I gave them $200.''

He then watched in impotent horror as the rebels went to his 22-year-old
brother's house next door. The man, a student, had no money to offer them. The
soldiers ordered him to lie on the ground. They stabbed him in the neck with
their bayonets and shot him in the head, he said.

''They said, 'If you don't have money, you are Mai Mai,' '' he said. ''Everyone
who was young was destined to die.''

Muwavita Mukangusi said she was out in the fields farming with her husband when
the shooting started. Their three young daughters were at home, so Ms. Mukangusi
ran back. Her husband hid in the fields, returning only at nightfall. The next
morning the rebels came.

''They took my husband,'' she said, her eyes rimmed in red. ''Because I had $50
in the house, I took $25 to them. But it was not enough. I added $25. It was
still not enough. They accused him of being Mai Mai.''

The rebels beat him, she said, then forced him to the ground and shot him in the
back of the head.

According to witnesses and clips of video shot at the time, Jean Bosco Ntaganda,
Mr. Nkunda's chief of staff, commanded the troops that carried out the killings.
Mr. Ntaganda, whose nom de guerre is the Terminator, is wanted by the
International Criminal Court for war crimes committed while he was commanding a
different armed group earlier in the war.

Meanwhile, confusion reigned at the nearby peacekeepers' base. The company of
soldiers sits in a spot that is decidedly not strategic, nestled in a valley
that is highly vulnerable to incoming fire and has a poor vantage point from
which to keep tabs on the surrounding area.

The company's only translator left the base on Oct. 26 and was not replaced
until more than two weeks later. But even in normal times, communications are
limited. To make logistical arrangements, the peacekeepers depend largely on
civilian staff members who work normal business hours and have weekends off.
Unable to speak to most of the population and with almost no intelligence
capabilities, Colonel Brar groped his way through a fog of rumor, speculation
and misinformation.

''During this whole time, there was an informational vacuum,'' Colonel Brar
said.

With just one company of soldiers and three armored vehicles, the colonel's
peacekeepers were overmatched, he said. Patrols had to be aborted because rebels
and militia fighters opened fire with heavy weapons that could pierce the
vehicles' cladding. The peacekeepers said they could not tell the difference
between the different armed groups and were fearful of firing on civilians.

The colonel said he was juggling orders from headquarters in Goma to rescue
stranded aid workers and search for a kidnapped foreign journalist. Sending out
too many patrols would leave no one to protect the thousands of civilians
gathered around the base, trapped in the vulnerable valley.

Making matters worse, the peacekeepers' armored vehicles are largely unable to
handle the muddy terrain of the neighborhoods hit hardest by the violence. It
was not until the fighting was over that the full horror of the killings was
discovered in houses stuffed with dead bodies.

''We launched patrols in areas we thought there would be clashes,'' he
explained. ''But we could not be everywhere at once.''

As the shooting died down, residents said they found streets littered with
bodies. Most, but not all, were young men and boys. One health care worker, who
spoke anonymously for fear of reprisals, helped the Red Cross recover the
bodies.

''Some were killed with bullets, others bayoneted,'' the worker said. Among the
injured sent to the regional hospital, the worker said, were ''two women, one
small girl of 9 years and one boy of 11 years.''

Witnesses said the rebels ordered that the bodies be buried quickly and far from
the cemetery, to avoid leaving evidence for war crimes investigators.

''They did not want any mass graves,'' said another man, who participated in the
burials.

The worker said that by the end of Nov. 6, they had collected 150 bodies, the
same toll reached by Human Rights Watch. The count could be higher still, he
said, since the rebels have hampered efforts at a fuller accounting of the dead
and missing.

Mr. Nkunda's men continue to hold the town, as well as neighboring Rutshuru.
Outwardly, calm has returned to the streets. But mothers have sent their sons
packing because the rebels have been forcing men and boys to join them.

Mujawimana Nyiragasigwa said her 15-year-old son Jimia was snatched by soldiers
in broad daylight last month. He had been out looking for work when the soldiers
rounded him up, she said, and he has been missing for two and a half weeks.

''If I ever see him again, it will be by the grace of God,'' she said.

Colonel Brar was clearly troubled by what happened here but said he and his
troops did their best in an awful situation.

''We did what we could,'' he said. ''Imagine if we had not been here. Many more
could have died.''

Ms. Kavira Nzuva, whose son Francois was killed, said his death had hollowed out
her life. Gaunt and hobbled at 67, she was forced to return to the fields to
farm.

Francois had supported her with his photography business. He had wired her
mud-walled house for electricity and paid the monthly bill. He had built her a
new kitchen. She kept a thick album of pictures of him, a tall man always eager
to strike a pose for the camera.

''He was my youngest child,'' she said. ''I don't know how I will live without
him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The son of Ludia Kavira Nzuva, 67, was among at least 150
people killed in little more than 24 hours by rebels in Kiwanja, Congo.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL KAMBER FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
Muwavita Mukangusi's husband was suspected by rebels of being part of a
different militia. He was beaten and shot in the head.
 Some members of a group of rebels led by Laurent Nkunda. His troops were
accused of carrying out the killings in Kiwanja. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL KAMBER
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A21) MAP: Kiwanja was the site of a massacre by
rebels in November.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); ARMIES (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (72%); DISASTER RELIEF (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%); INTERVIEWS
(71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); ARMED FORCES (66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             109 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rehabilitating Libya

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 447 words


We are all for forgiveness and second acts, but Libya's sordid human rights
record and continuing police state tactics should not be forgotten. Businesses
-- and their government backers -- rushing to procure contracts with the
oil-rich state would prefer to ignore what's happening on the ground in Libya.
President Bush and other democratic leaders cannot, and must keep pressing
Tripoli for change.

Libya's return from the cold began in 2003. First, it accepted responsibility
for the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland -- agreeing to
compensate the victims' families -- and forswore terrorism. Then it gave up its
clandestine nuclear program.

Last month, Libya's leader, Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, was feted in Paris. This
month, the country that until 2003 was under United Nations Security Council
sanctions took over the council's presidency. This week, its foreign minister
made an official visit to Washington. There were no meetings with Mr. Bush or
Vice President Dick Cheney. There was a personal tour of the White House,
meetings with Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice and other cabinet members and
lunch with representatives of some of America's biggest companies.

Rehabilitating a pariah state is never easy or without distasteful aspects.
Re-engagement must be carefully calibrated so long as Libya continues to operate
outside international norms by jailing political prisoners, torturing detainees,
ignoring the rule of law and refusing to pay settlement claims promised to
families of victims of Lockerbie and the 1986 bombing of the La Belle disco in
Berlin. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee is right to withhold confirmation
of the first American ambassador to Tripoli in decades until those claims are
resolved. (A charge d'affaires represents Washington's interests.)

According to Human Rights Watch, three Libyan dissidents have disappeared in the
last 18 months. Abed al-Rahman al-Qotaiwi and Jum' a Boufayed were arrested in
early 2007 after planning a peaceful protest. Fathi Eljahmi has been in
detention since 2004 when he gave interviews critical of Colonel Qaddafi. One of
Ms. Rice's top aides raised Mr. Eljahmi's case with the foreign minister on
Thursday. Ms. Rice, who discussed human rights generally during her meeting,
would have made a stronger point if she had raised all three cases herself.

Libya is keen to have Ms. Rice visit this year. Before that happens, she is
going to have to press a lot harder for changes in Libya's behavior, including
releasing dissidents and settling the Lockerbie claims. Colonel Qaddafi needs to
understand that Libya's responsibilities don't end just because its isolation
has.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); BOMBINGS (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(73%); RULE OF LAW (73%); ARRESTS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); TERRORISM
(70%); JAIL SENTENCING (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (69%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (72%); DICK CHENEY (57%)

CITY: TRIPOLI, LIBYA (90%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); GERMANY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 6, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Danger in Kenya

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 196 words


To the Editor:

Re ''A New Chapter in Ethnic Cleansing'' (editorial, Feb. 2):

In addition to the continuing politically motivated ethnic violence and last
week's killings of two opposition members of Parliament, a number of Kenyan
journalists, human rights defenders, and pro-democracy activists have recently
received serious death threats.

Amnesty International has learned of more than 25 cases and continues to receive
new reports from throughout the country.

Many of those threatened have been forced into hiding or even exile, as in the
case of Maina Kiai of the Kenya National Human Rights Commission. Kikuyus who
have spoken out about election irregularities and human rights abuses committed
by the police and armed gangs, including Kikuyu gangs, have been specifically
targeted as ''traitors'' to their ethnicity.

The United States government, Kofi Annan and the African Union should pressure
the Kenyan government to provide protection for those threatened, investigate
these threats and prosecute those responsible before the violence escalates
further out of control.

Ann Corbett Kenya Country Specialist, Amnesty International USA Washington, Feb.
4, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); ETHNICITY (73%); WRITERS (73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (72%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); AFRICAN UNION (56%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             114 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tom Lantos, 80, Is Dead; Longtime Congressman

BYLINE: By DAVID M. HERSZENHORN

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 956 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Representative Tom Lantos of California, chairman of the House Foreign Affairs
Committee and the only Holocaust survivor ever to serve in Congress, died on
Monday. He was 80.

His death, at the National  Naval Medical Center in Bethesda, Md.,  was
announced by Lynne A. Weil, a spokeswoman for his office. Mr. Lantos said last
month that he had cancer of the esophagus and would retire early next year, at
the end of his 14th term.

Mr. Lantos, a Democrat, represented a district that includes southwest San
Francisco as well as his hometown, San Mateo. He became chairman of the Foreign
Affairs Committee early last year after the Democrats had regained control of
the House.

The congressman was known as a strong defender of human rights, an ardent
supporter of Israel and an outspoken critic of Communism. He also worked for
stronger protections for animals and the environment.

''Tom was a living reminder,'' President Bush said in a statement Monday, ''that
we must never turn a blind eye to the suffering of the innocent at the hands of
evil men.''

Mr. Bush called Mr. Lantos ''a man of character and a champion of human rights
,'' and cited his role as a founder of the Congressional Human Rights Caucus,
created in 1983.

Mr. Lantos voted in 2002 to authorize the Bush administration to use force
against Iraq. But as Foreign Affairs chairman he criticized the administration's
handling of the war and was a co-sponsor of a resolution last year opposing Mr.
Bush's buildup of troops.

It was his defense of human rights, though, that most clearly defined a
Congressional career that lasted nearly three decades. That focus was an
outgrowth of his experience during the Holocaust, in which much of his family,
including his mother, perished.

Mr. Lantos, a Hungarian-born Jew who was 16 when the Nazis occupied his native
country, once said his entire life had served as preparation for the
chairmanship of the Foreign Affairs Committee. Though he held the post for
little more than a year, the committee took a number of bold steps in that time,
demanding, for instance, that the government of Japan apologize for wartime sex
slavery by its military and declaring Turkey's mass killing of Armenians in
World War I an act of genocide, a move that angered the Bush administration and
nearly provoked a confrontation with the Turkish government.

He was frequently critical of China, citing its record on human rights, and was
arrested outside the Sudanese Embassy in Washington in 2006 during a protest
against the mass killings in Darfur.

Mr. Lantos had a tart tongue that could offend foreign leaders. In October,
members of the Dutch Parliament said he had insulted them by pointedly telling
them at a meeting that some Europeans were more outraged by the Guantanamo
detention center than by Auschwitz. And he once called former Chancellor Gerhard
Schroder of Germany a ''political prostitute'' because of his ties to the
Russian gas industry.

In a speech on the Senate floor on Monday, Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky,
the Republican leader, recalled working with Mr. Lantos to support democracy in
Burma and to impose additional sanctions against Iran on the ground that it
supported terrorism.

Thomas Peter Lantos, born into a family of educators in Budapest, twice escaped
from forced-labor camps after the Nazis occupied Hungary. His survival was due
in part to the efforts of Raoul Wallenberg, the Swedish diplomat who saved
thousands of Jews by issuing them Swedish-protected passports and declaring them
Swedish subjects. ''This was like me declaring you to be prima ballerina of the
St. Petersburg Ballet; it had no validity,'' Mr. Lantos was to say. And yet, he
said, ''these miraculous, worthless pieces of paper worked.''

One of Mr. Lantos's first acts after being elected to Congress in 1980 was to
introduce legislation naming Wallenberg an honorary United States citizen.

Mr. Lantos was one of five Hungarian Holocaust survivors featured in the film
''The Last Days,'' which won the 1998 Academy Award for best documentary
feature.

After the war, Mr. Lantos managed to reunite with his childhood friend Annette
Tillemann, who had escaped to Switzerland. They moved to the United States after
he won a scholarship, and married in 1950. He earned bachelor's and master's
degrees in economics at the University of Washington and then a doctorate in
economics from the University of California.

He taught economics at San Francisco State University from 1950 to 1980 and also
served as a television commentator on international affairs. He was a member of
the Presidential Task Force on Defense and Foreign Policy in 1976 and was an
aide to Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, in 1978-79.

Besides his wife, he is survived by two daughters, Annette Dick of Denver and
Katrina Swett of Bow, N.H.; 17 grandchildren; and 2 great-grandchildren. Ms.
Swett's husband, Richard Swett, is a former congressman from New Hampshire and
onetime ambassador to Denmark.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who represents a district in San Francisco adjacent to Mr.
Lantos's, called his death ''a profound loss for the Congress and for the nation
and a terrible loss for me personally.''

Looking back on his immigrant past, Mr. Lantos often declared himself an
''American by choice.''

''It is only in the United States that a penniless survivor of the Holocaust and
a fighter in the anti-Nazi underground could have received an education, raised
a family and had the privilege of serving the last three decades of his life as
a member of Congress,'' he said in a statement last month on announcing he would
retire. ''I will never be able to express fully my profoundly felt gratitude to
this great country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Government (U.S.)

PERSON: Tom Lantos

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tom Lantos (PHOTOGRAPH BY JUSTIN SULLIVAN/GETTY IMAGES, 2007

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (77%); NAVIES (77%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (73%); WORLD WAR I (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); EARLY RETIREMENT (71%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (69%); SLAVERY (69%);
GASTROINTESTINAL CANCER (56%); CANCER (56%); ARRESTS (50%)

TOM LANTOS (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (52%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SUDAN (92%); TURKEY (92%); JAPAN (79%); ARMENIA
(79%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPE (79%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             115 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Deal We Can Live With

BYLINE: By MAINA KIAI and L. MUTHONI WANYEKI.

Maina Kiai is the chairman of the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights. L.
Muthoni Wanyeki is the executive director of the Kenya Human Rights Commission,
a nongovernmental organization.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 675 words

DATELINE: Nairobi, Kenya


UNTIL December, Kenya was the most stable nation in East Africa. It has long
been a willing partner in the Bush administration's war on terrorism. Yet the
United States has mostly stood by as our country has descended into chaos.

More than 800 people have been killed and at least 250,000 driven from their
homes since rigged presidential elections on Dec. 27. Two opposition members of
Parliament have been gunned down, and human rights defenders have received death
threats.

Thankfully, for the first time since the election, there is a glimmer of hope.
On Friday, Kofi Annan, who has led an African Union mediation effort, announced
that President Mwai Kibaki and his opponent in the presidential election, Raila
Odinga, have agreed to negotiate a power-sharing agreement. Levels of tension in
the country have already abated.

But Kenya will not be able to take the crucial steps to stability alone. We need
sustained international pressure for as long as it takes to get the country back
on track. Washington must refrain from simplistic characterizations of the
violence as a matter of ethnic cleansing or tribal conflict, when in fact the
roots of the problem are political.

To play an effective role, the United States must maintain consistent and strong
pressure to ensure that Kenya's leaders treat the mediation with utmost
seriousness. Kenyans welcome American leadership on Kenya at the United Nations
Security Council. The recent decision to bar hard-line politicians and their
families from entering the United States is another step in the right direction.
It appears to have been a decisive factor in prompting the parties to finally
sit at the table.

Washington should continue to work in concert with other strong voices, like the
European Union, to push for the restoration of democracy in Kenya. Additionally,
the personal assets of the hard-liners and  the leaders of the violence should
be traced and frozen.

Congress should call for the International Republican Institute, an
elections-monitoring organization that conducted an exit poll on the
presidential vote, to release its findings. Suspicions that the institute has
suppressed its results not because they were flawed but because they showed that
Mr. Odinga won have fueled mistrust.

Finally, the United States can use another pressure point. It must freeze the
millions of dollars of military assistance Kenya receives each year, pending a
successful outcome to the negotiations. Some of the security forces benefiting
from this aid and equipment have been killing Kenyan civilians with impunity.
The United States must not be an accessory to their brutality.

The Annan agreement presents an opportunity for Kenya to step back from the
brink of disaster.   Kenya can now  fix the ''winner take all'' political system
that prompted the recent election rigging, and end the impunity for human rights
violations that has dogged our country since independence.

The Annan mediation effort must push the parties to agree to a one- to two-year
transitional government, with both sides exercising equal powers. This
government's chief tasks, besides keeping the country running, must be to carry
out badly needed constitutional reforms around presidential powers, and to
create the conditions for new free and fair elections.

Restructuring the electoral commission, the police and the judiciary is also
critical. The perpetrators of the election fraud and the violence must be
prosecuted to restore Kenyans' faith in the power of the vote. Only then can new
presidential elections be held.

The current calm must not be mistaken for peace. A critical opportunity will be
lost if the mediation effort results only in political horse-trading between Mr.
Kibaki and Mr. Odinga. Without these critical reforms, the gains made in the
last few days will secure only a short-lived truce.

Above all, the United States and the world must ensure that the Kenyan people's
vote is respected. If we cannot uphold our democratic choice, the future of
Kenya will be lost.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ASTRID CHESNEY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TERRORISM (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); VOTERS & VOTING (76%); ELECTION FRAUD (76%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (73%); WAR ON TERROR (73%); SHOOTINGS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%);
ELECTION MONITORING (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(70%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

PERSON: MWAI KIBAKI (58%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (97%); UNITED STATES (97%); AFRICA (93%); EASTERN AFRICA (92%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (77%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             116 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexican Panel Lacks Impact In Inquiries, Group Finds

BYLINE: By JAMES C. McKINLEY Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 327 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


A common saying in Mexico about police investigations and government inquiries
goes ''no pasa nada,'' or ''nothing happens.'' Investigations often start with
great fanfare only to die  quiet deaths.

The National Human Rights Commission was supposed to change that when it was
created in 1990 and given a large budget and staff. But a new report by Human
Rights Watch says Mexican officials regularly ignore the commission's findings
or begin investigations that go nowhere.

The commission seldom follows up to find out whether anyone was ever prosecuted
or sanctioned, the report said.

''We lament that it does not have a bigger impact,'' Jose Miguel Vivanco,
Americas director at Human Rights Watch, said at a news conference Wednesday. He
added, ''They don't follow up.''

In a statement, the office of the commission's president, Jose Luis Soberanes,
said, ''Many of the criticisms contained in this report, as well as other
points, lack foundation because they propose actions and conducts that exceed
the legal realm of this institution.''

In one case cited, the commission did an exhaustive investigation into a state
crackdown on antiglobalization protesters in Guadalajara in May 2004. Its
investigators determined that the Jalisco state police had arbitrarily detained
70 people, least 55 of whom were subjected to cruel and inhumane treatment,
including 19 who were tortured into signing confessions.

The governor of Jalisco at the time, Francisco Ramirez Acuna, rejected the
report. Two years later, President Felipe Calderon named him the interior
minister.

Perhaps the biggest failure involved the disappearance of about 500 dissidents,
leftists and suspected guerrillas during the 1960s and 1970s. The commission
issued a report in 2001 saying it had found evidence that at least 275 people
vanished after being arrested and tortured by the police and the military. A
special prosecutor's office was created; it never obtained a conviction.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
POLICE FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%); ARRESTS (73%); GLOBALIZATION (72%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (69%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (63%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

PERSON: FELIPE CALDERON (58%)

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (96%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             119 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canada Again Transfers Afghan Prisoners

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN; Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 651 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


The Canadian military has resumed handing over prisoners captured in Afghanistan
to the Afghan government, a practice it quietly suspended late last year over
concerns about torture, the military said Friday.

Speaking to reporters in a conference call from Kandahar, Canada's operational
base in southern Afghanistan, Lt. Col. Grant Dame did not say when the transfers
had restarted and said they were being made on a ''case-by-case basis.''

''In other words, we'll exercise discretion each and every time we transfer a
detainee,'' he said.

The resumption of transfers comes as Parliament is reviewing the country's
combat mission in Afghanistan and as two human rights groups are challenging the
transfers in court.

The transfers were ended in November after a Canadian prison inspection team
concluded that at least one detainee had been tortured and heard complaints of
torture from several others. A heavily censored government report said that one
detainee showed inspectors a braided electrical cable and a rubber hose that he
said were used for beatings.

But Colonel Dame and Ron Hoffman, the acting Canadian ambassador in Afghanistan,
said at the news conference that several changes had made Canada confident that
prisoners were no longer being abused.

In particular, Mr. Hoffman said Afghanistan had suspended and arrested a senior
member of the country's intelligence service. He offered no details about the
person or the charges.

Mr. Hoffman added that Afghanistan was also improving living conditions at two
of the prisons that received detainees from Canada, which were now using ''hand
and leg restraints that comply with international standards,'' and was sending
prison and intelligence officials to training courses on human rights.

Canada is also training members of the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission, a watchdog agency.

''These are promising first steps in the right direction,'' said Alex Neve, the
head of Amnesty International's Canadian branch. ''But they are not sufficient
to conclude that it is now time to resume transfers. Torture in Afghanistan is
not something that was isolated; it is systemic.''

Within hours of the government announcement, lawyers for Amnesty and the British
Columbia Civil Liberties Association asked the federal court in Ottawa to block
further prisoner transfers until their request for a permanent ban was heard.

Government court filings related to an earlier injunction request from the
groups first revealed in January that the transfers had been stopped. While that
suspension meant that the first injunction was not granted, the federal court
was critical of the prisoners' situation.

Evidence presented by the rights group, Justice Anne L. Mactavish wrote in her
ruling, ''is very troubling, and creates real and serious concerns as to the
efficacy of the safeguards that have been put in place thus far to protect
detainees.''

Unlike the United States and Britain, Canada will not disclose the number of
prisoners it has detained in Afghanistan, citing security concerns. Nor will the
government comment on what happened with prisoners between November and the
resumption of transfers.

The governor of Kandahar, Asadullah Khaled, declined to comment about Canada's
action.

Canada's controversial combat role in the volatile Kandahar region is set to
expire in February 2009. A compromise by Prime Minister Stephen Harper, a
Conservative, appears to have assured passage of a motion to continue
participation in the NATO-led mission. Because Mr. Harper's party does not
control a majority of the votes in the House of Commons, he recently agreed to a
Liberal Party plan to set December 2011 as an end date.

The motion also makes Canada's continued military presence contingent on another
NATO country's deploying 1,000 combat troops in the south. No other country has
yet come forward to fulfill that request.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INJUNCTIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%);
LAWYERS (72%); CONFERENCE CALLS (72%); EVIDENCE (69%); LIVING CONDITIONS (69%);
CENSORSHIP (67%)

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (88%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (88%); BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (58%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Speak Out on Tibet

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 452 words


China has cracked down on Tibet and neighboring provinces. It sent more troops
into restive regions and made scores of arrests in Lhasa. It acknowledged firing
on demonstrators in Sichuan. Yet, the response of the international community --
and of the International Olympic Committee -- has been tepid. Beijing must be
called to account, especially since it will host the 2008 Games.

We are just learning details of what happened. China has blocked most news
coverage despite a pledge to give freer access to journalists in the run-up to
the Olympics. Tibetan exile groups say about 100  people died in violence that
followed a week of peaceful protests. Beijing puts the toll at  about 20. In any
case, the violence is neither acceptable nor particularly surprising.

The State Department says Tibet -- taken by force by China in 1951 -- is ''one
of China's poorest regions.'' Authorities have increased controls over the
practice of Buddhism and committed serious human rights abuses.

The Dalai Lama, Tibet's exiled spiritual leader, has shown remarkable restraint
against what he calls ''cultural genocide.'' Despite the bloodshed, he
reaffirmed a commitment to nonviolence and greater autonomy -- rather than
independence -- for Tibet. In return, Beijing called him a ''devil.''

But China's authoritarianism is backfiring, fueling resentment that exploded in
Lhasa and radicalizing Tibetans, who increasingly demand independence.

The United States and other major countries must go beyond anemic statements
urging Chinese restraint. They must make it clear that such repression violates
the promise Beijing made to improve its human rights record when it won the
Olympics bid. It mocks the Olympic Charter, which extols ''human dignity.'' It
mocks the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which recognizes ''equal and
inalienable rights of all.''

The West should keep pressing Beijing to begin serious talks with the Dalai Lama
and instruct the United Nations Human Rights Council, which has investigated
reported abuses by Israel, Sudan and Myanmar, to begin a similar probe in Tibet.
The White House says President Bush is trying privately to influence Beijing. So
far, we see no positive results.

Inexcusably, the International Olympic Committee has done little to defend its
values and has stuck with plans to have the Olympic torch pass through Lhasa.

Boycotting the Olympic Games does not work; we know that from experience. But
the idea of Bernard Kouchner,  France's foreign minister, about not attending
the opening ceremony is worth considering. What message does it send if Mr. Bush
and other dignitaries lend their prestige to China's coming out party as if
nothing happened in Tibet?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); OLYMPICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); OLYMPIC TORCH PROTESTS
(79%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (77%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); JOURNALISM (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (75%); GENOCIDE (72%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (72%); BOYCOTTS (69%);
RELIGION (67%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE (58%)

PERSON: DALAI LAMA (59%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); BERNARD KOUCHNER (50%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (99%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); SICHUAN, CHINA (92%);
XIZANG, CHINA (90%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); TIBET (99%); UNITED STATES (79%); ISRAEL (79%); FRANCE
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jamaica: Amnesty Chides Government

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AMERICAS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 134 words


Amnesty International criticized the Jamaican government for what it called its
failure to protect inner-city residents trapped by violence. Fernanda Doz Costa,
an Amnesty researcher, said the human rights group called on Jamaican
authorities to tackle the underlying causes of the ''public security and human
rights crisis,'' including reforming the judicial system to ''improve access to
justice.''

She said residents were caught in a ''confrontation between criminal gangs,
police officers who kill with impunity and authorities who are failing to
protect their human rights.'' Amnesty said the nation of 2.8 million people had
one of the highest rates of violence and police killings in the Americas. There
were more than 1,550 murders last year, while 272 citizens were killed by police
officers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (88%); MURDER (86%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%)

COUNTRY: JAMAICA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             136 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Crackdowns June 1-7

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; ZIMBABWE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 563 words


THE NEWS American and British diplomats investigating political violence in
Zimbabwe were stopped by the police, threatened and detained for five hours.

BEHIND THE NEWS The episode underscored the increasingly repressive atmosphere
in Zimbabwe in advance of the June 27 presidential election. The government also
ordered aid groups to suspend their operations. Earlier in the week, Morgan
Tsvangirai, the opposition leader who placed first in the March elections and
now faces a runoff with President Robert Mugabe, was detained by the police and
charged with drawing a big crowd. Amnesty International condemned his detention
as part of a ''sharp and dangerous crackdown.''

THE NEWS A popular Burmese comedian coordinating a private relief effort to help
victims of Cyclone Nargis was detained by the police.

BEHIND THE NEWS The comedian, U Maung Thura, 47, known for his biting satire of
the junta in Myanmar, has been jailed at least three times before for his
outspokenness. His arrest came as the government was growing increasingly
intolerant of criticism of its response to the cyclone as callous and
inefficient. The relief efforts of Mr. Thura and Buddhist monks were widely seen
as a rebuke to the ruling generals. ''His arrest is a warning against Burmese
who are trying to help fellow Burmese,'' said a friend of Mr. Thura's.

THE NEWS Two prominent human rights lawyers in China lost their licenses after
volunteering to defend Tibetans charged in the violent anti-China protests that
erupted in March.

BEHIND THE NEWS Lawyers are at the forefront in promoting change in China. The
two lawyers who lost their licenses, Teng Biao and Jiang Tianyong, are known for
taking politically sensitive cases. After they offered legal aid to Tibetans,
the government did not renew their licenses. In other fallout from the protests,
the police said 16 Buddhist monks admitted guilt in three bombings. But an
official with Human Rights Watch said, ''We have no confidence that these people
get due process.''

THE NEWS The army-backed government in Bangladesh has rounded up nearly 12,000
people in what it called a crusade against crime.

BEHIND THE NEWS The crackdown began after the two major political parties
rejected talks with the government until their leaders, jailed on corruption
charges, were released. The country's police chief said the wave of arrests was
to guard against deteriorating law and order and to ensure a peaceful campaign
leading up to national elections in December. But one opposition leader said the
arrests were ''a direct attempt at manipulating who gets to campaign for these
elections, and therefore these elections are going to be a farce.''

THE NEWS President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela used his executive powers to revamp
the country's intelligence agencies, provoking a backlash from human rights
groups and legal scholars.

BEHIND THE NEWS Citizens will be required to help the intelligence agencies,
secret police or groups loyal to Mr. Chavez, or face prison terms. He has said
the new law is intended to guarantee national security and shield against
''imperialist attacks.'' But critics say it will force citizens to inform on one
another to avoid prison. ''We are before a set of measures that are a threat to
all of us,'' said one justice on Venezuela's top court. ''This is a step toward
the creation of a society of informers.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 15, 2008



CORRECTION: A picture last Sunday with a capsule summary about the arrests of 16
Buddhist monks in Tibet was published in error. The picture showed monks from
Sri Lanka.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (PHOTOGRAPHS BY EMMANUEL CHITATE/REUTERS
CHOE SANG-HUN/INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE
M. A.PUSHPA KUMARA/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY
FARJANA K. GODHULY/AGENCE FRANCEPRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES
 SUSANA GONZALEZ/BLOOMBERG NEWS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISASTER RELIEF (90%); NATURAL DISASTERS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); MILITARY
RULE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); NEWS BRIEFS (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); LAWYERS (86%);
POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DUE PROCESS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); POLITICS
(78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%);
LEGAL AID (77%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%);
MYANMAR CYCLONE NARGIS (74%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(73%); BOMBINGS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (66%);
RELIGION (66%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (66%); LICENSES & PERMITS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (58%); HUGO CHAVEZ (57%)

STATE: XIZANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (95%); MYANMAR (94%); CHINA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); TIBET (92%); BANGLADESH (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             138 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 25, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bipartisan Group to Speak Out on Detainees

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 705 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A bipartisan group of 200 former government officials, retired generals and
religious leaders plans to issue a statement on Wednesday calling for a
presidential order to outlaw some interrogation and detention practices used by
the Bush administration over the last six years.

The executive order they seek would commit the government to using only
interrogation methods that the United States would find acceptable if used by
another country against American soldiers or civilians.

It would also outlaw secret detentions, used since 2001 by the Central
Intelligence Agency, and prohibit the transfer of prisoners to countries that
use torture or cruel treatment. The C.I.A. has allowed terrorism suspects to be
taken to such countries.

Among the signers is George P. Shultz, secretary of state under President Ronald
Reagan. ''It's a good time to step back, take a deep breath and set a
standard,'' Mr. Shultz said in an interview.

Mr. Shultz would not criticize the practices of the Bush administration but said
he believed strongly that the United States should treat terrorism suspects as
it expected American prisoners to be treated.

''If you have served in the armed forces, as I did in the Pacific in World War
II, and you've been secretary of state, you understand reciprocity,''  he said.

In a similar statement issued Tuesday, 15 veteran interrogators, retired from
the military, the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the C.I.A., declared
torture and other abusive methods ''ineffective and counterproductive.'' The
group was convened in Washington last week by Human Rights First, an advocacy
group.

The chorus of public voices against coercive interrogations appears to be
growing. A report issued last week by Physicians for Human Rights about signs of
abuse it found on 11 prisoners held by the United States included a blistering
preface by Maj. Gen. Antonio M. Taguba, who wrote an Army report on the abuse of
detainees at Abu Ghraib  in Iraq and who retired in 2007.

''There is no longer any doubt as to whether the current administration has
committed war crimes,'' General Taguba wrote. ''The only question that remains
to be answered is whether those who ordered the use of torture will be held to
account.''

The statement to be issued Wednesday seeking a presidential order does not
explicitly criticize recent practices but prescribes rules for the future. Its
signatories, predominantly but not exclusively Democrats, include two other
former secretaries of state, Madeleine K. Albright and Warren Christopher; three
former defense secretaries, William S. Cohen, William J. Perry and Harold Brown;
and three former national security advisers, Anthony Lake, Sandy Berger and
Zbigniew Brzezinski. The list includes more than 30 retired generals and
admirals; a handful of former C.I.A. officers; four former World War II
interrogators; and more than 100 leaders of religious congregations, divinity
professors and other religious figures.

One signer, Burton Gerber, who served in the C.I.A. from 1955 to 1995, said he
opposed torture ''on ethical grounds.''

''It corrupts the torturer and the country that condones it,'' Mr. Gerber said.

The one-page statement was organized by three nonprofit groups, the Center for
Victims of Torture, Evangelicals for Human Rights and the National Religious
Campaign Against Torture.

Douglas A. Johnson, executive director of the Center for Victims of Torture,
based in Minneapolis, whose organization has counseled thousands of torture
victims from 70 countries, said it was time for the United States ''again to
show leadership in the war against torture.''

Asked whether he sought an executive order from President Bush or his successor,
he replied, ''I don't think as a country we can wait for the next president.''

A White House spokesman, Tony Fratto, noted that Mr. Bush last year issued an
executive order on interrogation that outlawed torture and other abuses while
preserving the C.I.A.'s right to use some coercive interrogation methods. He
said Qaeda terrorists should not be treated the same way uniformed soldiers
were.

Of the C.I.A. interrogation program, he added, ''There's absolutely no question
that the program has prevented attacks.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); ARMIES
(77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%);
WORLD WAR II (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); INTERVIEWS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(70%); TERRORISM (69%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(54%)

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             141 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 28, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

All Too Human

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 814 words


Thursday was the 21st anniversary of the United Nations Convention Against
Torture.

It was also the same day that two Bush administration lawyers appeared before a
House subcommittee to answer questions about their roles in providing the legal
framework for harsh interrogation techniques that inevitably rose to the level
of torture and shamed the U.S. before the rest of the world.

The lawyers, both former Justice Department officials, were David Addington, who
is now Dick Cheney's chief of staff, and John Yoo, now a law professor at the
University of California, Berkeley. There is no danger of either being enshrined
as heroes in the history books of the future.

For most Americans, torture is something remote, abstract, reprehensible, but in
the eyes of some, perhaps necessary  --  when the bomb is ticking, for example,
or when interrogators are trying to get information from terrorists willing to
kill Americans in huge numbers.

Reality offers something much different. We saw the hideous photos from Abu
Ghraib. And now the Nobel Prize-winning organization Physicians for Human Rights
has released a report, called ''Broken Laws, Broken Lives,'' that puts an
appropriately horrifying face on a practice that is so fundamentally evil that
it cannot co-exist with the idea of a just and humane society.

The report profiles 11 detainees who were tortured while in U.S. custody and
then released  --  their lives ruined  --  without ever having been charged with
a crime or told why they were detained. All of the prisoners were men, and all
were badly beaten. One was sodomized with a broomstick, the report said, and
forced by his interrogators to howl like a dog while a soldier urinated on him.

He fainted, the report said, ''after a soldier stepped on his genitals.''

Officials at Physicians for Human Rights said extensive medical and
psychological examinations were conducted --  and in two cases prior medical
records were consulted --  to help corroborate the testimony of the detainees.
The organization has a long and credible history of documenting such abuses.

Leonard Rubenstein, president of Physicians for Human Rights, said: ''In doing
the evaluations, we used international standards, medical assessments of torture
and ill treatment, and meticulously assessed physical and psychological evidence
of torture and ill treatment, and the long-term physical and mental health
consequences.''

The most effective element of the report is the way in which it takes torture
out of the realm of the abstract to show not just the horror and cruelty of the
torture itself, but the way in which it absolutely devastates the body, soul and
psyche of its victims.

The detainees profiled in the report were abused at facilities in Afghanistan,
Iraq and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Three said they had been subjected to electric
shocks. One said he was stabbed in the cheek with a screwdriver and hit in the
head and in the jaw with a rifle.

In an example of how medical evidence was used to back up a detainee's account,
the report said scarring on one of the prisoner's thumbs ''was highly consistent
with the scarring caused by electric shock.''

In addition to the physical mistreatment, the detainees reported that various
gruesome forms of humiliation, including sexual humiliation, were pervasive.
They said men were paraded nude in front of female soldiers, forced to watch
pornography, and forced to disrobe before female interrogators.

The sheer number of different ways in which detainees were reported to have been
abused was mind-boggling. They were deprived of sleep, forced to endure extremes
of heat and cold, chained in crouching positions for 18 to 20 hours at a time,
told that their female relatives would be raped, that they themselves would be
killed, and on and on. All to no good end.

The ostensible purpose of mistreating prisoners is to inflict pain and induce
disorientation and despair, creating so much agony that the prisoners give up
valuable intelligence in order to end the suffering. But torture is not an
interrogation technique; it's a criminal attack on a human being.

What the report makes clear is that once the green light is given to torture,
the guaranteed result is an ever-widening landscape of broken bodies, ruined
lives and profound shame to all involved.

Nearly all of the detainees profiled in the report have experienced excruciating
psychological difficulties since being released. Several said that they had
contemplated suicide. As one put it: ''No sorrow can be compared to my torture
experience in jail. That is the reason for my sadness.''

Congress and the public do not know nearly enough about the nation's post-Sept.
11 interrogation practices. When something as foul as torture is on the table,
there is a tendency to avert one's eyes from the most painful truths.

It's a tendency we should resist.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PSYCHOLOGY (87%); HISTORY (78%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); ANNIVERSARIES (73%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); AWARDS & PRIZES (72%); TESTIMONY (72%); TERRORISM
(68%); ANIMAL WELFARE (68%); MEDICAL RECORDS (68%); NOBEL PRIZES (67%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); MENTAL HEALTH (62%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA BERKELEY (57%);
HUMANE SOCIETY (55%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             144 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 12, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mexico: Report Accuses Military of Human Rights Abuses

BYLINE: By ELISABETH MALKIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEF AMERICAS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 88 words


The National Human Rights Commission said the armed forces had committed
repeated human rights violations, including torture and arbitrary arrest, in the
government's crackdown on drug trafficking. Susana Pedroza de la Llave, one of
the commission's investigators, said that soldiers sometimes detained suspects
and tortured them before turning them over to the police. As part of a $400
million American aid package, the State Department must report  on the progress
the government is making on working with human rights groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (85%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (83%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

War Crimes Arrest Bolsters Other Courts

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE and MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1091 words


The arrest of Radovan Karadzic on Monday gave badly needed credibility to
international war crimes tribunals that have struggled for years to bring
fugitives to justice, according to former prosecutors, legal experts and human
rights groups.

Mr. Karadzic will be the third high-profile figure to be brought before a United
Nations-backed tribunal on war crimes charges in the last six years, following
in the footsteps of President Charles Taylor of Liberia and the Yugoslav
president, Slobodan Milosevic.

But Mr. Karadzic, who remained free for nearly 13 years, made a mockery of the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, which in 1983 became
the first such body established by the United Nations.

Although repeatedly seen in public when American and NATO forces entered Bosnia
in 1996, he was not arrested, in part out of fear that seizing him could cause a
violent backlash against NATO forces. Instead, the United States and the
European Union tried to use economic and diplomatic pressure on Serbia to force
his arrest. Until Monday, the policy appeared to be a failure.

''For international justice, this is a very good thing,'' Richard Dicker,
director of Human Rights Watch's International Justice Program, said of the
arrest, especially since Mr. Karadzic's evasion of the court for so long had
come to ''personify impunity.''

Other war crimes tribunals established by the United Nations have also come
under fire. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda has been criticized
as being hugely expensive, exceedingly slow and largely detached from the
country itself. And the establishment of the International Criminal Court -- a
permanent tribunal intended to prosecute war crimes globally -- was delayed for
years by tortuous negotiations and fierce opposition from the Bush
administration.

Luis Moreno Ocampo, the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Court,
called Mr. Karadzic's arrest a ''great achievement'' and predicted it would aid
his efforts to prosecute war crimes in Darfur, including his widely-debated
genocide case against the country's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan.

Other legal experts agreed that Mr. Karadzic's arrest had the potential to
significantly bolster the clout of the tribunals.

''When Karadzic was indicted back in 1995, nobody really expected he'd ever
actually get arrested,'' said Gary Bass, a professor of politics and
international affairs at Princeton University and the author of ''Stay the Hand
of Vengeance: The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals.''

''It's not clear how exactly Bashir could wind up in The Hague,'' he added,
''but the Karadzic example has got to make Bashir think hard.''

Officials from the war crimes tribunals have argued that the United States and
its allies have lacked the political will to make arrests or use diplomatic and
economic measures to bring fugitives to justice. Economic sanctions, indictments
and travel restrictions can all place small but steady pressure on individuals
accused of war crimes and on their patrons.

Critics of the tribunals' track records argue that Mr. Karadzic's arrest does
not make up for more than a decade of inaction. The widely feared wartime leader
was arrested while masquerading as a bearded practitioner of alternative
medicine in Serbia. A man accused of overseeing the execution of 8,000 Bosnian
Muslims in Srebrenica and the brutal siege of Sarajevo was giving lectures on
new age medicine in local community centers.

The amount of time it took to pressure Serbia to arrest Mr. Karadzic shows how
easy it is for states to defy and divide the international community. Similarly,
Sudan has also flatly refused to turn over war crimes suspects.

For years, many of survivors of the 1995 massacres in Srebrenica -- for which
Mr. Karadzic was indicted on genocide charges -- mocked the Yugoslavia tribunal
as a toothless and expensive show put on by the international community.

''Three thousand persons in Bosnia still unaccounted for,'' said Hasan
Nuhanovic, whose father, mother and brother were killed in Srebrenica. ''The
mortal remains of my mother and brother still not found.''

Richard Goldstone, a South African jurist who served as the Yugoslavia
tribunal's first chief prosecutor and indicted Mr. Karadzic in 1995, said it was
critical that Serbian officials also arrest Mr. Karadzic's co-defendant, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, who remains free and is believed to be hiding in Serbia as well.
''I just hope that Mladic is not that far behind,'' he said.

Similarly, the international tribunal for Rwanda, created in 1995 in neighboring
Tanzania, has secured the arrest of more than 70 people accused of high-level
involvement in the mass killings of more than 800,000 Rwandans in 1994. Yet 13
accused kingpins have not been caught.

The bulk of the defendants have been politicians, but there has been an array of
others: journalists who helped fuel the slaughter; businessmen who helped
finance it; members of the clergy who participated in it and even a musician,
Simon Bikindi, who is accused of singing songs and giving speeches that promoted
hatred and violence against Tutsis.

But the tribunal's work has been slowed to a snail's pace by bureaucratic
failings, the need for multiple translations and the shear complexity of the
cases. In the tribunal's four courtrooms, six trials involving 19 people are
taking place, the court reported in its latest submission to the United Nations,
and two more are scheduled to commence. Four more cases are preparing for trial.

The United Nations Security Council has urged the tribunal to end its trials
this year and wind up all its work by 2010. But in May, the tribunal indicated
in a report that those deadlines would likely slip.

The effort, however, remains profoundly important for Africa, tribunal officials
say. Ending the tribunal's work too early and not rounding up every last
fugitive, they say, would destabilize a part of Africa where ethnic strife
remains 14 years after the machetes and guns were laid down and Rwanda's lush
soil was stained with blood.

Despite the burdened pace, the tribunal has some notable accomplishments. It
secured the first genocide conviction against a head of government: former Prime
Minister Jean Kambanda, who was found to have led the homegrown campaign to
exterminate ethnic Tutsis and moderate Hutus.

The tribunal also helped establish the legal precedent that rape, which was
widespread during the Rwandan massacre, can be a form of genocide to destroy a
group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ECONOMIC POLICY (72%); ECONOMIC NEWS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION
(69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (67%); POLITICAL SCIENCE
(60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%);
EUROPEAN UNION (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SUDAN (92%); LIBERIA (92%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (56%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             148 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 25, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Ex-Army Chief Gets Life Sentence in 'Dirty War' Crimes

BYLINE: By ALEXEI BARRIONUEVO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 424 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO


A court in Argentina sentenced a notorious former military leader to life in
prison for atrocities committed in 1977 at a clandestine torture center used by
the military dictatorship where only 17 of more than 2,200 political prisoners
survived.

Luciano Benjamin Menendez, the former commander of the regional Third Army Corps
in Cordoba during the military dictatorship, oversaw the kidnapping, torture and
murder of four activists who protested against the military government that
lasted from 1976 to 1983. The atrocities occurred at La Perla detention center
in Cordoba, the biggest in the province at the time.

After a trial lasting almost two months, the court on Thursday also sentenced
six other former military officers and one civilian for crimes committed during
the military regime. Four of them were also given life sentences, with remaining
three receiving sentences ranging from 18 to 22 years in prison, Argentine
newspapers reported.

Mr. Menendez, 81, was stone-faced and silent as the televised verdict was read
to loud cheers inside and outside the courtroom, where hundreds of people waved
flags and placards commemorating the victims.

''Today justice was done,''  the daughter of one of the victims told the
television channel Todo Noticias.

The convictions on Thursday were the latest of ''dirty war'' suspects to be
judged by Argentine courts. Some 13,000 people were killed during the
dictatorship, according to official figures, although human rights groups say
the figure is closer to 30,000.

The Supreme Court in 2005 struck down amnesty laws from the 1980s that had
protected former military officials who served during the dictatorship, The
Associated Press reported.

''This is a decision that should be celebrated as an example that accountability
is possible,'' said Jose Miguel Vivanco, Americas director for Human Rights
Watch.

The retired general was under house arrest for convictions related to the
military regime's ''dirty war'' against accused leftists. He will now be
transferred to prison.

The four victims -- Hilda Palacios, Humberto Brandalisis, Carlos Lajas and Raul
Cardozo -- were members of the Workers' Revolutionary Party who were kidnapped
on Dec. 15, 1977.

Prosecutors said that the four were taken to La Perla, which was run by the
Third Army Corps, and killed the next month. Their bodies were dumped in the
street to make it appear as if they had been killed in an exchange of gunfire
with the military. Only the remains of Ms. Palacios were found and returned to
family members.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Luciano Benjamin Menendez was a commander in the Third Army
Corps. (PHOTOGRAPH BY OSVALDO RUIZ/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (92%); MILITARY RULE (92%); ARMIES
(91%); PRISONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (89%); MURDER (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HOUSE ARREST
(78%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); SUPREME COURTS
(73%); AMNESTY (72%); ARRESTS (69%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (51%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 8, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

AIDS Group Cites Rapes In Zimbabwe As Terror Tool

BYLINE: By LAWRENCE K. ALTMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 443 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


A 13-year-old girl was abducted, then raped repeatedly over a two-week period
during a campaign of political terror in Zimbabwe surrounding recent elections
there.

Hers is one of 53 cases documented by AIDS-Free World, an advocacy group
investigating rape as a political weapon in Zimbabwe, activists said Thursday at
a news conference at the 17th International AIDS Conference here.

Betty Makoni, director of Girl Child Network in Zimbabwe, said at the news
conference, ''Rape is being used as a weapon of political intimidation to
instill fear in us, our families and communities.'' Youth militias have raped an
estimated 800 girls on bases, she said.

Other rape victims include the wives, sisters, mothers and grandmothers of
political opponents, Ms. Makoni said. Some were teachers, ward leaders and
clergy members, she said. Some were raped in front of family members and some
men were forced to rape their mothers-in-law. The victims were often forced to
say they would never support the opposition, she said.

''Pesticides, sticks and other objects have been inserted in their vaginas,''
Ms. Makoni said.

Many victims went to state hospitals to seek treatment to prevent pregnancy, as
well as H.I.V. and other sexually transmitted infections, she said, but they
were denied treatment, even when they were in pain and bleeding. The victims
said that doctors at government hospitals did not treat them, fearing
repercussions.

AIDS-Free World is a Boston-based advocacy group that focuses on international
AIDS issues. Stephen Lewis, the co-director of the group, said it was collecting
evidence of rape and other atrocities committed in the campaign that was aimed
at the political opposition in Zimbabwe. Rape and other atrocities have long
been part of wars and political campaigns in many countries. But the evidence
for charges of atrocities is often obtained long after alleged crimes.

Documenting personal accounts now as well as collecting photographic and
laboratory evidence obtained soon after the alleged crimes, AIDS-Free World
said, should eventually make for stronger legal cases to present to prosecutors
under new governments in Zimbabwe than has been possible in similar situations
elsewhere.

Noah Novogrodsky, a human-rights lawyer and the advocacy group's legal director,
said the evidence would also be shared with the office of the United Nations
high commissioner for human rights for possible prosecution as crimes against
humanity.

The United Nations' latest report on AIDS says ''widespread violence against
women not only represents a global human rights crisis but also contributes to
women's vulnerability to H.I.V.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); AIDS & HIV (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); EVIDENCE (86%); SEX
OFFENSES (78%); CHILD SOLDIERS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%);
WOMEN (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (76%); LAWYERS (74%); POLITICS (73%); SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE
(72%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); RELIGION
(54%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             156 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 15, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Signs of Ethnic Attacks in Georgia Conflict

BYLINE: By SABRINA TAVERNISE and MATT SIEGEL; Sabrina Tavernise reported from
Gori and Tbilisi, Georgia, and Matt Siegel from Tskhinvali, Georgia. Bryon
Denton contributed reporting from Gori.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: TBILISI, Georgia


As the conflict between Russia and Georgia enters its second week, there is
growing evidence of looting and ''ethnic cleansing'' in a number of villages
throughout the area of conflict.

The attacks -- some witnessed by reporters or documented by a human rights group
-- include stealing, the burning of villages and possibly even killings. Some
are ethnically motivated, while at least some of the looting appears to be the
work of profiteers in areas from which the authorities have fled.

The identities of the attackers vary, but a pattern of violence by ethnic
Ossetians against ethnic Georgians is emerging and has been confirmed by some
Russian authorities. ''Now Ossetians are running around and killing poor
Georgians in their enclaves,'' said Maj. Gen. Vyacheslav Nikolaevich Borisov,
the commander in charge of the city of Gori, occupied by the Russians.

A lieutenant from an armored transport division that was previously in Chechnya
said: ''We have to be honest. The Ossetians are marauding.''

The hostilities between Russia and Georgia started last week when the Georgian
military marched into the disputed territory of South Ossetia, and the Russians
responded by sending troops into the pro-Russia, separatist enclave and then
into Georgia proper.

Dozens of houses were on fire on Tuesday in the northern suburbs of Tskhinvali,
the capital of South Ossetia. Reporters saw armed men moving on the streets,
carting away electronics and other household items. It was not clear who the men
were. They did not appear to be part of the Russian forces, but the Russians
were not stopping them.

''We're not a police force, we're a military force,'' said a Russian lieutenant
colonel in response to a reporter's question. ''It's not our job to do police
work.''

Still, there was some evidence that the Russian military might be making efforts
in some places to stop the rampaging. A column of 12 men with their hands on
their heads, several wearing uniforms, were marched into the Russian military
base in Gori on Thursday afternoon. The identities of the men were unclear.

Human Rights Watch issued a report on Thursday that documented attacks by ethnic
Ossetians in and around Tskhinvali on Wednesday. Researchers saw a number of
houses on fire in the town of Java. They quoted a South Ossetian intelligence
officer as saying that his fighters had burned the houses to ''make sure'' that
the Georgians could not come back.

The report's findings also seemed to indicate that early Russian accounts of
casualties, which in the first days of fighting reached 2,000, were far too
high. In Tskhinvali , where the heaviest fighting took place, the local hospital
received 44 corpses and 273 wounded people from Aug. 6, after clashes between
separatists and Georgians, to Aug. 12, the report said, citing a doctor.

The report quoted the doctor as saying that the majority of the wounded were
affiliated with the military, although it was not clear if he meant the Russian
or Georgian armies or Ossetian fighters. As of Aug. 13, none of the wounded
remained in the hospital, the report said. Many were transferred to mobile
hospitals in the Russian Emergencies Ministry.

An elderly woman from the village of Kurta who gave only her first name, Elene,
said she had been forced to walk three days to safety after Russian-speaking men
broke into her house. An Ossetian man was with them, she said. ''They entered
the houses, took whatever they liked, and burned everything.'' They threatened
to shoot her after taking her valuables, but her neighbor, a Russian woman,
intervened on her behalf.

''She said, 'Please don't do this,' '' said the woman. The men shot at the
ground several times and then left. She fled.

Five villages in her area were looted and people driven out, she said. In one of
them, Oreti, she said she saw the bodies of two women decomposing. The walk was
terrifying. She spent one night in an empty house.

She was reminded of the violence that took the life of her husband in the early
1990s, when Ossetians and Georgians fought an all-out war. ''I wish I'd died
soon after my husband,'' she said. ''There are so many deaths.''

A Georgian official said some of the worst ''ethnic cleansing'' was in the towns
of Eredvi, Ditsi, Tirdznisi and Kuraleti. A man from the village of
Karetezhvyari said he returned to check his house on Thursday, only to discover
several houses on fire.

The man, who gave only his first name, Nukri, was livid about the lootings and
the Russian advance. ''They were a big empire, and they fell,'' he said, ''but
they can't stop acting like one.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Looters hauled goods through an ethnic Georgian neighborhood
along the road to Tskhinvali, the capital of South Ossetia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN
WENDLE/ATLAS PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); SOUTH OSSETIAN CONFLICT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); VIOLENT CRIME
(76%); POLICE FORCES (75%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (72%); FIRES (71%)

CITY: TBILISI, GEORGIA (73%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); GEORGIA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             159 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 23, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Protest Bedeviled by a Political Side Show

BYLINE: By CLYDE HABERMAN.

E-mail: haberman@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; NYC; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 809 words


Once a year, the Israel-threatening, Holocaust-denying, nuke-building and
child-hanging president of Iran, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, comes to New York for the
opening ceremonies of the United NationsGeneral Assembly.

Many New Yorkers don't like having him around. But they have no choice. Foreign
leaders must be allowed to attend these sessions, no matter how
Israel-threatening, Holocaust-denying, nuke-building and child-hanging they may
be.

It is the price that the city has to pay as host to the United Nations -- a role
that is the sole reason New York may indulge in the vanity of calling itself the
''capital of the world.''

So once a year, Mr. Ahmadinejad comes to New York, as he did again on Monday.
And once a year, some normally sensible New Yorkers lose their bearings because
of him.

Columbia University is a serial bearing-loser.

For reasons not universally understood, some Columbia officials have a notion
that academic freedom requires them to invite this man to their Morningside
Heights campus. They asked him over in 2006, only to back out in embarrassment
after security types told them that the Iranian was too great a risk.

Somehow, the threat to the common weal dissolved by September 2007. Mr.
Ahmadinejad was back in town, and Columbia just had to have him up for a
schmooze. The city's tabloids and some politicians who get hives if they venture
too far from television cameras vented more furiously than an overheated nuclear
reactor.

Up to Columbia the Iranian went. By way of a greeting, the university's
president, Lee C. Bollinger, called him ''astonishingly uneducated'' and
denounced him as a ''petty and cruel dictator.'' There's hospitality for you:
Bring in someone whom you need not have invited in the first place, and then
insult him before he can say hello.

This year, it was the turn of leading Jewish organizations to stumble over yet
another visit by Iran's leader.

Several thousand people gathered across the street from the United Nations
campus on Monday for an anti-Ahmadinejad rally sponsored by a coalition of
Jewish groups. A dominant force behind the protest was the Conference of
Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations.

Speakers denounced the Iranian for statements describing the Holocaust as a
myth. They deplored his threats to end Israel's existence. They demanded that
Iran's nuclear ambitions be blocked. They attacked Iran for domestic human
rights violations, which include sending teenagers to the gallows.

Indeed, separate from the rally, Human Rights Watch issued a report in New York
saying that ''basic human rights protection in Iran has deteriorated to new
lows'' under Mr. Ahmadinejad. The group cited executions this year of six
offenders under the age of 18 and death sentences given to 130 other juvenile
offenders.

Despite all that, some will remember Monday's ''Stop Iran'' protest as the Sarah
Palin rally. Or, to be more precise, the non-Sarah Palin rally.

To back up for a moment, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton agreed weeks ago to be a
speaker. She is a New York senator, after all, with a record of attacking Iran
for its nuclear plans and anti-Israel venom.

Then, unbeknown to some groups that were rally sponsors, the main organizers
also invited Ms. Palin, the Alaskan governor and Republican vice-presidential
nominee. She had already intended to be in New York for the General Assembly's
opening session, to meet with a few friendly world leaders and counter the
critics and jokesters who say that her foreign policy credentials go no further
than breakfast at the International House of Pancakes.

Once Ms. Palin's participation became known, Mrs. Clinton dropped out. The
rally, her spokesman said, had been turned into ''a partisan political event.''

Within the Jewish coalition, a left-right divide became evident. On the right,
some said it was Mrs. Clinton who had played partisan politics. But people on
the left saw no equivalence between the Democratic senator and the Republican
governor. Only one of them is a candidate. Inviting Ms. Palin, they charged,
tilted the rally toward the Republican national ticket -- an impression not
likely to be dispelled by the many signs on Monday supporting Senator John
McCain and none backing Senator Barack Obama.

Reports in the Jewish press said that rally organizers reached out belatedly to
the Obama campaign. It agreed to take part. But then the organizers had second
thoughts, and disinvited every politician, Ms. Palin included. All that did was
anger some Jews on the right. In the end, the entire episode had ''turned into a
political embarrassment,'' wrote The Forward, a Jewish weekly.

So it always seems to go when Mr. Ahmadinejad is in town. Chances are good that
he will be here again next year. Maybe by then yet another group of New Yorkers
will have figured out how to get it wrong.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); POLITICS (78%); UNIVERSITY
ADMINISTRATION (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (77%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); ACADEMIC FREEDOM (68%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (66%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (64%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (60%)

ORGANIZATION: COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (83%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (89%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             160 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 2, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Accuses Ethiopia of Keeping Detainees From '07

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 127 words


Suspects arrested in a clandestine anti-terrorism sweep in East Africa nearly
two years ago and interrogated by United States personnel have been abandoned by
their governments, a human rights group said in a report released Wednesday that
also detailed accusations of torture. One Canadian and nine Kenyans are still in
jail in Ethiopia without being charged after being arrested in 2007, and 22
other East Africans of various nationalities are missing, according to the
report by Human Rights Watch. The men were among a group of about 90 people
arrested in the months after Ethiopia toppled Somalia's Islamist government at
the end of 2006. They were suspected of being members of insurgent and Islamist
groups and were detained in Kenya, Somalia and Ethiopia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
TERRORISM (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); COUNTERTERRORISM (88%); TORTURE
(71%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (95%); EASTERN AFRICA (94%); AFRICA (93%); UNITED STATES
(92%); SOMALIA (92%); KENYA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 5, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peace Under Friendly Fire

BYLINE: By NADER NADERY and HASEEB HUMAYOON.

Nader Nadery is a commissioner with the Afghanistan Independent Human Rights
Commission. Haseeb Humayoon, a student at Middlebury College, has worked as a
consultant to nongovernmental groups in Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1213 words


AS civilian casualties mount, American and NATO forces in Afghanistan are facing
an erosion of their public legitimacy. The Taliban and Al Qaeda are exploiting
this distrust, aiming to transform it into a popular rage against the Afghan
government and its foreign allies. Unless the insurgents are denied propaganda
tools -- in particular, the growing number of images of dead women and children
-- no number of additional troops will bring success to the American-led
mission.

The United Nations, which last month extended NATO's mandate in Afghanistan for
another year, says there were 1,445 civilian casualties from the beginning of
the year to mid-September, a 40 percent increase over all of 2007. International
troops were held responsible for 577 of the deaths -- two-thirds of them caused
by air strikes.

Like clockwork, each of these ''friendly fire'' incidents brings about angry
demonstrations in the streets, with crowds chanting, ''Death to the government
-- down with the foreign troops!'' The latest tinder in the fire was the killing
of some 90 civilians, mostly women and children, on Aug. 22 in Azizabad in Herat
Province. (While the Pentagon has taken issue with the reported death count, the
Afghan government and United Nations stand by the villagers' claims.)

Daud, a police officer who lives in Azizabad and agreed to be interviewed by the
Afghanistan Independent Human Rights Commission, was away on duty the night of
the attack and thus survived. But seven members of his family, including his
wife and children, were killed. Sobbing as he told his story, he announced he
was leaving his job as a police officer and that he had lost ''any sympathy for
the Afghan government.'' He wished, he said, ''to be among the dead members of
my family and not the only helpless survivor.''

The growing disillusionment caused by civilian casualties is also driving old
friends away from NATO and American forces. In an interview some months ago, a
man who worked alongside American forces in 2001 in Urozgan Province to protect
Hamid Karzai, now the Afghan president, posed a staggering question: ''You speak
English, and interact with foreigners, so can you swear by the Almighty and tell
me if the foreigners are on the side of the Taliban, or of the Afghan people?''

He was hardly the exception: many average Afghans find it hard to believe that
America, with its tremendous military power, is having so much trouble defeating
tattered bands of Taliban warriors and don't understand why it can't avoid
continuous civilian casualties.

To Afghans, suspicion about the intentions of foreign forces comes easy: we have
suffered through two occupations in the last three decades, first by the former
Soviet Union in the 1980s and then by Pakistan -- indirectly through the Taliban
-- in the 1990s. Every military operation that kills civilians leads to more
conspiracy theories that the Americans and their Western allies want to maintain
chaos so they can maintain a military presence in the region.

Some pundits and analysts may have you believe that we Afghans are inherently
allergic to the West and its values. That is not true. We craved American and
United Nations involvement in Afghanistan long before 9/11. When United States
troops finally came to our liberation in late 2001, in city after city they
faced cheering people dancing in the streets out of joy. That seems a very long
time ago now.

Of course, the rising mistrust of NATO and American forces is not just about
civilian casualties. Afghans are frustrated by the failure of our government and
its foreign allies to improve security, clamp down on corruption and provide
food and jobs.

Unfortunately, the reformist local leaders the country most needs are losing
ground because they are seen as too close to the foreign allies. In our 2004
presidential elections, it was an asset for candidates to be viewed as connected
to the Americans. But such proximity has since become a liability. Across the
country, populist politicians are garnering more support by appearing
anti-Western. The insurgents, aiming to drive a wedge between the Afghan people
and their government and foreign allies, will continue to mount attacks from
heavily populated sites, hoping for a bloody American response. The best course
for NATO and the Pentagon, clearly, is to reduce the reliance on air strikes.
According to Human Rights Watch, most of the civilian casualties of air power
are caused by ''rapid-response air strikes,'' not planned targeted operations.
That is, when things go wrong on the ground and Afghan or international troops
find themselves in trouble, American airpower is brought in to crush the enemy.

The best way to avoid having to resort to rapid response air strikes is an
emphasis on better intelligence gathering, coordination and analyses so that
ground operations go as planned. Satellite imagery can be misleading, and needs
to be backed up by credible human intelligence. The insurgents do everything
they can to blend in with the local populations. And spotting legitimate targets
is even harder because, given the arming of the general population over the last
three decades, not every house with a stash of guns is a Taliban hideout.

And, while human intelligence is fundamental to determining the right targets
and avoiding mishaps, ancestral feuds and power rivalries make unofficial
sources of local knowledge highly dubious. Unfortunately, American and NATO
forces will find intelligence gathering almost impossible, especially given the
dearth of experts in local languages, history and politics embedded with them.

The Afghan government's formal intelligence apparatus, the National Directorate
of Security, could be a useful source if it were better equipped and trained, if
NATO and American troops were willing to work hand in hand with it, and if it
were staffed by officers whose primary goal wasn't to use Western military power
to settle old scores. It could provide the Americans with local intelligence in
tune with the broader goal of the government and its allies.

We are not naive enough to expect there could ever be zero collateral damage in
this fight against an enemy that is very conscious of the value of destroying
the public legitimacy of the foreign forces. But to reduce the harm caused by
the deaths of the innocent, Western troops must investigate promptly when such
allegations arise. A climate of denials and partial truths, such as occurred in
the wake of the Aziz Abad massacre, breeds anxiety and mistrust.

Last, in any military effort, a muddled chain of command is an invitation to
deadly accidents. It is time to merge, under a single leadership, NATO's
International Security Assistance Force and the separate American forces.

We understand that American goals in Afghanistan are in our country's interest,
and we hope more boots on the ground will help. But success against the
insurgency in Afghanistan may ultimately lie in denying the Taliban and Al Qaeda
their support, recruitment tools and external sanctuaries. To do this, Western
forces must keep up pressure on Pakistan and drastically cut back on the number
of operations ''gone wrong,'' or they will be providing the enemy with the very
ammunition it needs most.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY FAWAD KHAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); INTERVIEWS (87%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (91%); UNITED
NATIONS (83%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             167 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 13, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Guantanamo Captives Continue to Struggle, Report Says

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Former Guantanamo prisoners released after years of detention without charge
went home to find themselves stigmatized and shunned, viewed either as
terrorists or as United States spies, according to a report released Wednesday
by a human rights group and a legal organization representing detainees.

The report urged President-elect Barack Obama to form an independent,
nonpartisan commission with subpoena powers to investigate the treatment of
detainees held by the United States in Afghanistan, Iraq and at the naval base
at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

''We cannot sweep this dark chapter in our nation's history under the rug by
simply closing the Guantanamo prison camp,'' said one of the study's authors,
Eric Stover, director of the Human Rights Center at the University of California
at Berkeley.

The authors at the Human Rights Center and at the Center for Constitutional
Rights, which has coordinated detainees' legal cases, interviewed 50 United
States government officials, military experts and former guards and
interrogators, as well as 62 former Guantanamo prisoners in nine nations.

Two-thirds of the former captives said they had psychological and emotional
problems, which the authors called consistent with being held in extreme
isolation for extended periods.

Only six had regular jobs, with many saying that employers would not hire anyone
who had been held at Guantanamo.

''It doesn't matter that they cleared my name by releasing me. We still have
this big hat on our heads that we were terrorists,'' a former detainee, one of
eight Chinese Muslims who was settled in Albania in 2006, said in the report.

That group was still struggling to learn Albanian and had abandoned the hope of
ever being reunited with family, according to the report.

The United States has released 520 men from Guantanamo since it opened the
detention camp for those suspected of being part of Al Qaeda and the Taliban
after the Sept. 11 attacks. About 250 detainees are now there.

The most notorious prisoners, who are accused of plotting the Sept. 11 attacks,
the Bali nightclub bombings and attacks on United States embassies in Africa,
were not taken to Guantanamo until 2006, when they were transferred from secret
C.I.A. prisons.

Many of the former prisoners said that they had lost their homes and businesses
or that their families had piled up debts in their absence because there was no
one to support them.

One returned to find that his wife had divorced him and remarried. Another
returned to learn that his father had been killed and that his estranged wife
had taken their children and moved away. Others said they had received death
threats.

Those who fared the best seemed to be Afghans from tightly knit villages, where
several said they were greeted when they came home with celebrations that even
some local police officers attended.

Of the 55 who discussed their interrogations, 31 said they were abusive and 24
said they had no problems. The majority held ''distinctly negative views of the
United States,'' but many said that was directed at the United States
government, not the American people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWS & MIAS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); SUBPOENAS (76%); MILITARY BASES (76%); BOMBINGS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); POLICE FORCES (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%);
FAMILY (71%); NAVIES (71%); HISTORY (70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (67%);
RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (56%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
(56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (56%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (77%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); ALBANIA (92%); IRAQ (92%); CUBA
(91%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             175 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 25, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tens of Thousands More From Gaza Enter Egypt Seeking Consumer Goods

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Mona el-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1432 words

DATELINE: RAFAH, Egypt


Tens of thousands more Palestinians flooded across the breached border crossing
from Gaza into Egypt on Thursday, and Egyptian merchants greeted them with a
cornucopia of consumer goods and higher prices than on Wednesday, when Hamas
militants toppled large sections of the fence.

Many more Egyptian police officers were at various ruptures in the barrier at
Rafah, more of them in riot gear and some using batons with small electric
charges to keep the huge, pushing crowds in some form of order.

And on Thursday, more members of Hamas security forces were visible on the Gaza
side, maintaining calm and doing random checks for weapons possibly being
smuggled in for Fatah, the rival faction Hamas forced out of Gaza in June.

But neither group tried to stop the shoppers and businessmen restocking their
wares in Egypt, nor did Hamas make any visible effort to control or tax the
thousands of cigarettes coming into Gaza, let alone the televisions, generators,
washing machines, milk, cheese, sheep, goats, cows, camels, diesel fuel and
gasoline.

Hamas gunmen could be seen quietly taking delivery of hundreds of bags of
cement. Israel has sharply restricted cement imports to Gaza, even for aid
projects, because it says Hamas diverts the supply to build fortified tunnels
and emplacements for use against any major Israeli military action.

Exchange rates and prices were up, as were the amounts Gazans were buying, with
the clear intent to resell in Gaza. So intense was the trading that even some
Palestinians worried that there would be a backlash from impoverished Egyptians
in Rafah.

''This is not so good for the Palestinian people,'' said Ahmed Shawa, a Gaza
engineer who entered Egypt on Thursday. ''Prices are becoming very high while
people in Egyptian Rafah don't have bread. If I go to your country and buy
everything and you don't have bread, you're going to hate me.''

Hamas officials said they took action to open the Egyptian border after Israel
decided last week to stop nearly all shipments into Gaza, including industrial
diesel fuel needed to run Gaza's main power plant and gasoline, in an effort to
push Gazan militants to stop firing rockets at Israeli towns and farms.

Under severe international criticism, Israel relented, but only temporarily. It
agreed to supply a week's worth of fuel, but limited supplies again after the
border breach.

President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt considered his options. But Egyptian officials
made it clear on Thursday that while Egypt would not hinder Palestinians seeking
food and other goods, it would not accept a lawless border, open to arms traffic
and unregulated travel of gunmen and political extremists.

Israel and the United States said it was Egypt's responsibility to bring the
border situation under control.

Gen. Ahmed Abdel Hamid, the governor of northern Sinai, estimated that as many
as 120,000 Palestinians were in Egypt, but he said they were not being allowed
to travel beyond El Arish, which lies slightly west of Rafah. He said he thought
the border might stay open for another ''four or five days'' and then be closed
pending another agreement on what to do.

''You have to see where this problem came from,'' he said. ''Before the dispute
between Hamas and Fatah, the border was open every day with no problem. Since
the dispute, the border has been closed.''

In fact, before the fighting between the Palestinian factions over the summer
the Rafah crossing was closed more often than it was open. But General Abdel
Hamid emphasized that Egypt was not favoring one faction or another, saying,
''Egypt is with the legitimate authority,'' presumably the Palestinian Authority
and its president, Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah.

Mr. Mubarak's officials said  Egypt would not accept responsibility for
supplying Gaza and let Israel off the hook, as some Israeli officials hope.

''This is a wrong assumption,'' said Hossam Zaki, the spokesman for Egypt's
Foreign Ministry. ''The current situation is only an exception and for temporary
reasons. The border will go back to normal.''

But the definition of normal was left unclear. When Israel pulled its settlers
and troops out of Gaza in 2005, the Rafah crossing was opened with great fanfare
to allow people in and out of Gaza. European Union supervisors were put in
place, and Israeli video cameras monitored the traffic. But for security
reasons, the crossing was often closed, and it has been shut completely since
Hamas took over Gaza.

It will be difficult politically now for Mr. Mubarak to reseal the border
completely, shutting off any outlet for Gaza.  Egypt, with a strong opposition
element from the Muslim Brotherhood, does not want to offend its Palestinian
wing, Hamas. But Mr. Mubarak would prefer to work out an arrangement with the
legal authority, President Abbas. In addition, Mr. Mubarak has promised Israel
that Egypt  will coordinate its actions on the Gaza border to preserve security
interests of both countries.

In a speech on Thursday, Mr. Mubarak said that ''peace efforts cannot endure any
other failure, and Egypt will not allow the starving of Palestinians in Gaza or
that the situation in the strip turns into a humanitarian crisis.''

He called on Palestinian factions to work together and said, ''No one can outbid
Egypt in its support for this silent nation and their just cause.''

Egypt, he said, ''is doing its utmost in its movements and contacts to end their
suffering and to lift the Israeli measures of collective punishment and to bring
back the supply of fuel and electricity and humanitarian aid to the Gaza
Strip.''

Hamas officials want to regulate the border but reopen the crossing in
coordination with Egypt. They also want to allow the import and export of goods.
A Hamas leader, Mahmoud Zahar, said in an interview that Hamas wanted to end the
system under which Israel collects import duties and taxes for the Palestinians.
Israel does not give those receipts to Hamas, but only to the Palestinian
Authority government, based in Ramallah, in the West Bank.

He also said  the Israeli economy was too expensive for Gazans, while prices of
everything, including electricity, flour and gasoline, were much cheaper in
Egypt.

On Thursday, the Israeli deputy defense minister, Matan Vilnai, said openly what
some senior Israeli officials would only say anonymously on Wednesday -- that
Israel would like to hand over responsibility for Gaza to Egypt, in essence
supporting the Hamas position. ''We need to understand that when Gaza is open to
the other side we lose responsibility for it,'' Mr. Vilnai said. ''So we want to
disconnect from it.''

He said Israel's effort to disengage from Gaza ''continues in that we want to
stop supplying electricity to them, stop supplying them with water and medicine,
so that it would come from another place.'' But according to his office, he
acknowledged that ''we are responsible for it as long as there is no
alternative.''

Mr. Abbas wants to ensure that Gaza is not permanently separated politically and
economically from the West Bank, while even Hamas argues that Israel continues
to be responsible for the well-being of Gazans because it continues to control
Gaza's sea and airspace and the only goods crossings.

On Sunday, Israel's Supreme Court will hear an emergency appeal by Israeli human
rights groups for an injunction against Israel's cuts in electricity and in fuel
supplies to Gaza.

Although Israel promised to deliver 580,000 gallons of industrial diesel fuel
this week for Gaza's sole power plant, which supplies much of Gaza City, only
333,000 gallons had been delivered by Thursday. The power plant, which had shut
down for lack of fuel and is running only one turbine, will have to shut down
again on Sunday unless new supplies are delivered. Normally, Israel and Egypt
supply the rest of Gaza's power needs.

U.N. Tells Israel to Lift Blockade

GENEVA -- A special session of the United Nations Human Rights Council demanded
Thursday that Israel lift its blockade of Gaza and condemned its ''grave'' human
rights violations.

The resolution, sponsored by Syria on behalf of Arab states, made no reference
to Palestinian rocket attacks against Israel. As a result, the council's
proceedings drew criticism for anti-Israeli bias, and 15 of its 47 members
abstained.

Human rights groups also criticized the council for devoting four of the six
special sessions it had convened in the two years of its existence to the
Arab-Israeli conflict, while not taking up gross violations of human rights in
Sudan, Somalia, Sri Lanka and other places.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Palestinians with containers to fill with gas crossed what
remained of a barrier to enter Egypt from the Gaza Strip on Thursday.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAWN BALDWIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 A guard tried to control the hordes of Palestinians who poured into Egypt for
televisions, cigarettes, livestock, food and fuel. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LEFTERIS
PITARAKIS/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (92%); RETAILERS (90%); PRICE CHANGES (90%); PRICE INCREASES
(89%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); AL FATAH
(78%); SMUGGLING (78%); RIOTS (77%); POWER PLANTS (76%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS
(76%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (76%); CHEESE (72%); DIESEL FUEL (72%); EXCHANGE RATES
(51%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (58%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (96%);
UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             178 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths LANTOS, TOM

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 335 words


LANTOS--Tom. The Board of Directors, Overseers and staff of the International
Rescue Committee (IRC) are saddened by the death of Rep. Tom Lantos, a member of
our Board of Directors and Overseers since 1989. At the time of his death, Rep.

Lantos was serving his 14th term representing the Bay Area of California in the
House of Representatives. The only Holocaust survivor ever elected to Congress,
he was a staunch defender of human rights the world over and was a particularly
effective advocate for refugees fleeing persecution. We extend our heartfelt
sympathies to his wife, Annette, herself an ardent and accomplished human rights
advocate; their daughters Annette and Katrina; and their 18 grandchildren and
two greatgrandchildren. Alan Batkin and Jonathan Wiesner Co-Chairs, IRC Board
Tom Brokaw and Maureen White, Co-Chairs, IRC Overseers George Rupp, President
LANTOS--Tom. America has lost a great patriot, the American Jewish Congress has
lost a close friend and humanity, a great champion. Congressman Lantos' public
life was forged in the Holocaust, and he took from his own experience the
urgency to protect human rights and democracy and confront bigotry and hate. His
contributions were many and lasting. May his memory be a blessing. Richard S.
Gordon, President Jack Rosen, Chairman Neil B. Goldstein, Exec. Dir.
LANTOS--Tom, Congress man. We shared the suffering of the Holocaust and bonded
with gratitude in the Land of Freedom. A friend of over 40 years, he will be
sorely missed. Our deepest sympathy to Annette, his beloved life partner,
children Katrina and Richard Swett, Annette and Timber Dick, and the entire
family. Rabbi Arthur and Elisabeth Schneier LANTOS--Tom, Congress man. Appeal of
Conscience Foundation mourns Congressman Tom Lantos, a passionate defender of
human rights and freedom. A Holocaust survivor, he steadfastly worked for a
world of peace, justice and tolerance. Rabbi Arthur Schneier, President
Card.Theodore E. McCarrick Archbishop K. Barsamian Vice Presidents

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); BOARDS OF DIRECTORS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); GRANDCHILDREN
(74%); RELIGION (73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); REFUGEES (71%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (71%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE (84%); AMERICAN JEWISH CONGRESS
(56%)

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (94%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Confirms Protests Staged by Uighur Muslims

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 833 words

DATELINE: SHANGHAI


Chinese officials said Wednesday that they were grappling with ethnic unrest on
a second front, in the northwestern region of Xinjiang, where Uighur Muslims
protested Chinese rule last month even as Tibetans rioted in the southwest.

One Uighur demonstration, which appears to have been quickly suppressed, took
place in the town of  Hotan on March 23, at the same time China was deploying
thousands of security officers across much of its southwest to put down Tibetan
unrest.

Officials said the protest was staged by Islamic separatist groups seeking to
foment a broader uprising in Xinjiang. China often accuses what it calls
splittists and terrorists of being behind any ethnic disturbance. Human rights
groups say that Chinese Uighurs, like Tibetans, have fought for greater freedom
to practice their religion as well as more autonomy from Beijing.

The news of the protest in Xinjiang underscored the breadth of China's problems
with ethnic and religious minority groups in the country's vast western regions,
where there is a long history of unhappiness with Chinese rule. Ethnic groups
Beijing has sought to pacify with economic development programs and suppress
with a heavy police presence appear to be using the coming Olympic Games, to be
held in Beijing in August, as an opportunity to press their grievances and
attract international attention.

''A small number of elements tried to incite splittism, create disturbances in
the marketplace and even trick the masses into an uprising,'' a statement
published on the Web site of the  Hotan local government said in the first
official acknowledgment of the disturbances.

Uighur residents of  Hotan reached by telephone either claimed not to understand
Chinese or refused to talk about recent events there. But Han residents said
that as many as 500 Uighurs had protested. Some reports have said the Uighurs
were objecting to restrictions on wearing Islamic scarves and head coverings.
Some people who were interviewed, however, said the protesters were seeking
independence. The demonstrators were  arrested by the security forces.

Zhu Linxiu, a senior police official in  Hotan, declined to comment about the
protests, saying it was ''inappropriate to publicize.'' He refused to confirm
the number of protesters or arrests, but said the demonstrators were
''instigated by bad elements.''

Two weeks before the reported protest in  Hotan, China announced the discovery
of what it called a terrorist plot in Xinjiang, which it said involved the
smuggling of combustible liquids onto a commercial airliner by a Uighur woman
who had spent time in neighboring Pakistan.

Officials called the incident part of a terrorist campaign by a radical Islamic
independence group, the East Turkestan Islamic Movement. Uighur groups have
denied the reports and called them part of an effort to justify increased
security in the region and the suppression of dissent before the Olympics.

In recent days, the Chinese government has also accused supporters of the Dalai
Lama, the exiled Tibetan spiritual leader, of plotting a suicide bombing
campaign against China, as part of a separatist movement.

On Tuesday, Amnesty International criticized the government for its crackdown on
protests in Tibetan areas of China, and it said the country's efforts to silence
dissidents before the Olympics violated the government's pledges to improve
human rights before the Games. ''The Olympic Games have so far failed to act as
a catalyst for reform,'' Amnesty International said in a statement. ''Unless
urgent steps are taken to redress the situation, a positive human rights legacy
for the Beijing Olympics looks increasingly beyond reach.''

A Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, Jiang Yu, denounced the Amnesty
statement as ''biased.''

Like Tibetans in Tibet, Uighurs have historically been the predominant ethnic
group in Xinjiang, which is officially known as the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous
Region. In both Tibet and Xinjiang, indigenous groups have chafed at the arrival
of large numbers of Han Chinese, the country's predominant ethnic group, who
have migrated to western regions with strong government support.

Uighurs, like Tibetans, have complained that recent Han arrivals now dominate
their local economies, even as the Han-run local governments insert themselves
deeper into schools and religious practices to weed out cultural practices that
officials fear might reinforce a separate ethnic or religious identity.

In telephone interviews, Han residents of  Hotan and nearby areas said there was
a long history of distrust and tension between the Han and Uighurs. Some Han
migrants said that the atmosphere remained volatile and that the Uighurs had
been inspired by the Tibetan unrest.

''Some   jobless people here have heard about the situation in Tibet, and they
also want to make trouble,'' said Wang Guoliang, a Han grocery store owner in
Hotan.  ''They want independence and they want to expel the Han, whom they
dislike.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Chinese security officers in Kashi,  Xinjiang Province, on
Wednesday. In March, Uighur Muslims protested in Hotan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARK
RALSTON/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE  -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PROTESTS
& DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
RIOTS (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (75%); ARRESTS (75%); ETHNICITY (73%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%);
OLYMPICS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); BOMBINGS
(70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); SMUGGLING (61%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (52%);
AIRLINES (50%)

PERSON: DALAI LAMA (59%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (96%); XINJIANG, CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%);
XIZANG, CHINA (90%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); TIBET (95%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Memo, and the Outrage

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 749 words


To the Editor:

Re '' '03 U.S. Memo Approved Harsh Interrogations'' (front page, April 2):

It's high time that the authors of the Bush administration's legal recipe book
for torture be brought out of the kitchen and into the courtroom. Yet despite
volumes of highly credible evidence of human rights crimes, or even war crimes,
a negligent Congress continues to fail miserably in its responsibility to
mandate proper investigations into these cruel policies.

The United States' moral and political standing in the world have completely
eroded, and legitimate prosecutions of crimes against humanity against the
United States have been compromised. Congress must finally face its own
complicity in torture with concrete measures -- not shortsighted hearings -- by
ordering a full, independent investigation into how torture became United States
modus operandi and holding those responsible accountable.  Curt Goering

Deputy Executive Director

Amnesty International USA

New York, April 2, 2008

To the Editor:

The Bush administration attributes detainee abuse at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere to
the rogue actions of a few soldiers and a lack of clear interrogation
guidelines. But the mounting evidence, particularly the declassified memo by
John C. Yoo, a former Justice Department official, proves that administration
officials themselves are responsible for the  torture and cruel treatment of
detainees in United States custody.

The continuing effort to exempt the president from anti-torture law, among other
revelations, shows that the government's calculated policy of torture originated
at the highest levels of the administration. The Justice Department's
interpretation of long-held tenets of American and international law provided
the executive branch with the unlimited power to treat detainees as it saw fit.

Longstanding legal precedents were willfully twisted to justify a systematic
regime of abuse employing the expertise of military psychologists and medical
personnel. These ''enhanced'' techniques inflicted severe and lasting harm on
detainees -- the kind of harm explicitly criminalized by the United States War
Crimes Act.

The use of these interrogation techniques has eroded our international standing
and compromised the rule of law. The question is no longer who is responsible.
The question now is whether they will be held accountable.

Frank Donaghue

Chief Executive

Physicians for Human Rights

Cambridge, Mass., April 3, 2008

To the Editor:

Your April 4 editorial ''There Were Orders to Follow'' brings attention to
additional evidence that it could take years to unearth the full extent of the
damage inflicted on our nation by this Bush administration.

While it will never happen, once the election is over, an independent commission
should be appointed to investigate once and for all the nation's unseemly march
to war, the administration's apparent disregard for civil liberties and
international standards of conduct, and its support of policies that served to
advance cronyism, self-dealing and economic waste on a monumental scale.

For future generations to be able to identify and marginalize such conduct, it
needs to be identified and exposed. While security demands vigilance to thwart
the enemy from without, we should not ignore the more insidious dangers posed by
contemptible policies foisted on us from within.

Robert I. Goodman

Rye Brook, N.Y., April 4, 2008

To the Editor:

I was reminded of how differently the Truman administration was advised to
respond to the Soviet Union.

In 1946 George F. Kennan was asked to explain why the Soviet Union was behaving
as it was. In his famous ''long telegram,'' Kennan discussed how the Kremlin
leaders justified the dictatorship and the ''cruelties'' they inflicted, along
with the threat that Communist expansion posed to the West.

The way to respond to despotism and the Communist threat, he concluded, was to
''have the courage and self-confidence to cling to our own methods and
conceptions of human society. After all, the greatest danger that can befall us
in coping with this problem of Soviet Communism, is that we shall allow
ourselves to become like those with whom we are coping.''

It is more than regrettable that John C. Yoo and others in the Bush
administration failed to remember Kennan's sage advice. Kenton Clymer

DeKalb, Ill., April 4, 2008

The writer is a presidential research professor and chairman of the history
department at Northern Illinois University.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANDRES VERA MARTINEZ)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EVIDENCE (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); ETHICS (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); RULE OF LAW (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (77%); NEGLIGENCE (76%); EXECUTIVES (73%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (73%);
STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (69%); APPOINTMENTS (69%); ARMED FORCES (66%);
PSYCHOLOGY (62%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             185 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Captain Kidd, Human-Rights Victim

BYLINE: By JOHN S. BURNETT.

John S. Burnett is the author of ''Dangerous Waters: Modern Piracy and Terror on
the High Seas.''

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: London


ON April 11, French commandos went in with guns blazing  and captured a gang of
pirates who days earlier had hijacked a luxury cruise ship, the Ponant, and held
the crew for ransom. This was the French solution to a crime wave that has
threatened international shipping off Somalia; those of us who have been on the
business end of a pirate's gun can only applaud their action.

The British government on the other hand, to the incredulity of many in the
maritime industry, has taken a curiously pathetic approach to piracy. While the
French were flying six of the captured pirates to Paris to face trial, the
British Foreign Office issued a directive to the once vaunted Royal Navy not to
detain any pirates, because doing so could violate their human rights. British
warships patrolling the pirate-infested waters off Somalia were advised that
captured pirates could claim asylum in Britain and that those who were returned
to Somalia faced beheading for murder or a hand chopped off for theft under
Islamic law.

A violation of human rights? In 2007, 433 crew members were either taken
hostage, assaulted, injured or killed by pirates. Three seafarers are still
missing and presumed dead. According to the International Maritime Bureau, the
anti-piracy watchdog of the International Chamber of Commerce, over the past 10
years 3,200 seafarers have been kidnapped, 500 injured and 160 killed.

Modern-day pirates are not like Errol Flynn or Johnny Depp swinging through the
rigging, but well-armed militiamen equipped with rocket-propelled grenades,
assault rifles, global positioning systems and high-speed motorboats who have
long terrorized the shipping lanes in the Gulf of Aden and literally gotten away
with murder. During the week before the French raid, half the pirate attacks in
the world occurred in the gulf, a strategic waterway that leads into the Red Sea
and thus to the Suez Canal and Europe. Two weeks before the attack on the
Ponant, a huge crude-oil carrier -- a monster of a ship as long as the Chrysler
Building is tall -- en route to the Middle East was attacked by pirates firing
automatic weapons. The vessel managed to flee.

The Ponant was not the first cruise ship attacked off Somalia. In November 2005,
the American ship Seabourn Spirit was attacked. The quick action of the master
and the use of a Long-Range Acoustic Device, a sonic weapon that can blow out
eardrums, drove off the pirates (an unexploded rocket-propelled grenade,
however, did embed itself in the stateroom of a passenger). The Ponant will not
be the last cruise ship to be attacked; undefended passenger vessels are among
the ships that are most vulnerable to pirates (the Ponant, for example, has a
water-hugging swim platform that made it easy to board).

Hijacking a ship and kidnapping the crew for ransom is a lucrative business in
Somalia. It is less risky than robbing a bank and more profitable than pulling
up half-empty fishing nets. Two weeks before the Ponant was captured, Somali
pirates released the British-Irish-Russian crew of an ice-breaking tug traveling
from Russia to Singapore who had spent 47 days in captivity. The captain had
surrendered his vessel after the wheelhouse windows were blown out by gunshots.
The ship owner paid a ransom of about $700,000. The French were reported to have
paid $2 million for release of the 30 crew members of the Ponant before their
military took action.

This is not a problem without a solution. Just a few years ago, piracy was out
of control in the Malacca Strait, the waterway through which 80 percent of crude
oil to Japan and China is shipped. But the recent combined efforts of the
region's littoral states -- Indonesia, Malaysia and Singapore -- have nearly
eliminated piracy in the strait. The French are hoping that a concerted
international effort off Somalia will have similar success.

France is also lobbying the United Nations Security Council to adopt an
international anti-piracy law. Jean-David Levitte, the top diplomatic adviser to
President Nicolas Sarkozy, said his government hoped that the organization would
consider the creation of an international military force ''to deal with this
plague.'' Once we could have expected the British to lead such an effort; now we
don't even know if they will join it.

The British fear of breaching the human rights of pirates has not gone down well
in the maritime community. Andrew Linington, the spokesman for Nautilus, a
British-Dutch seafarers trade union, has called the Foreign Office's policy ''a
get out of jail card'' for pirates.

''We despair,'' Mr. Linington told me. ''We are meant to be a major maritime
country. The U.K. is heavily dependent on maritime trade -- 95 percent of trade
comes and goes by sea. Yet the Foreign Office has its head in the sand. It is
just wishing the problem would go away.''

The British attitude has come a long way since the days when pirates were
chained to pilings at Wapping and left there until the tidal water of the Thames
ebbed and flowed over the bodies three times. So much for Britannia ruling the
waves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY MATT ROTA)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HIJACKING
(90%); MARITIME PIRACY (90%); MARINE VESSELS (90%); MURDER (89%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); MARINE SHIPPING (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); SOMALI
PIRACY (89%); CRUISES (89%); MARINE PASSENGER TRANSPORT (89%); CANALS &
WATERWAYS (89%); NAVAL VESSELS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); POWS & MIAS
(78%); MILITARY VESSELS (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); NAVIES (78%); FIREARMS
(78%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (72%);
CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE (71%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(67%); UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE (64%); RELIGION (52%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (51%); GLOBAL POSITIONING SYSTEM (50%)

ORGANIZATION: ICC INTERNATIONAL MARITIME BUREAU (55%); INTERNATIONAL CHAMBER OF
COMMERCE (55%)

PERSON: JOHNNY DEPP (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (77%); PARIS, FRANCE (58%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (92%); RED SEA (79%)

COUNTRY: SOMALIA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); FRANCE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 13, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ethiopia: Army Is Accused of Torture and Evictions

BYLINE: By ANDREW C. REVKIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 118 words


Human rights advocates said the Ethiopian Army had tortured, murdered, raped and
evicted civilians in a crackdown on insurgents in the country's isolated Ogaden
region. The group Human Rights Watch, in a report released in Nairobi, Kenya,
and posted online at hrw.org, said that some villages had been burned, citing
independent analysis of satellite photographs by the American Association for
the Advancement of Science. The scientists  confirmed that dozens of structures
had vanished in eight communities identified by witnesses as being attacked,
said Lars Bromley, the director of the association's science and human rights
program.  The Ethiopian government has routinely rejected claims of rights
abuses.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); TORTURE (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (88%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT
OF SCIENCE (57%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (90%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (94%); ETHIOPIA (94%); UNITED STATES (89%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             199 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 3, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

France: Report Faults Counterterrorism Strategy

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 115 words


France's system of using sweeping arrests and aggressive interrogations and
prosecutions to combat terrorism prevents suspects from receiving a fair trial,
a human rights group said. A report by Human Rights Watch said that the
practices resulted in too many arrests and convictions based on scanty evidence.
It said the much-used charge of ''criminal association in relation to a
terrorist undertaking'' was so sweeping that it allowed the authorities to
arrest and interrogate many people even when they had nothing to do with
suspected terrorist activity. The Justice Ministry defended the country's
counterterrorism strategy but said there would be no official comment on the
report itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); COUNTERTERRORISM (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (88%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             203 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Neighbor vs. Neighbor

BYLINE: By JOSH BARBANEL

SECTION: Section RE; Column 0; Real Estate Desk; BIG DEAL; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 764 words



IMAGINE a letter slipped under an apartment door, and then a warning of a
lawsuit in the offing: ''As you may not be aware, we are both lawyers and both
litigators, for whom the usual barriers to litigation are minimal.''

That was the curt beginning of a lawsuit at the Ansonia, a condominium on
Broadway and 73rd Street, filed this month by two Ivy League-educated lawyers
against a neighbor, a restaurateur, over secondhand smoke they said was wafting
into the hallway from her apartment. Jonathan Selbin, whose field is
class-action cases, and his wife, Jenny Selbin, represented themselves, without
a fee, according to state court filings.

The case has raised concern among managing agents and lawyers about secondhand
smoke in co-ops and condominiums as well as the appropriateness of lawyers'
using their knowledge of the legal system to take on neighbors.

''It is not unethical -- it is unneighborly,'' said Stephen Gillers, a law
professor at New York University who specializes in legal ethics. ''It is
contrary to what we think of when we use the word cooperative. It is unwise,
unless you are desperate.''

And if it is sometimes unwise and unneighborly, do co-op and condo boards worry
about having too many litigators on the premises? Last fall, another resident of
the Ansonia, a lawyer who is renting a condo from a friend, filed suit against
the building's management company complaining about ''a horrific plague of
roaches.''

Some landlords are leery of renting to lawyers, but the attitudes of co-op and
condo boards toward lawyers wishing to buy into a building have changed, and
have been fairly benign in recent years, managing agents say. After all, many
lawyers serve on building boards and add, at the minimum, a patina of
professionalism to meetings.

While it is illegal to discriminate on the basis of race, color, creed, age,
national origin and many other factors, discrimination against someone because
he or she is a member of the legal profession was, for a time, perfectly legal.
Precedent was established by a 1977 case, which lawyers sometimes cite as a joke
on lawyers. When the general counsel of the city's Commission on Human Rights, a
divorced black woman, sued a landlord for discrimination for refusing to rent to
her, the court found that the landlord, who had rented to many black tenants and
many women, had a right to refuse to give her a lease because she was a lawyer
and might sue. This stood until 1986, when the city's human rights law was
amended to bar discrimination in housing on the basis of a lawful occupation.
Nonetheless, Co-op and condominium boards may still reject lawyers and other
applicants based on specific actions -- for instance, a pattern of filing
lawsuits against neighbors.

Anthony vanEyck Miller, a vice president of Bellmarc Realty, says boards don't
mind lawyers, but he warns buyers about using the word ''litigator'' on
applications. ''It is almost pejorative in the context,'' he said. ''It is not
quite as bad as terrorist, but it makes people nervous.''

Felicia de Chabris, a broker at Halstead Property's Greenwich Village office,
said that lawyers are usually approved, especially if they are helpful and show
humility.

But she pointed out that a pattern of past lawsuits could pose a problem,
especially when suits have been filed against neighbors or co-ops or condo
boards. ''Sending a quick legal letter is one thing,'' she said. ''Actually
litigating is not a good idea.''

In the case of the Ansonia, the lawyers who sued complained that the neighbor
who smoked next door, Galila Huff, was creating a nuisance by failing to provide
ventilation when she smoked and endangering their 4-year-old son.

The neighbor, a chain smoker, said she had tried to respond to their complaints
and had even bought air purifiers to reduce the amount of smoke. But the lawyers
complained that she had failed to provide them with receipts proving that she
had made the purchases.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 24, 2008



CORRECTION:  A report in the Big Deal column last Sunday about lawyers who sue
their neighbors in apartment buildings misstated the circumstances under which
lawyers can be refused housing in New York City. Although a 1977 court decision
upheld a landlord's right to refuse to rent to a lawyer, the city's human rights
law was amended in 1986 to bar discrimination in housing on the basis of a
lawful occupation. Co-op and condominium boards may, however, reject lawyers and
other applicants based on specific actions -- for instance, a pattern of filing
lawsuits against neighbors.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Ansonia

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); LITIGATION (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); RESIDENTIAL
CONDOMINIUMS (90%); CONDOMINIUMS (90%); RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVES (90%);
RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (90%); RENTAL PROPERTY (89%); REAL ESTATE (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); ETHICS (88%); HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); LEGAL
ETHICS (77%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (76%); PROPERTY MANAGEMENT (76%); CLASS
ACTIONS (73%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (72%); LEGAL SERVICES
(72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); CITY GOVERNMENT (60%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (52%)

LOAD-DATE: November 11, 2009


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             218 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 24, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Advocates Defy Israeli Blockade of Gaza

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 391 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Two boats carrying more than 40 international human rights advocates landed in
Gaza on Saturday, challenging an Israeli blockade of the Hamas-run territory.

About 2,000 residents came out to greet them at the small seaport near Gaza
City. Many were singing, while others swam or set out in fishing vessels to meet
the boats.

Israel had told the activists to keep their boats away but ultimately decided to
allow them to land, apparently to prevent a potentially more damaging public
relations drama.

Arye Mekel, an Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the decision was made
''to avoid the provocation they had planned at high sea,'' and  because the
Israeli authorities knew exactly who was on board and what cargo they were
carrying.

The human rights advocates, ranging in age from 22 to 81 and coming from about a
dozen countries, set sail from Cyprus on Friday morning to make a symbolic stand
against what they called Israel's ''illegal'' and ''immoral'' siege of Gaza.
They were carrying 200 hearing aids for children in Gaza and thousands of
balloons.

Prepared for the possibility that they would be stopped by the Israeli Navy,
they  said earlier that if they were arrested and taken to Israel, they would
''protest and prosecute'' their ''kidnapping in the appropriate forums.''

Among the passengers was Lauren Booth, a sister-in-law of Tony Blair, the former
British prime minister and now a peace envoy for the Middle East; Anne
Montgomery, an  American nun; and an Israeli Jew, Jeff Halper, a rights activist
from Jerusalem.

The Islamic militant group Hamas won Palestinian legislative elections in 2006
and took full control of Gaza last year after a factional war. Since then,
Israel has strictly limited the goods allowed into the area, allowing in only
basic supplies. Israel, the United States and the European Union classify Hamas
as a terrorist organization.

At the seaport, Naama Abu Hamda, 59, said she had come to thank the activists.
''We are encouraged by their courage,'' she said, ''unlike the Arab
governments,'' who she said had cooperated with the Israeli embargo.

Khalil Nofal, a Hamas leader who also came to the port, said, ''This is a strong
message to the cowardly Arab leaders.''

Ms. Booth said she was pleased that the Israelis did not block the boats, and
hoped that signaled an end of the siege.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HAMAS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HARBORS & PORTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (78%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (78%); MARINE VESSELS (78%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%); ELECTIONS (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (69%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (66%); RELIGION
(64%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (64%); HEARING AIDS (52%); ARRESTS (51%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (50%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); UNITED KINGDOM
(92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CYPRUS (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (70%)

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             220 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 19, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Venezuela: Report Faults Chavez On Human Rights

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING THE AMERICAS; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 83 words


President Hugo Chavez's government has consolidated power by eliminating
judicial independence, punishing critical news outlets and engaging in
wide-ranging acts of political discrimination against opponents, Human Rights
Watch said in a report released Thursday in Caracas. Mr. Chavez is already
facing an outcry from opponents in Venezuela after supporting a blacklist to
prevent opposition candidates from running for office in regional elections and
for enacting by decree laws increasing his power.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (90%)

CITY: CARACAS, VENEZUELA (90%)

COUNTRY: VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (94%); VENEZUELA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             221 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Army Bombs Headquarters Of Rebels In Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 677 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


The Sri Lankan military appeared close to making its final push on rebel
territory on Thursday, as its air force's jets pounded the headquarters of the
country's guerrilla group.

Both sides, which routinely provide conflicting accounts of clashes, agreed
roughly on what happened. It signaled a turning point in the prolonged conflict.

The guerrilla group, the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, or L.T.T.E., said in
a statement that its peace secretariat, which was its main political office, was
bombed around midday. The Sri Lankan military confirmed the strike as well, with
the defense secretary, Gotabhaya Rajapaksa, reporting that ground troops were
three miles from the rebel headquarters, in the northern town of Kilinochhi.

''It is the beginning of the end of L.T.T.E. terrorists,'' Mr. Rajapaksa said.

His brother, Mahinda, is the country's president. Since his election two years
ago, the brothers have aggressively sought to end the quarter-century-long
ethnic conflict by crushing the Tamil Tigers militarily.

The rebel statement made no mention of the proximity of ground troops. It said
the airstrike killed two civilians.

Whether this brings the Sri Lankan conflict anywhere closer to resolution is
unclear. The rebels have crude but effective bomber jets of their own. And over
the last several months, even as the Sri Lankan military has made advances into
rebel territory in the island's north, the rebels' fighter jets and suicide
bombs have rattled ordinary life in government-controlled areas.

The government, for its part, has come under sharp criticism for failing to
protect journalists and human rights workers from disappearances, kidnappings
and intimidation.

In the latest attack, last Saturday, unidentified men lobbed hand grenades at
the residence of J. C. Weliamuna, country director of Transparency International
and a prominent human rights lawyer. The United States condemned the attack.

The National Peace Council, a nonpartisan group that has been sharply critical
of the government, said in a statement, ''This act of violent intimidation can
be interpreted as a thinly veiled attempt to silence critical and dissenting
voices in the country.''

The death toll, which has plainly escalated in recent months as the conflict has
intensified, is impossible to verify. Both sides are known to inflate the enemy
toll.

The military push comes at a time when aid agencies have been forced by
government order to leave Tamil Tiger-held territory. Sri Lanka has been
unusually suspicious of aid groups working in the area, repeatedly accusing them
of helping the guerrillas.

On Thursday, the government got a chance to accuse them anew, when explosives
were found in a private truck that was to be loaded  with United Nationsfood
aid. The World Food Program's acting country director, Azeb Asrat, said by
telephone from Vavuniya, where the trucks were being loaded, that the vehicle in
question had been contracted privately by the government and that it had not
even entered the United Nations compound when the explosives were found. In a
statement, the United Nations said it ''condemned the attempt by persons unknown
to disrupt the aid effort.''

Ms. Asrat said the discovery prompted her agency to stop loading trucks provided
by the same contractor. Altogether, 51 trucks were loaded with dry rations for
the approximately 200,000 civilians living behind rebel lines.

The first relief to reach them in two weeks, about 650 tons of food aid --
flour, rice, lentils and cooking oil -- was expected to last no longer than a
week. The United Nations said it aimed to send the next batch of aid next week.

The aid delivery comes a week after a statement from the White House urging Sri
Lanka to allow humanitarian agencies to reach civilians in the conflict zone. In
the statement, Richard A. Boucher, assistant secretary of state for South and
Central Asia, reminded the Sri Lankan government of its responsibility in
''respecting and extending human rights protection to the people in the areas
that they take over.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); AIR FORCES (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); TERRORISM (68%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (67%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (64%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (60%);
FOOD CHARITIES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (83%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             223 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 22, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Terrorism Suspects on Trial

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 147 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Last Call'' (Op-Ed, Oct. 15):

Mary Jo White, former United States attorney in Manhattan, asks about the proper
balance between military proceedings and criminal trials ''when dealing with
people accused of being involved in international terrorism against the United
States.''

The answer is, our federal courts can handle complex terrorism cases.

''In Pursuit of Justice,'' a recent Human Rights First report, examined 123
international terrorism cases prosecuted in the federal courts and found that
the federal system successfully balances the need to protect classified
information with defendants' fair trial rights.

In fact, the United States attorney's office in Manhattan successfully
prosecuted dozens of terrorism suspects in the 1990s while Ms. White was at the
helm.

Deborah Colson  Senior Associate, Human Rights First  New York, Oct. 15, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); LAWYERS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (83%)

PERSON: MARY JO WHITE (88%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             224 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 25, 2008 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Rape in Congo: Reports From the Field

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg.

LENGTH: 395 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Rape Victims' Words Jolt Congo Into Change'' (front page, Oct. 18):

In our recent survey of 2,620 people in eastern Congo, we found that nearly one
of four adults (23 percent) had witnessed sexual violence and one of six (16
percent) had been sexually violated, often multiple times (12 percent).

In addition to the trauma, rape victims have been rejected by their communities.
One of four adults (25 percent) would not accept victims of sexual violence back
into their community.

Most of all, eastern Congolese want justice. Eighty-five percent of those we
surveyed wanted those responsible for rape and war crimes to be held
accountable. Yet so far, the Congolese government and the international
community have failed to engage in any meaningful reform of the courts or the
security sector, including training of the national police and army to be human
rights protectors rather than rights violators.

Until that is done, the people of eastern Congo will continue to live in fear.

Patrick Vinck  Phuong Pham  Berkeley, Calif., Oct. 18, 2008

The writers are, respectively, director of the Initiative for Vulnerable
Populations and director of research, Human Rights Center, University of
California at Berkeley.

To the Editor:

Your article effectively highlighted the complexities in redressing these
horrible crimes against women. Broken legal systems must be reconstructed to
protect women who come forward.

Those who speak out against their rapists face very real dangers. When we
interviewed women in eastern Congo, they said admitting to being raped, even
without filing a case, can provoke dire consequences. Men reject their wives out
of fear of sexually transmitted diseases, there is shame at not being able to
intervene, and ridicule from peers.

One man justified this by saying, ''How can you feed yourself with spoiled
food?''

Many women are cast out of their homes and left to search for shelter on streets
or in forests where they may be attacked again. While the traveling courts you
mention will bring valuable services, they will fail unless there are community
mechanisms in place to follow up.

Without robust local support, women will remain at risk.

Jocelyn Kelly  Michael VanRooyen  Jennifer Leaning Cambridge, Mass., Oct. 21,
2008

The writers are with the Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, Harvard University.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (91%); POLLS & SURVEYS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WRITERS (78%); WOMEN (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (74%); SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE (72%); POLICE FORCES
(70%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (67%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (55%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

LOAD-DATE: October 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             226 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 18, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pass the Colombian Trade Pact

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 467 words


We don't say it all that often, but President Bush is right: Congress should
pass the Colombian free-trade agreement now.

Mr. Bush signed the deal two years ago. The Democratic majority in Congress has
refused to approve it out of a legitimate concern over the state of human rights
in Colombia and less legitimate desires to pander to organized labor or deny Mr.
Bush a foreign policy win.

We believe that the trade pact would be good for America's economy and workers.
Rejecting it would send a dismal message to allies the world over that the
United States is an unreliable partner and, despite all that it preaches, does
not really believe in opening markets to trade. There is no more time to waste.
If the lame-duck Congress does not approve the trade pact this year, prospects
would dim considerably since it would lose the cover of the rule (formerly known
as fast track) that provides for an up-or-down, no-amendment vote.

Because of trade preferences granted as part of the war on drugs, most Colombian
exports already are exempt from United States tariffs. The new agreement would
benefit American companies that now have to pay high tariffs on exports to
Colombia.

It also would strengthen bonds with an important ally in a volatile corner of
South America -- that also is the main source of cocaine shipped into this
country and where the United States has very few friends these days.

In neighboring Venezuela, President Hugo Chavez spouts fierce anti-American
rhetoric to distract attention from his autocratic policies. Last month, Bolivia
expelled the United States ambassador and accused Drug Enforcement
Administration agents of conspiring against his government. Ecuador has refused
to renew a lease on an airbase used by American counternarcotics flights in the
coastal city of Manta.

We, too, have strong concerns about human-rights violations committed by the
government of President Alvaro Uribe. But Democrats opposing the trade pact on
these grounds are ignoring undeniable improvements. Violence has abated
considerably during the Uribe administration as it has taken on the left-wing
guerrillas of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, and
right-wing paramilitaries. The number of trade unionists killed, a major
Democratic concern, is still too high but has dropped sharply.

Washington must keep pressing Bogota to reduce abuses by Colombia's Army, ensure
the prosecution of paramilitary thugs and further rein in violence against union
members. It has a powerful tool to do that: $600 million a year in mostly
military and anti-narcotics aid.

Failing to approve this trade agreement would do nothing to improve Colombia's
human-rights record. Walking away from it now would alienate many people in
Colombia and undermine Washington's credibility.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%); TARIFFS
& DUTIES (90%); EXPORT TRADE (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); FREE TRADE TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (90%);
EXPORT & IMPORT LAW (90%); LABOR UNIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); DRUG POLICY
(89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(87%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (85%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (78%);
APPROVALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); LIBERALISM (76%); ARMIES (74%);
TAXES & TAXATION (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(71%); CONSPIRACY (71%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (69%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%);
COCAINE (66%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (65%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); HUGO CHAVEZ (58%); ALVARO URIBE (58%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); COLOMBIA (97%); BOLIVIA (79%); SOUTH AMERICA
(79%); ECUADOR (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             229 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 25, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congo: U.N. Reports Widespread Rights Abuses

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 100 words


Government soldiers and rebels in eastern Congo have committed serious human
right abuses, including mass killings, arbitrary executions, rape and torture, a
United Nations report says. Elements of the Congolese Army and the national
police were responsible for many serious violations from July to November,
including arbitrary executions, rape, torture and cruel and inhuman treatment,
the report said. The rebels  have also ''perpetrated serious human rights abuses
with impunity,'' the report said, including mass killings, torture, abductions,
forced recruitment of children and sexual violence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL
PUNISHMENT (88%); ARMED FORCES (88%); POLICE FORCES (87%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); CHILDREN (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             232 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 10, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Relatives of 9/11 Victims Add a Passionate Layer to Guantanamo Debate

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 843 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


After the detainees charged with the plotting of the Sept. 11 attacks discussed
confessing this week, something unusual was heard here: a vigorous public
defense of Guantanamo.

''Guantanamo Bay has gotten a bad rap,'' said Alice Hoagland, whose son was
killed in the 2001 attack.

Hamilton Peterson, whose father was killed that day, said the procedures of the
much-criticized military commission tribunal seemed plenty fair. ''The entire
day,'' he said, ''was giving these defendants their due.''

The routine here has long included officials making their case for the
detentions and trials at the Guantanamo naval base in muted bureaucratese about
''fair and open'' proceedings. They were outmatched by human rights groups and
defense lawyers, with their inflammatory accusations about torture and secret
evidence.

This week, the Pentagon brought victims' families for the first time as
observers. The half-dozen family members who spoke to reporters gave the
Pentagon the counterpoint it had been lacking.

They also provided a sample of the emotional crosscurrents swirling around
President-elect Barack Obama over Guantanamo. He has said he will close the
detention camp. But its critics worry he may not carry through. He has said the
military commission system has failed. But its critics worry that he may
continue it, particularly with the Sept. 11 case now at a pivotal stage.

For each side in the seven-year struggle over Guantanamo, this is the definitive
moment in an argument that is a surrogate for other arguments about America's
definition of justice and its role in the world.

This week, that meant the victims' families were in the thick of an old debate,
suddenly turbocharged. Some of them called for Mr. Obama to keep Guantanamo
open. Others said the military tribunal here should be permitted to finish its
work.

The unaccustomed rebuttal unsettled the Bush administration's critics here.
Defense lawyers and human rights monitors said the Pentagon was using the
victims' family members and had handpicked those invited.

Officials insisted the family members had been selected randomly. But the chief
military defense lawyer here, Col. Peter R. Masciola, said he wondered ''what
the government is trying to make you believe by only bringing the victims they
want to bring.''

Thomas A. Durkin, a defense lawyer from Chicago who represents one of those
accused of plotting the Sept. 11 attacks, said the display of the victims'
relatives was an effort to make it politically risky for Mr. Obama to close the
military commissions by making it appear that abandoning the military
commissions would be abandoning the victims too.

''This show trial is nothing more today than an effort to blackmail him
politically,'' Mr. Durkin said.

Pentagon officials have a track record of trying to line up
pro-Bush-administration observers. In June, the Pentagon withdrew an invitation
it had extended to another relative of a Sept. 11 victim, Debra Burlingame,
after news organizations learned that she had been invited without any other
victims' representatives. Ms. Burlingame had written that detainees' lawyers
''subvert the truth and transform the Constitution into a lethal weapon.''

This week's appearance by the victims' family members came at an awkward
juncture for the Pentagon. Its public position is that it stands ready to carry
out Mr. Obama's orders on Guantanamo once he becomes president. But some
military officials have been working behind the scenes to convince transition
officials that the military commissions may be useful in fighting terrorism.

Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, who is to remain in the new administration,
muddied the current debate about Guantanamo by saying last week that closing the
detention camp was a priority but adding, ''I think some legislation probably is
needed as part of it.''

The Pentagon has long argued that to close Guantanamo and transfer some
detainees to the United States, Congress should pass legislation declaring that
the government has the authority to hold detainees indefinitely in the United
States even if they are not convicted of any charges.

Civil liberties groups and other critics of the Bush administration have been on
alert for any sign that the Obama administration would consider asking for an
indefinite detention law. That, in the view of some of critics, would be a first
retreat by Mr. Obama on Guantanamo. An Obama call for indefinite detention, they
say, could be one short step from continuing the military commissions.

The public debate here has always been a concentrated version of the debate in
Washington about detention. This week, there was more at stake because everyone
seemed to think it might be their last chance.

For the victims' families it was their first chance at that last word. Jim
Samuel of Brick, N.J., went to the courtroom here to see the men who proudly
said they planned the World Trade Center attack. ''My son was on the 92nd
floor,'' he said.

There were some things this week for which there was no rebuttal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY BASES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%);
EXTORTION (73%); NAVIES (73%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

COUNTRY: CUBA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             234 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 21, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sexual Harassment Claim Arises After Official Quits

BYLINE: By DAVID W. CHEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 906 words


The commissioner of the city's Department for the Aging, whose resignation on
Dec. 12 was attributed by the mayor to ''personal reasons,'' has been accused by
his former secretary in a federal lawsuit of sexual harassment and
discrimination.

The lawsuit was filed in February, and followed an investigation by the New York
State Division of Human Rights, which determined that the former secretary,
Auritela Santos, had probable cause to proceed with a legal claim against the
commissioner, Edwin Mendez-Santiago.

But the case went unnoticed until Mr. Mendez-Santiago resigned unexpectedly amid
strong opposition to plans to overhaul programs for the elderly.

City lawyers have denied Ms. Santos's allegations in court papers. City
officials declined to comment, citing the continuing litigation. Ms. Santos said
she did not want to discuss the case; her lawyer, Doris Traub, also declined to
comment.

The case appeared to take a turn on Nov. 20, when city lawyers sought another
extension to reply to Ms. Santos's request for more than 4,000 e-mail messages,
presumably involving Mr. Mendez-Santiago, many of them in Spanish. Ms. Santos
said some of the e-mail messages were sexual or even violent in nature,
according to court documents.

In a letter to Judge Alvin K. Hellerstein of Federal District Court in
Manhattan, Eamonn F. Foley, a lawyer for the city, said, ''The parties believe
that it currently is an opportune time to consider possible settlement.''

The accusations against Mr. Mendez-Santiago represent a rare moment of
awkwardness for an administration that has generally won plaudits for the
quality -- and longevity -- of its cabinet members. Almost none of the
administration's senior officials have been touched by even a whiff of personal
scandal since Mr. Bloomberg was elected in 2002.

The issue of sexual harassment is one that Mr. Bloomberg has had to deal with
before; the financial services company he founded, Bloomberg L.P., has been sued
on numerous occasions since the 1990s by employees claiming discrimination and
sexual harassment.

One senior city official who knows Mr. Mendez-Santiago said the allegations
seemed out of character; a 54-year-old family man, he had a good reputation
among community activists prior to his being chosen as commissioner in December
2001. Still, the allegations were serious enough that Mr. Mendez-Santiago had
little choice but to resign, said the official, who spoke on condition of
anonymity because of the pending litigation.

''I heard it was the harassment charges,'' said the official, explaining the
reason behind Mr. Mendez-Santiago's departure, which takes effect on Jan. 1. ''I
heard it was ugly.''

According to complaints filed with the State Human Rights Division and in
federal court, Ms. Santos, now 38, became Mr. Mendez-Santiago's secretary in
2004. He made frequent sexual remarks and rated the physical appearance of
female employees, saying that one was so loathsome that he had lost his
appetite, according to the complaint.

Mr. Mendez-Santiago, according to the federal complaint, had ''physical and/or
sexual relations with subordinate female employees in his office, while
plaintiff had to sit at her desk directly outside his office.'' And he sent
sexually explicit e-mail messages to Ms. Santos to try to entice her into
joining him on out-of-town trips, despite the fact that she told him repeatedly
that she was married and had three children.

Undeterred, Mr. Mendez-Santiago said that a close friend would ''buy plaintiff a
house in the Dominican Republic if she agreed to accompany the two of them on a
trip to that location with a female friend,'' the federal complaint states.

But when she resisted, according to the state complaint, Mr. Mendez-Santiago
began sending Ms. Santos threatening e-mail messages. ''The e-mails had a
hostile tone to them,'' the complaint said. ''These e-mails were written in
Spanish, and he would tell me to warn people of his propensity for violence.''

By the summer of 2007, the federal complaint says, Ms. Santos was unable to
continue working in such an environment and left the agency. The State Human
Rights Division determined in August 2007 that probable cause for a case
existed, and in February this year, Ms. Santos filed her federal lawsuit.

For the better part of the last year, Mr. Mendez-Santiago had been involved in
one of Mr. Bloomberg's more controversial initiatives: revamping the city's
decades-old system of managing more than 300 senior centers. The policy sought
to incorporate a business-oriented, results-driven approach that has been a
Bloomberg hallmark.

But older citizens and most of the City Council protested. So when Mr.
Mendez-Santiago left so abruptly, some advocates and council members speculated
that Mr. Mendez-Santiago had misgivings about the policy.

The fact that Mr. Bloomberg quickly named a replacement on Wednesday -- a
well-respected government veteran, Lilliam Barrios-Paoli -- only cemented that
belief. So, too, did the announcement on Friday that the administration was
scrapping the plan.

But Mr. Bloomberg brushed aside such speculation during a news conference on
Wednesday to introduce Ms. Barrios-Paoli.

''He left for totally personal reasons, and it had nothing to do with any policy
whatsoever of the Department for the Aging,'' he said. ''Never even came up. He
did a good job. I'm sorry he chose for personal reasons to resign.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Edwin Mendez-Santiago, in a 2001 photo, resigned on Dec. 12 for
''personal reasons.''(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); CITY GOVERNMENT (91%); CITIES
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (90%); AGING (89%); RESIGNATIONS
(89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); LIFE EXPECTANCY
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); SENIOR CITIZENS (73%); SCANDALS (72%); CRIMINAL
HARASSMENT (72%); PROBABLE CAUSE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); COMMUNITY ACTIVISM
(50%)

COMPANY: BLOOMBERG LP (82%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(82%); NAICS519110 NEWS SYNDICATES (82%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS
(82%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 8, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Argentine Suspect Found Dead in Jail

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 172 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


A former coast guard officer found dead in jail last month before an expected
verdict in his trial for torture during Argentina's 1976-1983 military
dictatorship may have been killed to keep him silent, a judge concluded Monday.

Hector Febres, a defendant in a high-profile human rights case, died Dec. 10 of
cyanide poisoning in the comfortable suite where he was held in a coast guard
complex. The verdict in his case was scheduled to be given Dec. 14.

Judge Sandra Arroyo Salgado ordered the arrest of two coast guard officials who
were his jailers, accusing them of giving Mr. Febres's killers access to the
area, a court official said..

The judge wrote that the motive had been ''to silence one who tried to reveal
data or information about the facts surrounding the human rights violations
during the last military government.''

Mr. Febres was on trial on charges of torturing political prisoners in
Argentina's most infamous clandestine detention center  during the military
government's crackdown on leftists and dissidents.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY RULE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ARRESTS (88%); POISONINGS (72%); ARREST WARRANTS
(69%); CYANIDES (56%)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             240 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Congo Rekindles Ethnic Hatreds

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1621 words

DATELINE: MUSHAKE, Congo


Andre Simwerayi looked on with satisfaction as the army blasted rockets over a
verdant hillside, pummeling what officers said were the positions of forces
loyal to a renegade Congolese Tutsi general.

''If the bombs don't do the job, we are ready with machetes to finish it
ourselves,'' said Mr. Simwerayi, 31, a street tough standing nearby in a
tattered trench coat.

''We must crush the inyenzi,'' he spat, using a word made notorious by the
genocide against Tutsi  in neighboring Rwanda more than a decade ago. It means
cockroaches.

The recent clashes in eastern Congo between the army and the troops of the
dissident general have exacted a grievous toll on a region ravaged by a decade
of war. Around 400,000 people have been forced to flee their homes, thousands of
women have been raped and hundreds of children have been press-ganged into
militias, the United Nations says, raising alarm among diplomats the world over.

But the fighting is also rekindling the kind of ethnic hatred that previously
dragged this region into the most deadly conflict since World War II.

It began with the Rwandan genocide, in which Hutu extremists killed 800,000
Tutsi and moderate Hutu  in 1994. Many of the genocide's perpetrators fled into
Congo, igniting regional conflicts that were fueled by the plunder of Congo's
minerals, lasted for nearly a decade and killed, by some estimates, as many as
four million people through violence, disease and hunger.

Now a new wave of anti-Tutsi sentiment is sweeping Congo, driven by deep anger
over the renegade Tutsi general. Many see his rebellion as a proxy for Rwanda,
to the east, whose army occupied vast parts of Congo during the most devastating
chapter of the regional war and plundered millions of dollars' worth of minerals
from the country, according to many analysts, diplomats and human rights
workers.

The current battle is in many ways a throwback to the earliest and most
difficult questions at the heart of the Congo war, and also a reflection of
longstanding hostilities toward Tutsi, who are widely viewed here as being more
Rwandan than Congolese.

Many Congolese Tutsi see themselves as members of an especially vulnerable
minority, one that has already suffered through genocide and whose position in
Congo has always been precarious. But many other Congolese see Tutsi, many of
whom have been in Congo for generations, as foreign interlopers with outsize
economic and political influence.

At the center of this latest rebellion is the renegade general, Laurent Nkunda,
a Congolese Tutsi with longstanding ties to the Tutsi-led Rwandan government. He
has refused to integrate his men into Congo's national army, as the other
militias that fought in the sprawling civil war have done, arguing that Tutsi
face unique perils that require his special protection.

''Our enemies have the ideology of genocide,'' General Nkunda said in December
at his hide-out in lush  eastern Congo. ''We are fearing they will continue
their genocide in Congo.''

Like many of Congo's historical figures, General Nkunda, a tall, rail-thin
40-year-old with angular  features, has developed a cult of personality. He has
a penchant for flamboyant accessories: in a recent interview he cradled a black
cane topped by a silver eagle's head. Other times he has worn a button that says
''Rebels for Christ.'' He likes to refer to himself in the third person.

''Is Nkunda the problem?'' he demanded. ''Why? How can Nkunda be to blame? I am
only trying to protect my people.''

General Nkunda said Congo's small Tutsi minority was vulnerable to attack by
militias, particularly the remnants of the Hutu extremist forces that carried
out the genocide in Rwanda. Many of the extremists still roam the jungles of
eastern Congo, and he has demanded that this militia be disbanded and that Tutsi
refugees who fled into Rwanda be allowed to return.

Many Congolese Tutsi share his fears. ''We are always seen as outsiders, but we
are Congolese,'' said Sanvura Birida, who lives with her four children in a camp
for displaced people in territory controlled by General Nkunda. ''The government
does not protect us.''

But that feeling of vulnerability does not always mean people are being
personally victimized.

''In response to the cumulative deaths of fewer than 20 Tutsi over the past two
years, Nkunda has launched offensives that have killed over 100 persons and
displaced hundreds of thousands,'' said a report published in October by the
International Crisis Group, a nonprofit organization that seeks to prevent or
resolve deadly conflicts. ''While Nkunda has defended the Tutsi minority in
North Kivu, he has become a potential danger to the community's security as a
whole.''

Representatives of his militia and others involved in recent fighting were
expected to participate in a peace conference called by the government and
originally scheduled to begin  Jan. 6. It has been delayed by logistical
problems, according to Reuters.

In many ways, Congo's Tutsi are a people apart, an unusual minority with
influence but also problems beyond its size.

These differences are reflected in a unique way of life. When the Congolese Army
routed General Nkunda's forces in one of the strategic towns they occupied in a
recent, ultimately failed push, the army celebrated  with stiff pulls of rotgut
whiskey.

But when General Nkunda's men routed the army with a much smaller force a few
days later, they toasted their victory with cups of milk from the most prized of
Tutsi possessions, dairy cows.

This reputation for sobriety and determination helps explain why Tutsi have been
so successful in business, according to Tutsi community leaders in Goma, the
regional capital.

''When we were investing and working, the Congolese were listening to music and
playing football,'' said Modeste Makabuza Ngoga, a Tutsi who is one of Goma's
richest men, with investments in transportation, telecommunications, tin ore and
the  gasoline trade, among other things. ''Are we to be blamed for that?''

But the history of the region tells a different story. Before the elections of
2006, the area was controlled by a Rwandan-backed rebel group turned political
party, the Congolese Rally for Democracy. It helped Mr. Makabuza Ngoga and other
Tutsi build fortunes through patronage of the state government and special deals
to buy valuable agricultural land, according to analysts and Western diplomats
in the region.

Wealth also helps fuel the Tutsi sense of vulnerability. A power-sharing
agreement that ended the war in 2003 enabled a party dominated by a handful of
Tutsi to essentially control one quarter of the country, which is the size of
Western Europe, and thus considerable wealth. But in the election, the first
democratic vote in Congo in more than four decades, only one Tutsi from this
region was elected to the National Assembly.

Some of Goma's wealthy Tutsi feel so unsafe that they sleep in Gisenyi, a town
just inside the Rwandan border, a fact that reinforces the common perception
that Congolese Tutsi are more Rwandan than Congolese.

Rwanda's history is a powerful touchstone for Congo's Tutsi. Similar disparities
-- a small group controlling considerable wealth and influence, amid a powerful
sense of grievance from the majority -- helped create the conditions that led to
the genocide in Rwanda in 1994.

Like many African ethnic groups, the Tutsi were divided in the 19th century
among the European colonies; in the  case of the Tutsi, those areas became
Congo, Rwanda and Burundi. In each of these places,  they have at times been
co-opted and cultivated as a favored elite by those in power.

That trend began with Mobutu Sese Seko, Congo's longtime ruler, after
independence and later included Laurent D. Kabila, who became president after
rebelling  in 1996 with backing from Rwanda and Uganda.

These alliances allowed Tutsi to dominate the economy and political life of much
of North Kivu Province here, with its tin mines, rich pastureland and
transportation links to the Great Lakes region of Central Africa. Large parts of
the province's best farming and grazing land is controlled by a handful of Tutsi
owners, according to analysts and human rights workers.

But at times allies of the Tutsi have turned on them, sometimes savagely. In
1983, facing pressure from other ethnic groups in the region, Mr. Mobutu revoked
citizenship for residents who could not trace their roots in Congo to 1885,
effectively turning thousands of Tutsi and Hutu into stateless people. A decade
later, ethnic violence exploded in North Kivu. As many as 10,000 people were
killed, and 250,000 Hutu and Tutsi fled.

Until the Rwandan genocide in 1994, Congolese Hutu and Tutsi coexisted
relatively peacefully and in many ways faced the same kinds of persecution from
other ethnic groups that considered them outsiders. But when the Hutu
perpetrators of the Rwandan genocide flooded into Congo, tensions rose between
Congolese Hutu and Tutsi as well.

These Hutu extremists made common cause with the Mobutu government. When Mr.
Mobutu fell in 1997, Mr. Kabila took power, and an unknown number of Rwandan
Hutu refugees were killed. Mr. Kabila broke with his Rwandan allies, who in 1998
sponsored another rebellion, this time led by Congolese Tutsi. Mr. Kabila joined
forces with the Hutus  behind the genocide, igniting a second civil war in
Congo.

Joseph Dunia Ruyenzi, a human rights activist in Goma, said that despite this
history, Tutsi must put their trust in the fledgling democracy of Congo.

''All Congolese must see themselves as Congolese first, and as having a stake in
peace and prosperity,'' he said. ''Our only option is to be in this together.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Members of the Congolese Army, shown in eastern Congo last
month battling renegade forces. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES) (pg. A1)
 A Congolese woman at a camp in North Kivu, eastern Congo, was one of thousands
who have been displaced by recent fighting. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (91%); ARMIES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); CHILDREN (73%); WORLD WAR II
(73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (69%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             242 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 16, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Faith, Freedom and Bling in the Middle East

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 1449 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia


As a Saudi soldier with a gold sword high-stepped in front of him, President
Bush walked slowly beside King Abdullah through the shivery gray mist enveloping
the kingdom, following the red carpet leading from Air Force One to the airport
terminal.

When the two stepped onto the escalator, the president tenderly reached for the
king's hand, in case the older man needed help. He certainly does need help, but
not the kind he is prepared to accept.

It took Mr. Bush almost his entire presidency to embrace diplomacy, but now that
he's in the thick of it, or perhaps the thin of it -- given his speed-dating
approach to statesmanship -- he is kissing and holding hands with kings,
princes, emirs, sheiks and presidents all over the Arab world and is trying to
persuade them that he is not in a monogamous relationship with the Jews.

His message boiled down to: Iran bad, Israel good, Iraq doing better.

Blessed is the peacemaker who comes bearing a $30 billion package of military
aid for Israel and a $20 billion package of Humvees and guided bombs for the
Arabs.

Like the slick Hollywood guy in ''Annie Hall'' who has a notion that he wants to
turn into a concept and then develop into an idea, W. has resumed his mantra of
having a vision that turns into freedom that could develop into global
democracy.

W.'s peace train quickly gave way to the warpath, however, with Mr. Bush
devoting a good chunk of time to the unfinished war in Iraq and the possibility
of a war with Iran.

In meetings with leaders, he privately pooh-poohed the National Intelligence
Estimate asserting that Iran had halted its nuclear weapons program in 2003. On
Fox News, he openly broke with intelligence analysts, telling Greta Van Susteren
about Iran: ''I believe they want a weapon, and I believe that they're trying to
gain the know-how as to how to make a weapon under the guise of a civilian
nuclear program.''

Less than a week after the president arrived in the Middle East, three violent
eruptions -- an Israeli raid killing at least 18 Palestinians, 13 of whom were
militants; an American Embassy car bombing in Beirut; and a luxury hotel
suicide-bombing in Kabul -- underscored how Sisyphean a task he has set for
himself.

''This is one of the results of the Bush visit,'' said Mahmoud Zahar, a Hamas
leader, as he went to a Gaza hospital to see the body of his son, a militant
killed in the battle. ''He encouraged the Israelis to kill our people.''

Arab TV offered an uncomfortable juxtaposition: Al Arabiya running the wretched
saga of Gaza children suffering from a lack of food and medicine during the
Israeli blockade, blending into the wretched excess scenes of W. being festooned
with rapper-level bling from royal hosts flush with gazillions from gouging us
on oil.

W.'s 11th-hour bid to save his legacy from being a shattered Iraq -- even as the
Iraqi defense minister admitted that American troops would be needed to help
with internal security until at least 2012 and border defense until at least
2018 -- recalled MTV's ''Cribs.''

At a dinner last night in the king's tentlike retreat, where the 8-foot
flat-screen TV in the middle of the room flashed Arab news, the president and
his advisers Elliott Abrams and Josh Bolten went native, lounging in
floor-length, fur-lined robes, as if they were Peter O'Toole and Omar Sharif.

In Abu Dhabi, Sheik Khalifa bin Zayed al-Nahyan gave the president  --  dubbed
''the Wolf of the Desert'' by a Kuwaiti poet -- a gigantic necklace made of
gold, diamonds, rubies and emeralds, so gaudy and cumbersome that even the
Secret Service agent carrying it seemed nonplussed. Here in Saudi Arabia, the
king draped W. with an emerald-and-ruby necklace that could have come from Ali
Baba's cave.

Time's Massimo Calabresi described the Kuwaiti emir's residence where W. dined
Friday as ''crass class'': ''Loud paintings of harems and the ruling Sabah clan
hang near Louis XVI enameled clocks and candlesticks in the long hallways.''

In Abu Dhabi, the president made a less-than-rousing speech about democracy
while staying in the less-than-democratic Emirates Palace hotel's
basketball-court-size Ruler's Suite -- an honor reserved for royalty and W. and
denied to Elton John, who is coming later this month to play the Palace.

The president's grandiose room included a ballroom, in case Mr. Bush wanted to
practice the tribal sword dancing he has been rather sheepishly doing with some
of his hosts, something between Zorba and Zorro. The $3 billion, seven-star,
84,114-square-foot pink marble hotel -- said to be the most expensive ever built
-- would make Trump blush. It glistens with 64,000 square feet of 22-carat gold
leaf, 1,000 chandeliers, 20,000 roses changed every day, 200 fountains, a dome
higher than St. Peter's, an archway larger than the Arc de Triomphe, a beach
with white sand shipped in from Algeria and a private heliport. The rooms,
scattered with rose petals, range from $1,598 to $12,251.

Puddle jumping through Arabia, the president saw his share of falcons in little
leather hoods -- presumably not a Gitmo reference -- and Arabian stallions,
including one retired stud from Texas -- presumably not a W. reference. But
there was a distinct dearth of wives and dissidents.

It does not bode well for the president's ability to push the Israelis and
Palestinians that he has done so little to push Musharraf on catching Osama,
despite our $10 billion endowment, or the Saudis on women's rights and human
rights, even with the $20 billion arms package.

At a press conference last night, the Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud
al-Faisal, was asked what the president and king had discussed about human
rights.

''About what?'' the prince repeated flatly.

''Human rights,'' Condi prompted.

''Human rights?'' the stately prince pondered, before shimmying out of the
question.

Though W. has made the issue of the progress of women in the Middle East a
central part of ''the freedom agenda'' -- he had a roundtable over the weekend
with Kuwaiti women on democracy and development -- he doesn't seem bothered that
17 years after his father protected the Saudis when Saddam invaded Kuwait, Saudi
women still can't drive or publicly display hair or skin and still get beheaded
and lashed because of archaic laws. Neither does the female secretary of state
of the United States.

''It's not allowed for ladies to use the gym,'' the Marriott desk clerk told me,
an American woman in an American franchise traveling with an American president.

W. was strangely upbeat throughout the trip -- ''Dates put you in a good mood,
right?'' he joked to reporters yesterday, specifying that he meant the fruit  --
even though back home the Republican candidates  were running from him and
clinging to Reagan.

The Saudi big shots I talked to were intrigued that W. is now more in the sway
of Condi than Bombs Away Cheney. They admire his intention about making peace,
even though they're skeptical that he has the time or competence to do it; and
they're sure that the Israelis need more of a shove than a nudge.

They are also dubious about his attempts to demonize and isolate Iran.

''We don't need America to dictate our enemies to us, especially when it's our
neighbor,'' said an insider at the Saudi royal court. The Saudis invited the
Iranian president, I'm-a-Dinner-Jacket, to their hajj pilgrimage last month.

Saudis and Palestinians grumbled that they find it hard to listen to the
president's high-flown paeans to democracy when he only acknowledges his brand
of democracy. When Hamas, Hezbollah and the Muslim Brotherhood won elections, W.
sought to undermine them. The results of the elections were certainly troubling,
but is democratization supposed to be about outcomes?

They also think W.'s plan cancels itself out. The Israelis don't have to stop
settlements if rockets are coming in from Gaza, and Abbas, the Palestinian
president, can't stop rockets from going out of an area he does not control.

The president who described himself at Galilee as ''a pilgrim'' makes peace
sound as easy as three faiths sharing, when history has shown that the hardest
thing on earth is three faiths sharing.

Asked by ABC's Terry Moran what he was thinking when he stood on the site where
Jesus performed miracles at the Sea of Galilee, W. replied: ''I reflected on the
story in the New Testament about the calm and the rough seas, because it was on
those very seas that the Lord was in the boat with the disciples, and they were
worried about the waves and the wind, and the sea calmed. That's what I
reflected on: the calm you can find in putting your faith in a higher power.''

Clearly, the man believes in miracles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORISM (87%); HIKING (78%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); IRAQ
WAR (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); HAMAS (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (63%); AIRPORTS
(57%)

COMPANY: FOX ENTERTAINMENT GROUP INC (81%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (81%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (81%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%); IRAQ
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             244 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congo Agrees to Peace Deal With Rebels

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal


Congo's government reached an agreement on Monday with a renegade general to end
an insurgency that has forced more than 400,000 people from their homes in the
country's volatile east in the past year and threatened to undermine the new
democratically elected government, according to Congolese officials and Western
diplomats involved in the negotiations.

Under the terms of the agreement, which was completed Monday and is expected to
be signed Tuesday after nearly two weeks of difficult negotiations in the
eastern city of Goma, the government and the rebel troops will withdraw from
some of their positions and United Nations peacekeeping forces will establish a
buffer zone.

A commission of Congolese officials and experts from the United States, the
European Union and the African Union will oversee the integration of the rebel
troops into the national army and the enforcement of a permanent cease-fire.

The rebels will also be granted amnesty on insurrection charges, which would
have carried the death penalty, but they could still face charges of war crimes
and crimes against humanity. The agreement will also apply to other militias
operating in eastern Congo.

The conflict between the Congolese government and a rebel army led by Laurent
Nkunda, a Congolese Tutsi general, was part of the deadly legacy of the Rwandan
genocide, which ensnared Congo in a vast regional conflict that began in 1996
and has limped on to the present despite a peace agreement formally ending the
war in Congo in 2003.

According to some estimates, the Congo war and its aftermath have killed more
than four million people, mostly because of disease and hunger, more than any
other conflict since World War II.

''The agreement has really been forged in the face of immense suffering of the
people of eastern Congo,'' said Anneke Van Woudenberg, a senior researcher for
Human Rights Watch, who was in Goma to observe the negotiations. ''What needs to
happen is all sides adhere to what they have signed so we see an end to the
suffering.''

General Nkunda had refused to surrender his command and integrate his troops
into the national army, as other armed groups had done, contending that
Congolese Tutsi faced a unique threat at the hands of the Rwandan Hutu
extremists who carried out the Rwandan genocide, in which 800,000 Tutsi and
moderate Hutu were slaughtered in 1994.

Many of the perpetrators in that conflict fled into Congo, then known as Zaire,
in 1994, and an untold number remain there.

Battles between General Nkunda's troops, government-allied militias and the
Rwandan Hutu fighters have spawned chaos in eastern Congo over the past year,
just as the country struggled to right itself after its first democratic
elections in more than four decades. The battles have also heightened ethnic
tensions in a region that has been torn by fighting among its many ethnic
groups.

The agreement follows a pact signed late last year in Nairobi, Kenya, between
the Congolese and Rwandan governments to disarm and repatriate the Rwandan Hutu
militias. Diplomats hope that taken together the two deals will help solve some
of the most intractable issues at the heart of Congo's seemingly interminable
conflict.

''The two agreements together really provided the processes we needed to unlock
this,'' said one Western diplomat close to the negotiations, who was not
authorized to speak for attribution. ''Now we just need the capacity to follow
through.''

The future of General Nkunda, one of the thorniest issues in eastern Congo, was
left out of the negotiations. Earlier efforts to persuade him to go into
temporary exile failed, and diplomats involved in the negotiations said his
status was put aside to avoid saddling the talks with yet another problem.

Joseph Kabila, Congo's president, was under enormous pressure to defeat General
Nkunda militarily. Many Congolese blame General Nkunda for the horrors that have
plagued North Kivu, the last remaining war zone in a country that has suffered
through more than a decade of regional conflict.

But a military assault on General Nkunda's positions in December ended in a
humiliating defeat for the Congolese Army, which was forced to flee positions it
had taken from the general's men just days earlier, leaving a trail of empty
water bottles, sardine cans and ammunition cartons.

Mr. Kabila and General Nkunda were also under intense pressure to reach
agreement from Western allies, who have spent billions of dollars on aid,
peacekeeping and organizing an election in Congo, with the United States in
particular playing a crucial role.

Timothy R. Shortley, senior adviser for conflict resolution to Assistant
Secretary Jendayi E. Frazer of the State Department, spent nearly two weeks
ferrying between government officials in Goma and General Nkunda's jungle
hide-out to press both sides to make a deal, according to negotiators and
observers.

While diplomats, analysts and human rights advocates hailed the agreement as a
historic step in a region torn by violence, many of the most difficult questions
remain unresolved, like the status of Mr. Nkunda, the precise arrangements for
ensuring the cease-fire and integrating the different forces into the national
army, and the potentially explosive return of thousands of Congolese Tutsi
living as refugees in Rwanda.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Rebel soldiers loyal to Laurent Nkunda, a Congolese Tutsi
general who is battling the government, in a village known as a Nkunda
stronghold in the eastern North Kivu Province last month. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY
ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (92%); PEACE PROCESS
(91%); ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING
(75%); WORLD WAR II (75%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); WAR CRIMES (72%); AMNESTY (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (70%); ETHNIC GROUPS (69%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (67%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (67%); ETHNICITY (60%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (60%); EUROPEAN
UNION (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); AFRICAN UNION (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (54%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (92%); AFRICA
(79%); SENEGAL (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (71%)

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             247 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 22, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Used a British Island to Transport Terrorism Suspects

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: LONDON


In tones freighted with frustration, Britain's foreign secretary, David
Miliband, told the House of Commons on Thursday that, ''contrary to earlier
explicit assurances,'' the Central Intelligence Agency had confirmed using an
American-operated airfield on a British island in the Indian Ocean for refueling
two ''rendition'' flights carrying terrorism suspects in 2002.

The American acknowledgment contradicted previous assurances by the United
States to Britain's government that no such flights had landed on British
territory or passed through British airspace. Each flight carried a single
detainee and stopped on the island of Diego Garcia.

Although the C.I.A. attributed its earlier denials to a ''flawed records
search,'' the admission could add to the animosity the government here has
aroused over its alliance with the United States in the wars in Afghanistan and
Iraq.

Mr. Miliband's statement prompted protests from members of Parliament of various
parties and from British-based human rights groups that have contended for years
that Britain was a knowing or unknowing partner in the American use of rendition
flights. The term gained much of its notoriety from the American practice after
Sept. 11, 2001, of transporting terrorism suspects secretly to other countries
for interrogation.

The director of the Central Intelligence Agency, Gen. Michael V. Hayden,
informed British officials of the 2002 flights last week during a visit to
London. He issued a statement on Thursday to the agency's staff in Washington
saying that a fresh review of agency records had shown that the C.I.A. had erred
in assuring Britain previously that ''there had been no rendition flights
involving their soil or airspace'' since the Sept. 11 attacks.

Mr. Miliband said that he had received a personal apology from Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice and that she had told him she shared his ''deep regret''
about the earlier false denials.

General Hayden said in his statement, ''That information, supplied in good
faith, turned out to be wrong.''

He added: ''That we found this mistake ourselves, and that we brought it to the
attention of the British government, in no way changes or excuses the reality
that we were in the wrong. An important part of intelligence work, inherently
urgent, complex and uncertain, is to take responsibility for errors and to learn
from them.''

Mr. Miliband told the House of Commons he was ''very sorry indeed'' to have to
revise the Labor government's repeated assurances  that it knew of no American
rendition flights involving British airspace or airfields. The British
assurances,  in 2005, 2006 and 2007, were given, among others, by Tony Blair,
who said in 2005 as prime minister that he was ''not prepared to believe'' that
the Americans had broken faith with Britain over the issue.

''The House and its members will be deeply disappointed at this news, and about
its late emergence,'' Mr. Miliband said.

Prime Minister Gordon Brown, visiting Brussels, spoke in similar terms. ''It is
unfortunate that this was not known, and it was unfortunate it happened without
us knowing that it had happened,'' he said.

The prime minister has been struggling with low poll ratings driven in part by
government mishaps. Mr. Brown has also been working to replace the close
relationship Mr. Blair had with President Bush with a more wary stance and
moving rapidly to draw down Britain's remaining 4,200 troops in Iraq.

In his account, General Hayden, the C.I.A. director, said that neither of the
detainees aboard the rendition flights that refueled at Diego Garcia ''was ever
part of the C.I.A.'s high-value terrorist interrogation program.''

This appeared to be his way of saying what Mr. Miliband, in his Commons
statement, made explicit: that the suspects were not taken to any of the
C.I.A.'s network of secret prisons, and that they were not subjected to stress
techniques that critics of the C.I.A. program have described as tantamount to
torture.

General Hayden said one of the detainees ''was ultimately transferred to
Guantanamo,'' the American military prison in  Cuba, while the other ''was
returned to his home country,'' identified as Morocco by State Department
officials in Washington on Thursday.

General Hayden also used the statement to refute accusations by human rights
groups that the C.I.A. ''had a holding facility'' for terrorist suspects on
Diego Garcia, a 40-mile-long island leased by Britain about 1,000 miles
southwest of the southern tip of India. ''That is false,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Foreign Secretary David Miliband telling Parliament that the
C.I.A. had used British territory to refuel ''rendition'' flights. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY PARBUL TV, VIA REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); ISLANDS & REEFS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%)

PERSON: DAVID MILIBAND (90%); TONY BLAIR (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); MICHAEL
HAYDEN (57%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (97%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); BRITISH
INDIAN OCEAN TERRITORY (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             252 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 8, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ethnic Divide Worsens as Sri Lanka Conflict Escalates

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1245 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


There are no eyes on this war. A truce between the Sri Lankan government and the
separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam is over, and gone are the Nordic
monitors who kept watch over it.

The government has refused entry to United Nations human rights monitors.
Independent journalists are not allowed anywhere near the front lines. Only
occasionally does a glimpse of the war's damage surface, as when the Red Cross
confirmed that in the first six weeks of this year alone, 180 civilians had been
killed, a toll it called ''appalling.''

While it is impossible to gauge what is happening on the battlefield, that is
where, it seems, the government has placed its bets to settle the long-running
ethnic war, once and for all. As it does, the public mood in this country is
more divided than in many years, like an old scratch that has festered into a
gaping wound.

The new government offensive against the ethnic Tamil insurgents, who have
fought for a quarter-century to carve a separate homeland from this island, has
received ample public support, at least among the ethnic Sinhalese who are the
majority.

The enthusiasm can be felt in the large numbers signing up for the army, or in
the citizens' groups on patrol against suspicious activity, or in the voices of
ordinary Sinhalese, who continue to brave checkpoints, suicide bombings and
double-digit inflation in hopes of a military victory over the rebels.

''We have economic problems, we have other problems, there is inflation, but
people are tolerating it because the war is going great,'' said Premaratne
Dawatage, whose son is in the navy, describing the country's mood the other day
at a crowded bus stand here in the capital.

Such enthusiasm is hard to find among minority Tamils. Anxiety prevails,
sometimes panic. They say they stay off the streets in the evenings for fear of
arrest or abduction. They quietly produce identity cards at security checkpoints
and say little when theirs are more closely scrutinized.

Tamil neighborhoods are raided at night. Few people are willing to speak their
minds, for fear that any criticism of the war effort will be construed as
support for the rebels, or worse, that they will be detained under stringent
emergency laws.

S. Hariharasharma, 20, desperately searching for a sponsor to help him emigrate
to Britain, recounted one incident, and it echoed the recollections of many
young Tamils here.

He was on the bus home from the British Council library one afternoon when
police officers got on and demanded to see passengers' identity cards. He began
to tremble, he said, because he knew his identity would be suspect: a young man,
a newcomer from Tamil-majority Jaffna in the north, unable to speak the Sinhala
language.

''Somehow I managed to hide my fear,'' he said. ''It is a must to be normal.''

And then, a confession: ''It's acting, it's acting, and it's humiliating.''

That day, the acting worked. The police checked his identity card and let him
continue. By the time he reached home, no more than half an hour late, his
mother was hysterical with fear. It was barely 5:30 p.m.

The unraveling of the cease-fire, which began with a series of suspected rebel
attacks on soldiers nearly two years ago, was followed by the military's seizure
of rebel-held territory in the east and then, by late last year, a full military
assault on Tamil Tiger redoubts in the north.

In January, President Mahinda Rajapaksa's administration called off the 2002
cease-fire accord, which by then had become a truce in name only. Cease-fire
monitors packed up and left.

Alongside the conventional war, a shadow war has been waged in government-held
cities, including Colombo. In a report released Thursday,  Human Rights Watch
blamed the government for a string of unexplained disappearances; the victims
were largely Tamils.

The United Nations, having recorded more disappearances in Sri Lanka last year
than in any other country, pressed to send human rights monitors, a bid the
United States and many other countries supported. Mr. Rajapaksa's administration
refused.

On Thursday,  a foreign panel invited by Sri Lanka to observe a government
commission's investigations into rights abuses said it was leaving the country,
frustrated by a lack of support from the government.

''There has been, and continues to be, a lack of political and institutional
will to investigate and inquire into the cases before the commission,'' the
panel, known as the International Independent Group of Eminent Persons, said in
a statement.

Both the government and rebels tend to exaggerate battlefield casualties.
Propaganda battles propaganda. Much of the public faith in the war effort relies
on the pronouncements of the Sri Lankan Army chief, Lt. Gen. Sarath Fonseka. In
an interview in February, the general, a survivor of an attack by a Tamil Tiger
suicide bomber, said his forces killed nearly half of the guerrillas'
10,000-strong cadres in the north in the past 14 months.

The rebel organization will disintegrate soon, he predicted, particularly if his
forces succeed in taking out the rebel leader, Velupillai  Prabhakaran. (The
Defense Ministry has said it has lost barely 100 of its own troops so far this
year.)

On previous occasions, General Fonseka has vowed to get Mr. Prabhakaran by the
end of June, and finish off the rebellion by the end of the year. This time, he
hedged.

''At the rate they are dying, they will not be able to survive for a long
time,'' he said. ''I'm not looking at the horoscope of Prabhakaran. But as a
military officer, I can say if it continues in the same way, unless some miracle
takes place, and Prabhakaran becomes a superman and starts doing wonders, he
will have to face reality.''

How long General Fonseka can sustain public enthusiasm with the war effort
without regaining Tiger-held territory is uncertain. He acknowledged that the
front lines had barely moved since the start of the new push into the north, but
said he would rather kill rebels than drive his troops into rebel territory.
Implicit in his remarks was that if his troops moved too fast, the Tamil Tigers
could do more damage to them than it  was worth.

Meanwhile, any political track to quell the rebellion seems to have been set
aside. A long-awaited government proposal to devolve power to the Tamil-majority
north and east has met with widespread criticism, even from onetime Tamil
backers of the administration.

''They are not interested in winning the hearts and minds of the Tamil people,''
said Lanka Nesiah, a retired banker and ethnic Tamil who voted for Mr. Rajapaksa
in the 2005 elections but who has grown disenchanted with his government.

As the military pushes harder into the north, attacks on civilian targets here
in the capital have been more frequent, and all are widely attributed to the
Tamil Tigers. One of the most chilling came in early February, when a suicide
bomber blew herself up at a crowded Colombo railway station, killing 16 people,
including members of a high school baseball team.

The attacks sowed fear and sent a powerful message: The insurgents had people
and explosives at the ready in the heart of the heavily fortified capital,
despite its many checkpoints.

All over Colombo are posters calling for public vigilance. They show a map of
the island nation, with an eye wide open in the middle.

''Are you alert?'' it asks. ''If you are, your village and your country are
safe.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sri Lankans endure disappearances, raids and explosions, like
this one in Colombo in February, which caused no deaths.
 Security is tight, and tensions high, in Colombo. Some minority Tamils fear
wrongly being arrested during checks like these.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY PABLO
BARTHOLOMEW FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INFLATION (86%);
ECONOMIC NEWS (86%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); TERRORISM (76%); BOMBINGS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(72%); WRITERS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (70%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (70%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (68%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             254 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dalai Lama Condemns China For Suppressing Uprising in Tibet

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Hari Kumar contributed reporting from Dharamsala,
and Jim Yardley from Beijing.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1393 words

DATELINE: DHARAMSALA, India


The Dalai Lama accused China on Sunday of waging ''cultural genocide'' against
his followers in Tibet and called for an international inquiry into the
suppression of protests there, his strongest defense to date of Tibetan
Buddhists who have staged an uprising against Chinese rule.

Speaking at the headquarters of the Tibetan government in exile, the Dalai Lama
endorsed the right of his people to press grievances peacefully against the
Chinese authorities, and said he would not ask Tibetans to surrender to Chinese
military police by midnight on Monday, as Beijing has demanded. He said that he
had no moral authority to do so and that Tibetans had beseeched him not to
capitulate to that demand.

''Whether the Chinese government admits it or not, a nation with an ancient
cultural heritage is actually facing serious dangers,'' the Dalai Lama told
reporters during an emotionally charged news conference here. ''Whether
intentionally or unintentionally, some kind of cultural genocide is taking
place.''

His comments reflected the inflamed passions among Tibetans abroad, who view the
revolts, the largest since the late 1980s, as a watershed moment.

Some Tibetans hope to press for outright independence from China. They argue
that they have an unprecedented political opportunity to push for change as
China prepares to be the host country for the Olympic Games in August and faces
intense  scrutiny of its human rights record.

The Dalai Lama, 72, who heads the Tibetan government in exile and serves as the
spiritual leader of Tibetan Buddhism, does not call for Tibetan independence and
has remained far more cautious, fearing that the reprisals could worsen in
Tibet. But his tone on Sunday and the words he chose to describe the Chinese
crackdown are the strongest he has used since his representatives began
negotiations with the Chinese in 2002.

Though the impact of the Dalai Lama's words was difficult to gauge, they were
almost certain to further enrage Beijing. Even as he spoke, there were
unconfirmed reports that demonstrations by ethnic Tibetans had spread to the
nearby Chinese provinces of Sichuan, Gansu and Qinghai.

The developments also appeared to diminish the Dalai Lama's hopes of persuading
Chinese leaders to allow him to return to Tibet, his goal in talks between his
representatives and Communist Party leaders.

''They have no experience how to deal with problems through talk, only
suppress,'' he said.

Aides to the Dalai Lama said they had confirmed 80 killings on March 13 and 14
in Lhasa,  Tibet's capital, including 26 victims killed just outside Drapchi
prison. Tibetan exiles in Dharamsala said they had also received news that at
least two Buddhist monks had set themselves afire in protest. The claims could
not be independently confirmed. China says the death toll in the recent unrest
is much lower.

China says Tibet has been part of its territory for hundreds of years. It has
exercised full control only since 1951.

Several times during the news conference, the Dalai Lama reminded reporters that
he was not calling for secession. ''As far as material development concerned, we
get much benefit'' from being part of China, he said. He also said he remained
supportive of the Olympics' being held in China but called on the international
community to exercise its ''moral responsibility'' to remind Beijing about human
rights.

Asked whether he endorsed the protests in Tibet, during which, the Chinese
authorities say, ethnic Tibetans assaulted Han Chinese, the Dalai Lama said
Tibetans were entitled to air grievances peacefully. ''Protest -- peaceful way
express their deep resentment -- is a right,'' he said.

The unrest comes during the twilight of the Dalai Lama's life, during which he
has achieved awards and acclaim but little progress to resolve the fate of
Tibet, which he fled for India after a failed uprising in 1959.

China has consolidated its hold on the frontier region, most recently extending
a rail line that many Tibetans believe will spread Han Chinese domination.

Some Tibetans say they fear that Beijing is simply waiting for the Dalai Lama to
die in hopes that his influence  will be difficult  to replicate.

The latest clashes in Lhasa are by far the largest since the late 1980s, when
China declared martial law and violently suppressed demonstrations there,
leaving scores, perhaps hundreds, of ethnic Tibetans dead. The Dalai Lama said
Sunday that he feared such a crackdown  again.

''I do feel helpless,'' he said. ''I feel very sad, very serious, very anxious.
Cannot do anything.''

The Dalai Lama said the Chinese ultimatum to Tibetan protesters to surrender
reminded him of 1959. Asked if he could stop the protesters from defying the
deadline, he replied, ''I have no such power.''

He went on to say that he had spoken with a caller in Tibet on Saturday who
said, ''Please don't ask us to stop.'' The Dalai Lama promised he would not,
even though he expected the Chinese authorities to suppress the protests with
force.

''Now we really need miracle power,'' he said, before laughing starkly. ''But
miracle seems unrealistic.''

He took questions for more than an hour inside a temple in the lap of
snow-capped Himalayas. The limits of his influence, and even his ''middle path''
message of freedom for Tibetans, rather than total independence for Tibet, came
into sharp relief as thousands of mostly young Tibetan exiles raised a chorus of
stridently anti-Chinese slogans and called for outright secession.

''We, the young people, feel independence is our birthright,'' said Dolma
Choephel, 34, a social worker active with the Tibetan Youth Congress, who went
to a demonstration on Sunday morning outside the gates of the main town temple.
''We understand the limitations of the Dalai Lama's approach. What we got after
six rounds of talks -- this violence?''

She was referring to the six negotiating sessions between the Dalai Lama's
representatives and Chinese authorities over the past six years.

Just behind where Ms. Choephel stood, Buddhist monks began a hunger strike.
Protesters laid Chinese flags on the road, inviting cars and pedestrians to
trample them. Later, thousands streamed down the hill, to Dharamsala town, the
largest Tibetan settlement in India. Many had painted their faces with the
colors of the Tibetan flag.

''Long live the Dalai Lama,'' they chanted, making it plain that, despite their
more radical calls, they remained loyal to him.

For the second consecutive day, protests appeared to have spread into
Tibetan-populated regions beyond Tibet. Buddhist monks and the police reportedly
clashed in Abe County in Sichuan Province. A crowd of about 200 Tibetan
protesters burned a local police station, according to news agency reports. One
witness said a police officer was killed in the confrontation.

The India-based Tibet Center for Human Rights and Democracy reported that the
police had killed at least eight Tibetan protesters. Meanwhile, monks at a
monastery in Qinghai Province defied an order to remain inside the Rongwo
Monastery, according to The Associated Press.

A day after Buddhist monks and other Tibetans demonstrated in Xiahe in Gansu
Province, residents said the military police had secured the city. Witnesses
said numerous people were injured in Xiahe after the Tibetans hurled rocks and
the police responded with tear gas.

Meanwhile, Chinese military police continued to canvass the streets of Lhasa on
Sunday in what has become a virtual lockdown of the city. More than 200
transport vehicles, each carrying as many as 60 military policemen, had moved
into the central part of Lhasa, according to a Hong Kong television crew there.

Foreigners were blocked from traveling to Lhasa, while some tourists trapped
there during the riots said the authorities were arranging for them to leave.
Some witnesses reported continued unrest in small pockets of the city and
described hearing the sound of gunshots.

India has been the host country for Tibetan refugees since the Dalai Lama's
exodus, but on condition that they not protest against the Chinese government on
Indian soil. India's efforts to improve ties with China in recent years have
made the Tibet issue exceptionally tricky. The Dalai Lama, while acknowledging
India's hospitality, described the government's official position as
''overcautious.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The Dalai Lama accused China of waging ''cultural genocide.''
(PHOTOGRAPH BY GURINDER OSAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg. A1)
 Tibetans held a vigil on Sunday in Dharamsala, India, where the Tibetan
government in exile is based. Protesters have made more strident demands in
recent days than the Dalai Lama has. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MANAN VATSYAYANA/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES) (pg A6).  MAP (pg. A6)  Map of Lhasa in China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); RELIGION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); OLYMPICS (70%); POLITICS (70%); ARMED FORCES
(55%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (50%)

PERSON: DALAI LAMA (90%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (97%); XIZANG, CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%);
NORTHWEST CHINA (92%); GANSU, CHINA (79%); QINGHAI, CHINA (79%); SICHUAN, CHINA
(79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); TIBET (99%); INDIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             266 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 23, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Those Leaders Who Enable Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 815 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Torture Sessions'' (editorial, April 20):

You say that it will take a new president and Congress to finally see
accountability on torture. With America's global leadership and moral authority
on the line, nine months is too long to wait.

Fortunately, the remaining presidential candidates are all on record opposing
torture and official cruelty. Anyone who followed the early presidential debates
-- when many of the candidates sought to outdo one another on who was more in
favor of abusive interrogation -- knows that this outcome was not a given.

Human Rights First has had the privilege over the last few years of working with
a growing number of retired senior military leaders to share their messages with
candidates and the public. They believe, as we do, that human rights and
national security are mutually reinforcing, and that resort to torture and cruel
treatment is wrong and counterproductive.

The presidential candidates seem to have gotten the message. But ultimately, it
is up to the American people to keep the pressure on all of our current and
future elected officials to demand an end to torture and abuse.

Michael Posner

President, Human Rights First

New York, April 21, 2008

To the Editor:

You note that shameful legal opinions from the Justice Department helped grease
the way for torture administered by agents of the United States government.

I hope that like Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile and others, John Yoo, a Justice
Department lawyer who was the author of some of those memos, will eventually be
subject to an international indictment for his work on these policies, which
violate international law.

I know the American government would view such an indictment with contempt -- as
indeed it currently does the international standards such an indictment would
help uphold -- but at least it would send a clear message of disgust from the
international community.

Holding accountable those who administer the means of violating international
law would help make those who come after them think twice before doing so.  Mike
Kelly

Bainbridge Island, Wash., April 20, 2008

To the Editor:

If the torture issue and other malfeasances committed by members of this
administration, past and present, are swept under the rug, they will rot away
the fabric of our society.

It is not only necessary to hold open, televised hearings on what has been done
in our name, but also paramount that we hold people accountable for what they
have done.

Anything less and we do not deserve to call ourselves a democracy guided by our
laws and the Constitution.

Hendrik E. Sadi

Yonkers, April 20, 2008

To the Editor:

Now we learn that President Bush and the rest of our top administrative leaders
authorized torture. Where does this leave former Specialist Charles A. Graner
Jr. and former Pvt. Lynndie R. England, who were sentenced to jail time for the
Abu Ghraib abuses?

These low-level soldiers cannot be pardoned for following the orders of their
commander in chief. That was ruled an inadequate defense many decades ago during
the Nuremburg trials after the Nazi abuses of World War II.

But what do we do with those in the Central Intelligence Agency who used worse
methods on prisoners than stacking them naked? And what do we do with Mr. Bush
and his team?

Gene Menzies

Rodeo, Calif., April 20, 2008

To the Editor:

You end your editorial about the administration's torture policies with a call
for a full understanding of the truth so that we can ''ensure it does not happen
again.'' If only it could be that simple.

What has been truly frightening about the abuse of our Constitution by President
Bush and his administration over the last eight years is how easily they have
done it.

With an intimidated Congress, a compliant judiciary and a mostly apathetic
citizenry, presidential powers have been unchecked. Our constitutional
protections, long thought to be strong, are indeed fragile.  Douglas A. Racine

Richmond, Vt., April 21, 2008

To the Editor:

Thank you for calling for greater inquiry into the Bush administration's
violations of the War Crimes Act, the Anti-Torture Act, the Convention Against
Torture, the Geneva Conventions and other domestic and international laws.

It is not ''backward looking'' to seek answers and ultimately take legal action
where the laws have been violated. We don't hear prosecutors in this country
refuse to investigate and prosecute a criminal suspect because that would be too
''backward looking.''

Yet when mounting evidence suggests criminality at the highest level of
government, the politicians (both Democrats and Republicans) quickly protect
each other with rhetoric about ''looking forward, not backward.''

Imagine if every other criminal suspect in this country were given such
solicitude!  Daniel Schramm

South Royalton, Vt., April 20, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY SAM FRIEDMAN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INDICTMENTS (86%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); WRITERS (73%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); LAWYERS (67%); SENTENCING (60%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(59%); JAIL SENTENCING (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (72%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             271 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Official Raises Alarms Over Killings In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Taimoor Shah contributed reporting from Kandahar,
Afghanistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 508 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


A special investigator for the United Nations on Thursday accused foreign
intelligence agencies of conducting nighttime raids and killing civilians in
Afghanistan with impunity.

The investigator, Philip Alston, would not specify the nationalities of the
intelligence agencies. But the descriptions he gave of units operating out of
two American bases in southern and eastern Afghanistan suggested that he was
accusing the Central Intelligence Agency or American unconventional-warfare
units of operating without accountability to the Afghan government or the
foreign military command in the country. Afghan forces working with foreign
units were not under the control of the Afghan government, he said.

American officials in Afghanistan declined to comment on Mr. Alston's
accusations.

Mr. Alston, who directs a center for human rights and global justice at New York
University's Law School, spoke at a news conference after a 12-day visit to
Afghanistan as the United Nations special rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary
or arbitrary executions. He reports  to the United Nations Human Rights Council.

On Thursday, a suicide bomber  killed 14 people and wounded 25, among them
police officers and civilians, in an explosion in a town in southwestern
Afghanistan. The target appeared to be a convoy of police vehicles,  said the
provincial governor, Rohul Aman.

Mr. Alston said he had concluded that civilian casualties in Afghanistan were
intolerably high, and often could  be avoided. The lack of accountability, and
the complacency at so many  killings by the police and international forces, was
staggering, he said.

His comments seemed at odds with claims by NATO  that civilian casualties had
been greatly reduced in recent months.

International military forces have killed as many as 200 civilians in the first
four months of this year, often in aerial bombings, but also  in joint
operations with Afghan security forces, he said. The Taliban  have killed 300
civilians in the same period, he said. The Taliban may be attacking  military
targets, but 95 percent, probably more, of their victims were civilians, he
said, citing figures compiled by the United Nations' Afghan mission.

Mr. Alston said he regretted that the government had given him a clear message
not to approach the Taliban. He said  it would be useful to talk to the
insurgents and make the case for them to avoid civilian casualties. ''The
Taliban exist, they are engaged in widespread killings; we have an obligation
not to stand on formalities, but to seek to diminish civilian casualties and
killings,'' he said.

But he reserved his strongest criticism for the two American-run military bases,
one known as Camp Ghecko, on the outskirts of Kandahar, and one in the eastern
province of Nangarhar. ''It is absolutely unacceptable for heavily armed
internationals accompanied by heavily armed Afghan forces to be wandering around
conducting dangerous raids that too often result in killings without anyone
taking responsibility for them,'' he said in his report.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); GLOBALIZATION (78%); TERRORISM (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); MILITARY BASES (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (69%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (69%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (67%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             274 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: May 23, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2177 words


INTERNATIONAL

IMMIGRANTS FLEE SOUTH AFRICA

As Hate Mobs Continue Terrorism

Feneck Mgawa moved to South Africa to seek work and send cash to his family back
home in Malawi. But after being beaten with sticks and pelted with rocks by a
hateful mob, Mr. Mgawa intends to leave the country. He is part of a stunning
reverse migration of foreigners desperate to leave South Africa after more than
a week of anti-immigrant violence that has left 42 dead.  PAGE A10

DEADLY HELICOPTER STRIKE

An American helicopter strike killed eight civilians, including two children,
during an operation against ''known terrorists'' working with the Sunni
insurgent group Al Qaeda near the northern Iraqi town of Baiji, the Iraqi police
said. The episode may inflame anti-American feelings already present from the
admission that an American sniper had used a Koran for target practice. PAGE A16

CUTBACKS IN MEXICO'S DRUG PLAN

Congress has scaled back on President Bush's anti-drug plans for Mexico and put
human rights conditions on some of the aid, drawing fire from some Mexicans who
accuse American lawmakers of meddling in their country's internal affairs. At
issue is the performance of Mexico's army and the police, which have been
accused by human rights organizations of engaging in abuses as they chase down
the country's drug cartels. PAGE A6

HOPES FOR TROOP REDUCTION IN IRAQ

President Bush's nominees for commander of forces in the Middle East and senior
commander in Baghdad told a Senate hearing that troop reductions might be
possible this fall. But they acknowledged that Iraqi security forces would
probably be unable to take the leading role in all provinces of the country this
year.  PAGE A16

ATTACKS CONTINUE NEAR BORDER

A Palestinian suicide bomber detonated a truck packed with explosives near the
Gaza-Israel border, killing himself and causing damage, but no injuries, on the
Israeli side. It was the latest in a series of attacks at the border crossings
after the Islamic militant group Hamas took control of Gaza.   PAGE A14

Ruling Party Cements Power  A16

A Premier's Personal Troubles  A14

NATIONAL

NEW DRUGS RAISE HOPES

For Brain Cancer Treatment

Cancer drugs have been unable to do much to improve survival rates for brain
cancer, including the type recently diagnosed in Senator Edward M. Kennedy. But
Avastin, already widely used to treat other types of cancer, is leading a pack
of new drugs that some experts hope can improve the outlook.   PAGE A20

SENATE PASSES VETERANS' BENEFITS

Twenty-five Republican senators broke with President Bush and voted for a major
expansion of veterans benefits as part of a bill to finance another year of the
wars in Iraq and Afghanistan. The proposal, adopted by a veto-proof vote of 75
to 22, also provides money for extended unemployment insurance benefits and
other domestic programs to which Mr. Bush has objected. The bill now goes back
to the House, where its future course is somewhat uncertain.   PAGE A20

THE MACHINERY OF GOVERNMENT

Congress, efficient? A 34-page section of the 673-page farm bill was missing
from the package sent to President Bush (who vetoed it). So the House, which a
day earlier had voted to override the veto, voted again on the whole 673 pages
and passed it. And it gets even more complicated in the Senate.  PAGE A23

PANEL SUBPOENAS ROVE

The House Judiciary Committee issued a subpoena to Karl Rove, the former chief
political adviser at the White House, pressing its inquiry into possible
political influence in Justice Department prosecutions. Mr. Rove's lawyer said
his client would not appear, on instructions from the White House, and accused
the committee chairman of ''provoking a gratuitous confrontation.''  PAGE A21

F.D.A. TO EXPAND DRUG SCRUTINY

Federal health officials announced a plan to use information on Medicare claims
to assess almost immediately the risks of drugs. Now, months or even years pass
before officials learn of unexpected side effects that can be fatal. Researchers
praised the government initiative, but many said its fruits would take years to
realize.  PAGE  A17

A Fire's Costs and Benefits   A17

Subsidy Proposal for Pipeline   A20

metro

THE PUBLIC VICTIMS

Of a Private Turf War

The murders are so routine the mourning has become a familiar ritual at the
Redfern Houses in Far Rockaway, Queens. Invariably, those killed are young.
Sometimes they are the intended targets, other times they are not. Most are
victims of a private war over money, turf and drugs. Police Commissioner Raymond
W. Kelly visited to announce plans to combat the violence.  PAGE B1

BLOOMBERG WON'T TESTIFY

Saying that he did not want ''a media show,'' a federal judge ruled that Mayor
Michael R. Bloomberg cannot testify at the pending civil trial of a Georgia gun
dealer accused of creating a public nuisance in New York by selling weapons that
were later used to commit crimes in the city. ''I don't see any reason for the
mayor to be here,'' the judge said.   PAGE B3

SPORTS

COMING BACK DOWN TO EARTH

After Success Down Under

Tennis's newest star, Jo-Wilfried Tsonga, beat four top-15 players, including
Rafael Nadal, on his way to the Australian Open finals. But he is not expected
to have the same kind of run on home soil at the French Open. There is that
not-so-little problem of playing on the slow red clay. And, in general, things
have changed considerably for him since Australia.   PAGE D1

RUNNING INDY ON ALMOST EMPTY

Of the three women driving in Sunday's Indianapolis 500, Sarah Fisher is the
only one who is also an owner, and the first woman in 30 years to have filled
both roles at the 500. But it hasn't been completely smooth -- like when she
lost her primary corporate sponsor. But fans pitched in to help, and things are
looking better now, with a new sponsor.   PAGE D2

HANDICAPPING BEIJING

The coming Summer Olympic Games in China are a bit hard to handicap. Will
sympathy over the recent earthquake trump complaints about the country's
complicity in Darfur? And what will be the medal results produced by the
resources it has been pouring into the athletic effort? Sports of The Times,
Harvey Araton.   PAGE D1

SPRINTER ACKNOWLEDGES DRUG USE

The Olympic gold medalist Antonio Pettigrew acknowledged in federal court that
he used performance-enhancing drugs from 1997 to 2001, when he was one of the
world's top 400-meter runners. The admission took place at the trial here of his
former longtime coach, Trevor Graham, who is accused of lying to federal agents
in 2004 about whether he set up athletes with banned drugs.   PAGE D2

OBITUARIES

J.C. HUREWITZ, 93

A Columbia University professor, his voluminous research, belief in the
importance of local histories and evenhanded scholarship contributed depth and
complexity to the emerging field of Middle Eastern studies starting in 1950.
PAGE B7

JAN HIRD POKORNY, 83

A Czech-born architect, his New York firm became known for restoring and
adapting historic buildings for reuse. He spent much of the last decade, from
1997 to 2007, as an often wryly outspoken member of the New York City Landmarks
Preservation Commission.  PAGE B7

WILFRID MELLERS, 94

An English musicologist, composer, critic and teacher, he published more than 20
books on subjects ranging from 17th-century English and French composers to the
music of the Beatles and Bob Dylan.  PAGE B7

BUSINESS

WHAT HAPPENS HERE

Is Inexpensive Here

The approach of the crucial summer travel season has tourism marketers looking
for ways to overcome travel inertia caused by rising gasoline prices and
airfares. As a result, feel-good slogans like Las Vegas's ''What happens here
stays here'' are giving way to harder-hitting pleas and promises of bargains.
PAGE C3

THE USUAL SUMMER SUSPECTS

It must be close to summer if Congress is raking oil company executives over the
coals, a show that went into its second day. And there is talk by lawmakers of
various ways to provide relief at the pump. But none are likely to reduce prices
at the pump, as the players well know, so they just ran through the usual
script.   PAGE C1

EASING PAIN, OR DUMPING RICE?

The Japanese government says the country plans to send at least 220,000 tons of
rice to the Philippines, and possibly Africa, to ease the suffering of poor
nations punished by rising rice prices. Critics, including some in Washington,
say that could set a bad precedent for dumping. But opposing the plan could put
the United States in a delicate diplomatic position.  PAGE C3

UBS MOVES TO RAISE CAPITAL

The Swiss banking giant, UBS, said it would raise more than $15 billion by
issuing sharply discounted shares. It is the second time that UBS has had to
raise funds since the credit markets tightened last year with the collapse of
the American subprime housing market. It is issuing 760 million new shares at 21
francs each, 31 percent below the Wednesday closing price.   PAGE C5

Possible Airline Downgrades   C4

WEEKEND

SO MANY BOOKS, SURE,

But Are They Worth the Time?

William Grimes felt challenged, and a bit insulted, by the title: ''1001 Books
You Must Read Before You Die.'' So of course he had to find out more. And of
course he found points of disagreement, like this: ''Not only is it not
necessary to read 'Interview With the Vampire' by Anne Rice before you die, it
is also probably not necessary to read it even if, like Lestat, you are never
going to die.''  PAGE E29

TWO PROVOCATEURS

There is reason to be thankful, at times, that film critics stand between us and
the movies. A.O. Scott, for example, has invested more than four hours of his
life on ''Che,'' Steven Soderbergh's ''digitally shot, Spanish-language epic
about a Marxist militant.'' For various reasons it is altogether unclear whether
many of the rest of us will do the same.  PAGE E1

THE SOUNDS OF SUMMER

Summer has various associations with music, not the least being the open-air
amphitheater show. But while it's a crucial time for singles, it hasn't been for
albums. Until now. New albums by Coldplay, Usher, Lil Wayne, Nas, T.I.,
Slipknot, the Game, Solange Knowles and the Jonas Brothers are among the what
Billboard magazine counts as 180 significant records coming out in warm weather.
PAGE E1

REVISITING THAT FUN 2000 VOTE

In case you've forgotten, what with the various intervening events, the Florida
vote count in the 2000 presidential election was a big deal. So big that HBO is
about to offer ''Recount,'' which Alessandra Stanley calls ''an astute and
deliciously engrossing film.'' And, she reminds, presidential voting is again on
people's minds. And Florida again has a big role.  PAGE E1

Woman Troubles  E3

Giants Amid the Blooms  E23

Afghanistan's Hidden Treasures   E28

ESCAPES

LIVING AN ARTISAN'S LIFE,

At Least for a Weekend

The Roycroft Campus in East Aurora, N.Y., a nonprofit corporation, offers
classes and tours to visitors interested in print-  and jewelry-making, painting
and metalwork. It is where would-be craftsmen can learn to suffer quite
literally for their art, and can hear ''Don't worry. We can fix that.'' many
times over the course of a weekend.   PAGE F1

PUTTING OUT THE 'WILLKOMMEN' MAT

It is 650 square feet of white walls, windows, ceiling and rafters three blocks
from the beach in Venice, Calif., that had served as a surfer's crash pad and
was offered ''as is'' when the actor Joel Grey came upon it. ''O.K., this is
it,'' he said, and took a lease on what he now calls his ''ad hoc'' house.  PAGE
F1

A RAMBLIN' KIND OF GUY

Back in 1968, at the age of 14, Jim Dworschack bought his first Nash, a 1948
Model 600. The next year he founded the Nash Car Club of America. Some may find
the find the devotion puzzling, others understandable. ''I don't have any
rational explanation,'' Mr. Dworschack said. ''A '50 Nash was the family car, my
dad liked it a lot, and I guess it rubbed off.''   PAGE F6

Havens: Logan Martin Lake, Ala.  F3

Jazz and the Grateful Dead  F7

For Sale: Frank Lloyd Wrights   F4

EDITORIAL

TALKING WITH THE ENEMY

President Bush was aiming at Senator Barack Obama last week when the president
said those who talk to ''terrorists and radicals'' were appeasers. Now we know
what Mr. Bush knew then -- that Israel is in indirect peace talks with Syria. It
seems as though the president was going for a two-for-one.  Page A24

TROUBLE IN THE HUDSON

The Hudson River is looking good. You would think it was about as healthy as it
has been in a long time. Sadly, it isn't.  Page A24

CHILDREN IN ADULT JAILS

Children who are confined to adult jails are at greater risk of being raped or
pushed to suicide, and they are more likely to become violent criminals. This
barbaric practice must end.  Page A24

OP-ED

DAVID BROOKS

Among adults, the words ''geek'' and ''nerd'' exchanged status positions. A nerd
was still socially tainted, but geekdom acquired its own cool counterculture. A
geek possessed a certain passion for specialized knowledge, but also a high
degree of cultural awareness and poise that a nerd lacked. Page A25

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CANCER (89%); MILITARY BENEFITS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); BOMBINGS
(78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HAMAS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(75%); ARMIES (74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (73%); CANCER DRUGS
(73%); VETO (72%); VETERANS (71%); RELIGION (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(69%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (68%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (68%); ONCOLOGY
(65%); BRAIN CANCER (65%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (62%); UNEMPLOYMENT
INSURANCE (60%); CARTELS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); TED KENNEDY (52%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: SOUTH AFRICA (95%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (94%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); MALAWI (92%); ISRAEL (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             277 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Bodies' Exhibitors Admit Corpse Origins Are Murky

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WILSON

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 932 words


After more than two years of assurances that the cadavers on display in a
popular South Street Seaport exhibit were legally obtained in China, the company
that runs the exhibit admitted on Thursday that it could not prove that the
bodies were not those of prisoners who might have been tortured or executed. The
company promised refunds to people who have seen the exhibit.

The admission was part of a settlement between Premier Exhibitions, the owner of
''Bodies ... the Exhibition,'' and the New York State attorney general's office
that was announced on Thursday. The settlement came after an investigation into
the origin of the cadavers and body parts in the exhibit.

Under the terms of the settlement, the exhibit cannot obtain new bodies without
documentation proving the individual's identity, cause of death and consent for
the body to be displayed, a requirement that may slow or end  the importation of
bodies from China.

Under the settlement, the exhibit must display,  on its Web site and with a sign
at the entrance, a statement explaining that it is not able to confirm that the
bodies being displayed were not Chinese prisoners who may have been victims of
torture and execution, the attorney general's office said.

''Respect for the dead and respect for the public requires that Premier do more
than simply assure us that there is no reason for concern,'' Attorney General
Andrew M. Cuomo said. ''This settlement is a start.''

A lawyer for Premier said that the company's independent investigation of the
whole bodies on display found no signs of abuse. In cases where parts of a body
are displayed, the condition of the rest of that cadaver is unknown, the lawyer
said.

''They inspect and examine the specimens to look for any evidence of trauma or
bodily injury associated with torture or execution,'' said Brian Wainger, the
lawyer. ''They have never seen such evidence.''

Mr. Wainger said the company was looking into the feasibility of a program in
which  bodies would be donated from within the United States in the future.

The exhibit, which combines science and the macabre,  opened in November 2005,
and was originally to run for six months, but has been repeatedly extended.

The announcement comes after years of questions about  the acquisition of the
bodies used in this and similar exhibits across the country and worldwide. Human
rights advocates here and elsewhere have said  that the bodies could be those of
political prisoners or mentally ill patients.

The bodies on display have undergone a process called plastination, in which the
skin is removed and the bodily fluids drained and replaced with plastic that
hardens. The bodies on display in New York were obtained from China in 2004,
from the Dalian Medical University Plastination Company, according to a
statement released under the settlement by both Premier and Mr. Cuomo's office.

''There is no written record that any of those persons consented to the
plastination and exhibition of their bodies,'' the statement reads. ''Rather,
those bodies were unclaimed at death, collected by the Chinese Bureau of Police,
and delivered to the Dalian Medical University and other universities in China
for education and research.''

This month, 21 members of Congress, led by Representative Todd Akin, Republican
of Missouri, signed on to a bill that would ban the importation of plastinated
human remains

The exhibit was unchanged in the hours after the settlement was announced on
Thursday morning. Most visitors said they would want to know that the subjects
had consented to have their bodies displayed. Some, like Kathleen Bessette, 50,
had even assumed that was the case.

''It's so publicly displayed,'' she said. ''Well advertised.''

To others, the provenance of the bodies was more troubling. When an exhibit
employee approached a class of  Long Island City high school students  to see
if they had questions, the teacher, Anthony Lerro Jr., asked first where the
bodies came from. The employee said, as the company has said in the past, that
they were unclaimed specimens from China.

Afterward, Mr. Lerro said the issue was an important one. ''Human rights are an
issue when bodies are on display and there's this real succinct response as to
how they came to be here,'' he said.

Other visitors said they had heard of the controversy, but that the questions
surrounding the bodies' origins did not stop them from attending.

''When you're dead, you're dead,'' said Burl Sousa, 85, of Medford, Ore. ''What
difference does it make?''

Premier will set aside $50,000 for  refunds. Adult admission on Thursday cost
$28.72 with tax.   The company can choose to pay further refunds, but is
obligated only to the $50,000. Under the terms of the settlement, the offer
expires in six months.

To claim a refund, visitors must send the company proof of purchase and a
statement that they would not have attended had they known the bodies might have
been those of prisoners.

Premier will also pay the attorney general's office $15,000 as part of the
settlement.

A nonprofit group that gathers information on forced labor camps and human
rights violations in China, the Laogai Research Foundation, applauded the
settlement. ''We're very pleased with the settlement and we think it's going to
do a lot to shed light on the origins of these bodies,'' said Kirk Donahoe,
assistant director. ''Because of this settlement, it is now less likely that
Premier and its competitors will obtain specimens from China for display not
just in New York, but anywhere in the United States.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An exhibit of preserved bodies opened in New York in 2005.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY JAMES ESTRIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ATTORNEYS GENERAL (91%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); TORTURE (90%);
EXHIBITIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); LAWYERS (76%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); MENTAL ILLNESS (60%); WEB
SITES (52%)

ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK STATE ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE (57%)

PERSON: ANDREW CUOMO (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             282 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 8, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chavez Suffers Military and Policy Setbacks

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 565 words


On the same day Colombia said it had captured a Venezuelan national guard
officer carrying 40,000 AK-47 assault rifle cartridges believed to be intended
for leftist guerrillas, President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela said Saturday he
would withdraw a decree overhauling intelligence policies that he had made
earlier that week.

The rare reversal by Mr. Chavez came amid intensifying criticism in Venezuela
from human rights groups.

The capture of the Venezuelan officer in eastern Colombia could reignite
tensions between the neighboring countries over Venezuela's support for the
rebel group FARC.

Colombia's attorney general, Mario Iguaran, said Saturday that security forces
had captured the national guard officer carrying  cartridges that the Colombian
authorities believe were intended for the FARC.

While Mr. Chavez's government did not immediately comment on the arrest of the
Venezuelan officer, who was identified as Manuel Teobaldo Agudo Escalona, the
episode suggests that pressure could mount in Washington to add Venezuela to the
list of countries that are state sponsors of terrorism.

Colombian officials have recently said that Venezuela tried to provide arms and
financing for the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, basing their
claims on references to such dealings in archives from computers obtained in an
April raid on the rebels. The United States and the European Union classify the
FARC as terrorists.

Venezuela, which expresses ideological solidarity with the Marxist-inspired
FARC, has said that no further proof of such assistance has emerged. But that
was before Colombia announced the arrest of the Venezuelan officer, captured in
Puerto Narino in eastern Colombia with another Venezuelan citizen and two
Colombians.

The type of cartridges in the possession of the four men are used in assault
rifles commonly employed by the FARC, which has been active in Colombia for more
than four decades. Colombia, one of the largest recipients of American
counterinsurgency aid outside the Middle East, has recently killed several
senior FARC commanders.

Amid festering tension with Colombia, including claims that Colombian
paramilitaries were fomenting destabilization plots, President Chavez quietly
unveiled his intelligence law in late May, which would have abolished the DISIP
secret police and DIM military intelligence, replacing them with new
intelligence and counterintelligence agencies.

But in a rare act of self-criticism on Saturday, Mr. Chavez acknowledged the ire
that his intelligence overhaul had provoked among legal scholars and human
rights groups, which said Mr. Chavez was attempting to introduce a police state
by forcing judges to cooperate with intelligence services and criminalizing
dissent.

''Where we made mistakes we must accept that and not defend the indefensible,''
Mr. Chavez said at a campaign rally in Zulia State for gubernatorial and mayoral
candidates from his Socialist party. ''There is no dictatorship here,'' he
continued. ''No one here is coerced into saying more than they want to say.''

Reeling from the defeat of a constitutional reform in December that would have
expanded his powers, Mr. Chavez, in his 10th year in power, is facing multiple
challenges as a reinvigorated opposition fields candidates in regional elections
this year and Venezuela's economic growth slows despite record oil prices.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela in Maracaibo on Saturday.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCELO GARCiA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LIBERALISM (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(89%); FIREARMS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); TERRORISM (72%); EUROPEAN
UNION (72%); MILITARY RULE (71%); ARMED FORCES (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%);
GOVERNORS (67%); ELECTION LAW (66%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (64%); MAYORS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (92%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (98%); UNITED STATES
(93%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (69%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             283 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 15, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mugabe Vows to Go to War Before Ceding Post

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 480 words

DATELINE: JOHANNESBURG


The Zimbabwean president, Robert Mugabe, sounding ever more pugnacious, said
Saturday that he was prepared to go to war if he lost a runoff election to the
opposition leader Morgan Tsvangirai on June 27.

Speaking at the burial of a former army general, Mr. Mugabe, who at 84 has held
power for 28 years, was quoted by Reuters as saying, ''These pathetic puppets
taking over our country? Let's see. That's not going to happen.''

Mr. Mugabe finished second to Mr. Tsvangirai in balloting on March 29, but the
margin was not enough to avoid a runoff. Mr. Mugabe portrays his challenger as a
bootlicker to the British, Zimbabwe's colonial masters.

And he seems determined to deter Mr. Tsvangirai from publicly responding to his
invectives and threats.

On Saturday morning, the opposition leader was detained by the national police
yet again as he tried to campaign, this time at a roadblock at the central town
of Shurugwi. Mr. Tsvangirai, who was released after a few hours, has been
repeatedly stopped by authorities in the past week. His party, the Movement for
Democratic Change, issued a statement calling the detentions part of a pattern
of ''harassment and intimidation.''

The opposition party's secretary general, Tendai Biti, was arrested Thursday at
the airport in Harare, Zimbabwe's capital, as he returned to the country after a
self-imposed absence of two months. His lawyers had not been allowed to see him
or been informed of his whereabouts until Saturday, when he was brought
handcuffed to court by armed police officers.

The session was closed to the news media, but afterward one of Mr. Biti's
lawyers said his client was being accused of ''treason and making malicious
statements detrimental to the interests of the state,'' charges that could bring
the death penalty.

The crackdown before the runoff has hardly been restricted to efforts against
the opposition party. Charitable groups are being considered adversaries of the
state as well and have been halted from distributing food aid to the poor.

Human rights groups, churches, unions and rural communities that supported Mr.
Tsvangirai in the first election have been targets of repeated attacks.

In a news release issued Friday, Georgette Gagnon, Africa director of Human
Rights Watch, accused Mr. Mugabe of trying to ''hijack'' the election and said
her group had documented dozens of cases of politically motivated torture and
killings. ''The pre-runoff climate of repression and fear is disastrous for all
Zimbabweans,'' the statement said.

It also mentioned a June 9 raid in Harare on the Ecumenical Center, which houses
several religious and civic groups. It said the police hauled away computers,
files and 10 people, including Prosper Munatsi, the general secretary of the
Student Christian Movement of Zimbabwe.

Those taken into custody were never charged and were released four days later.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Tendai Biti, the secretary general of Zimbabwe's main opposition
party, arrived in court in Harare on Saturday. Mr. Biti was accused of treason,
one of his lawyers said. On Thursday, Mr. Biti returned to the country after a
two-month absence.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (90%);
POLITICS (89%); RELIGION (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (85%); ARMIES (73%); ARRESTS (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); HIJACKING (70%); LAWYERS (69%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (69%); TORTURE
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (65%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (61%); CHARITIES (61%);
CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (61%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (50%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (90%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (90%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (96%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             287 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 21, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Gaza Blockade

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 264 words


To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's warning (''Strengthening Extremists,'' column, June 19)
that the closing of Gaza is driving the Palestinian people to radicalism finds
support from an unlikely source: the Israeli public.

A June survey I conducted among adult Jewish Israelis for the human rights
groups Gisha-Legal Center for Freedom of Movement and Physicians for Human
Rights-Israel shows that after one year of closing, 60 percent of Israelis
believe that the hardships imposed on civilians in Gaza will likely drive them
to Islamic extremism.

An 83 percent consensus says that over the last year, Hamas has gotten stronger;
68 percent say Israel's security has deteriorated. Israelis have no illusions
regarding the closing's political goals: 78 percent see almost no chance that
Palestinian people will overturn Hamas's regime under Israel's pressure.

After one year of closing and untold suffering, the Israeli public knows that
the policy is a failure. Israel should acknowledge reality and let Gaza's
borders reopen.

Dahlia Scheindlin  Tel Aviv, June 19, 2008

The writer is a pollster and political analyst and author of the Gisha survey.

To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof says that the Israeli blockade of Gaza ''undermined the
moderates who are the best hope of both Israel and the Arab world.''

Hamas overthrew the so-called moderate Fatah party to impose its extremist
policies on the Gazan people. True, Hamas has survived in power until now, but
it would never have agreed to a cease-fire without the blockade.

Barry Lynn   Efrat, West Bank, June 19, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); AL FATAH (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); WRITERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%);
RELIGION (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); POLITICS (69%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (85%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (57%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             288 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Two Israels

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: HEBRON, West Bank


To travel through the West Bank and Gaza these days feels like traveling through
Israeli colonies.

You whiz around the West Bank on new highways that in some cases are reserved
for Israeli vehicles, catching  glimpses of Palestinian vehicles lined up at
checkpoints.

The security system that Israel is steadily establishing  is nowhere more
stifling than here in Hebron, the largest city in the southern part of the West
Bank. In the heart of a city with 160,000 Palestinians, Israel maintains a
Jewish settlement with 800 people. To protect them, the Israeli military  has
established a massive system of guard posts, checkpoints and road closures since
2001.

More than 1,800 Palestinian shops have closed, in some cases the doors welded
shut, and several thousand people have been driven from their homes. The once
flourishing gold market is now blocked with barbed wire and choked with weeds
and garbage.

''For years, Israel has severely oppressed Palestinians living in the center of
the city,'' notes B'Tselem, the Israeli human rights group, in a recent report.
The authorities, it adds,  ''have expropriated the city center from its
Palestinian residents and destroyed it economically.''

Rima Abu Aisha, a housewife in Hebron, has the misfortune of living in an area
near the settlers. When she went into labor, an ambulance could not get the
appropriate permissions in time and the baby died, she said.

Even if the Hebron settlement were not illegal in the eyes of much of the world,
it is utterly impractical. The financial cost is mind-boggling, and the
diplomatic cost is greater.

Perhaps greatest of all is the cost for any hope of a peaceful settlement: the
barriers and checkpoints have undermined Palestinian moderates like  President
Mahmoud Abbas and have empowered Hamas. Polls show that two-thirds of
Palestinians now approve of terror attacks against civilians in Israel, up from
40 percent in 2005.

The Palestinians are committing national suicide as well. By turning toward the
zealots of Hamas, and toward the short-term thrill of sending rockets into
Israel, they are building a tombstone for their state before it is even born.

Americans who haven't toured the West Bank or Gaza recently may not appreciate
how the new security regime of the last few years is suffocating, impoverishing
and antagonizing Palestinians.

In the village of Ein Bani Salim, a farmer named Khalifa Danna pointed to his
field,  separated from his house by a barbed-wire fence that Israel built in
2004. Since then, he has been unable to get to the fields. Mr. Danna shows
photos he has taken of Israeli settlers on his land -- even using it to throw
stones at him.

B'Tselem is giving video cameras to Palestinians to document the attacks and
abuses they suffer. Just this month, a Palestinian woman near Hebron used a
camera to record a group of four settlers clubbing her family in a field; two
settlers were later arrested.

The settlers see the issue very differently, emphasizing the continuing
Palestinian attacks on them and noting that the security steps were put in place
only in reaction to Palestinian terrorism during the second intifada a
half-dozen years ago.

''If people are trying to actively wipe you out and kill your people, then you
have to take security measures,'' says David Wilder, a spokesman for the
settlers in Hebron.  ''If that antagonizes them, they should stop trying to kill
us.''

So the chasm grows wider and peace more distant.

It is here in the Palestinian territories that you see the worst side of Israel:
Jewish settlers stealing land from Palestinians (almost one-third of settlement
land is actually privately owned by Palestinians); Palestinian women giving
birth at checkpoints because Israeli soldiers won't let them through (four
documented cases last year); the diversion of water from Palestinians. (Israelis
get almost five times as much water per capita as Palestinians.)

Yet it is also here that you see the very best side of Israel. Israeli human
rights groups relentlessly stand up for Palestinians. Israeli women volunteer at
checkpoints to help Palestinians through. Israeli courts periodically rule in
favor of Palestinians. Israeli scholars have published research that undermines
their own nation's mythologies. Many Israeli journalists have been fair-minded
toward Palestinians in a way that Arab journalists have rarely reciprocated.

All told, the most persuasive indictments of Israeli actions come from Israelis
themselves. This scrupulous honesty and fairness toward Israel's historic
enemies is a triumph of humanity.

In short, there are many Israels. When American presidential candidates compete
this year to be ''pro-Israeli,'' let's hope that they clarify that the one they
support is not the oppressor that lets settlers steal land and club women but
the one that is a paragon of justice, decency, fairness -- and peace.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (89%); HAMAS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (86%); CLOSINGS (75%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS
(73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (73%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); GOLD MARKETS (71%);
TERRORISM (69%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); POLLS & SURVEYS (65%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             292 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congolese Faces Charges Of Atrocities

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 516 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


When Jean-Pierre Bemba, a rich and powerful Congolese politician, visited his
family in Brussels in late May, he had no inkling that he would be grabbed by
the Belgian police, thrown in jail and put before an international tribunal.

His arrest warrant had been kept secret by the International Criminal Court in
The Hague.

On Friday, Mr. Bemba, a former vice president and still a sitting senator in
Congo, made his first appearance in court. Mr. Bemba, once a rebel leader, has
been accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity in a 2002-2003 campaign
by his forces fighting to Congo's north in  the Central African Republic.

Mr. Bemba, who lost Congo's pivotal presidential election in 2006, is the most
senior suspect now in the custody of the court, which holds three other
Congolese accused of large-scale human rights violations.

The prosecution is expected to focus on sexual violence, charging that  Mr.
Bemba's fighters  gang-raped women of all ages in public places, infecting many
of them with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.

Prosecutors contend that the fighters also tortured and pillaged, leaving
victims dead, wounded or traumatized. Human rights groups have long said that
Mr. Bemba's militiamen were aiding the Central African Republic's president at
the time, Ange-Felix Patasse, whose forces terrorized civilians in retribution
for a coup attempt.

During the short hearing on Friday, Mr. Bemba was not asked to enter a plea, but
he has denied the charges. He waved to his wife in the court's public gallery
and was asked by the court only to confirm his identity and the conditions of
his detention.

''The conditions are not the best, not what I had hoped for,'' said Mr. Bemba,
who gave his occupation as ''senator.''

Mr. Bemba, 45, is a scion of a prominent Congolese family with a large business
empire. He is still an important opposition figure with a considerable
following, even though before being arrested he had spent the past year in
Portugal. He had fled Congo amid clashes between his forces and the government.

At home, his angry supporters have denounced the court in The Hague. In
Brussels, Congolese immigrants have protested his arrest on the streets, wearing
T-shirts adorned with Mr. Bemba's photograph.

This week the office of the prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, had a serious
setback in another case linked to Congo.

On Wednesday, judges ordered the release of another Congolese warlord, Thomas
Lubanga, just as his trial was about to begin. It was to have been the very
first trial since the permanent criminal court was created in 2002.

Judges ruled that mishandling of the evidence by the prosecutor's office meant
that Mr. Lubanga could not receive a fair trial. The prosecution has appealed
the decision, and Mr. Lubanga will have to stay in the court's prison in The
Hague while the appeal is considered.

The Lubanga episode has prompted surprise and discomfort in the large legal
community of this city. It also cast a shadow over this week's marking  of the
10th anniversary of the Rome Statute, which created the court.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jean-Pierre Bemba, a senator and former militia leader accused
of war crimes, appeared in court in The Hague on Friday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT, VIA AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); ARRESTS (89%); ELECTIONS
(78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); TORTURE (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (73%); COUPS (72%); IMMIGRATION
(72%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (70%);
VIRUSES (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (66%); AIDS & HIV (54%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (90%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (92%); BELGIUM (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 28, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Rallies Behind Leader Reviled Abroad

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1631 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan


President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan has been accused by the prosecutor of
the International Criminal Court of genocide and vilified the world over as an
incorrigible mass murderer bent on slaughtering his own people in Darfur.

But inside Sudan, his grip on power seems, for the moment, to be surer than
ever.

In the past few weeks, one sworn political enemy after another has closed ranks
behind him. A result has been a swift and radical reordering of the fractious
political universe in Sudan, driven in part by national pride but also by
deep-seated fears that the nation could tumble into Somalia-like chaos if Mr.
Bashir were removed as president.

The Sudanese government, joined by many of its onetime foes who see the court's
looming arrest warrant as a mortal threat to the country, is scrambling to
determine exactly how much it needs to concede to survive.

One previously unthinkable proposal being discussed is whether the government
should arrest two men  accused of orchestrating the campaign of rape, murder and
pillage in Darfur that has left about 300,000 dead and scattered 2.5 million
people from villages reduced to circles of ash.

The two men, Ahmad  Harun, the former interior minister, and Ali Kushayb, a
militia leader, face arrest warrants issued by the international court for
crimes against humanity.

But the government has refused to turn them over. Sudanese officials say they
hope that putting the two men on trial in Sudan might persuade the United
Nations Security Council to exercise its power to suspend the case against Mr.
Bashir.

''Everything short of the presidency is on the table,'' said Sudan's foreign
minister, Deng Alor.

Although the West has been relentlessly focused on Darfur, here in Sudan, most
people view the crisis as simply a continuation of a long chain of internal
conflicts between an autocratic government and the deeply impoverished people on
the periphery. The deadliest of these conflicts, between the north and south,
raged for decades, killing 2.2 million people -- many more than the lives lost
in Darfur -- and threatened to split the country along religious lines.

Sudan has been at war with itself for almost its entire post-colonial history,
starting in 1956. Nearly all of the major ethnic and religious groups have
fought one another, and politics continue to be dominated by mistrust, outside
interference and combustible animosities. There are dozens of armed groups
across the country, each with its own political agenda.

One growing concern is that without Mr. Bashir, a peace treaty signed in 2005
between Sudan's central government and southern rebels could fall apart. The
treaty, which he fought hard-liners in his own party to approve, is widely seen
as the glue that is holding this unwieldy and deeply divided country together.
It calls for elections next year and outlines ways to share wealth and power.

''The situation in Sudan now is so pregnant with trouble,'' said Sadiq al-Mahdi,
Sudan's last elected leader, who was overthrown by Mr. Bashir in 1989 and has
remained a bitter opponent ever since. Until now.

After the warrant was announced, Mr. Mahdi threw the support of the party he
leads, one of Sudan's biggest, behind Mr. Bashir, at least for the moment.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor of the international criminal court, or
I.C.C., has described Mr. Bashir as the mastermind of a genocide in Darfur. But
here on the sun-blasted streets of Sudan's capital, Mr. Bashir is widely
perceived as a relative moderate.

''He is a pigeon, not a hawk,'' said Ghazi Suleiman, a human rights lawyer who
has been jailed 18 times by the Bashir government. Half of Mr. Suleiman's face
is paralyzed as a result of torture at the hands of the country's notorious
security forces. Nevertheless, he opposes any attempt to charge Mr. Bashir with
war crimes now.

From the perspective of many Sudanese political leaders, the I.C.C. move could
not have come at a worse time. A lightning-fast attack on the capital by a
Darfur rebel group in May rattled the ruling National Congress Party. Hundreds
of heavily armed rebels from an Islamist Darfur rebel faction thundered into the
capital's outskirts. They were repulsed, but the assault exposed gaps in the
government's aura of military invincibility.

''It just showed how the army is stretched to the limits,'' said Ghazi Salah
al-Din, a top adviser to Mr. Bashir, in a rare admission of vulnerability by a
senior ruling party official. A week later, new fighting between the national
army and a former rebel force in the disputed oil-rich area of Abyei forced more
than 50,000 to flee and sparked fears of a new round of bloodletting.

''A lot of the political entities looked into the abyss and were scared,'' said
a senior Western diplomat in Khartoum, speaking anonymously because he is not
authorized by his government to speak publicly.

A number of nightmare scenarios -- an implosion of the government that might
invite Al Qaeda back into Sudan or embolden rebel groups to try to topple the
government -- forced political elites in Sudan to choose sides. Most have
chosen, for now, to stick with Mr. Bashir.

''These are frail and critical moments in our history,'' said James Morgan, a
spokesman for the Sudan People's Liberation Movement, the rebel group that
signed the Comprehensive Peace Agreement ending the north-south war. Mr. Bashir,
he said, should be given ''ample time to implement these agreements.''

The international court's announcement also came as there were signs that the
country was taking its first steps toward democracy after years of autocratic
rule. The National Assembly had just passed a new electoral law, which would set
up rules for the country's first free elections in more than 20 years.

''The country was preparing itself for a new phase of government,'' said Mr.
Salah al-Din.

Mr. Salah al-Din acknowledged that ''mistakes had been made in Darfur,'' and
said that the coming political transformation would, through elections, deal
with the roots of the crisis -- political marginalization.

The north-south war had always been viewed as the biggest threat to Sudan. But
in 2003, as negotiations to end that conflict dragged on, a new rebel group rose
up in Darfur to demand a greater share of wealth and power for the
long-neglected western region. The government responded with the same ruthless
tactics it used in the south, unleashing Arab militias to chase the rebels and
their supporters from Darfur's villages. The terror they caused aroused outrage
across the world; the Bush administration called the killings genocide. The
crisis came to dominate Western policy toward Sudan, often at the expense of the
larger struggle to keep the north-south deal alive.

But diplomats, aid workers and analysts who have traveled to the region recently
say things have changed in Darfur. The conflict has become a violent
free-for-all in which a bewildering cast of rebels, bandits and militias murder
each other and civilians largely unchecked by government authority.

''The government is brutal, untrustworthy and bloodthirsty, but the reality is
that most of the violence in Darfur today is not caused by them,'' the senior
Western diplomat said. ''Is there a genocide in Darfur right at this moment? No,
there isn't.''

Mr. Bashir's tour of Darfur last week was short on proposals to jump start a
peace process, but a panel led by Mr. Mahdi and other political leaders has been
charged with finding a way to defuse the crisis. The government sent an official
to Qatar to ask the government there, which helped negotiate a settlement to
Lebanon's most recent crisis, to contribute $500 million for the compensation of
Darfur's victims.

The government and its new allies are hoping that if they can provide evidence
of progress in Darfur and persuade the international community that an arrest
warrant would create more problems than it would solve, the Security Council
will act to hold back the criminal court.

Not everyone agrees with this approach.

Salih Mahmoud Osman, a Darfur lawyer who has documented thousands of human
rights violations in Darfur, said the court represented the only chance for
victims to get justice. In a recent interview, he wept as he described the
painful process of collecting testimony from rape victims. ''They told us, 'Our
suffering must be documented,' '' he said, hiding his face with his hands to
cover his tears. '' 'Our story is not forgotten. You are putting criminals on
the record. If not today, tomorrow we will have justice.' And now it has
happened.''

In any case, Mr. Bashir's newfound popularity among Sudan's political elite is
likely to be short lived. If the arrest warrant is issued, analysts and
diplomats said, all bets are off. ''He could end up very weak to challenges from
inside and outside the ruling party,'' a senior United Nations official in
Khartoum said.

The government has responded so far to the court's action with diplomacy and
public relations, not violence. It has agreed to allow the delivery of hundreds
of containers of United Nations supplies held up in Sudan's port, and to make
visas and permits for aid workers easier to get.

''We've been receiving very strong messages of cooperation'' from the
government, said Ameerah Haq, the top United Nations aid official in Sudan.

Mr. Alor, the foreign minister, said the threat of an arrest warrant may prove
to be a blessing in disguise. ''Now we are seriously talking about the
resolution of the problem of Darfur,'' he said, adding that the government was
also considering ways to cooperate with the peacekeeping force in Darfur that it
long resisted.

''If we take the I.C.C. from that angle, it can be a blessing for the whole
country.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sadiq al-Mahdi, in Khartoum, Sudan, on Sunday, now supports the
man who ousted him from power, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.
 A pillar in a market district of Khartoum on Saturday was plastered with
posters showing the portrait of Mr. Bashir. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOAO SILVA FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
GENOCIDE (89%); POLITICS (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); HISTORY (76%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (72%); APPROVALS (67%); PEACE PROCESS
(62%); RELIGION (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%); MURDER (58%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (50%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (54%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); SOMALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             302 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 6, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scientist Tied to Al Qaeda Is Ordered Held Without Bail

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEISER and ERIC SCHMITT; Benjamin Weiser reported from New
York, and Eric Schmitt from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 674 words


A Pakistani neuroscientist who American officials say was a facilitator for Al
Qaeda was ordered held without bail on Tuesday by a federal court in Manhattan,
on charges that she had tried to kill American soldiers and F.B.I. agents in
Afghanistan.

The scientist, Aafia Siddiqui, was taken into custody last month after she was
found loitering outside an Afghan police station with suspicious items in her
handbag, including documents describing the creation of explosives, a criminal
complaint says.

A day later, prosecutors have charged, she picked up an unsecured M-4 rifle and
fired at least two shots toward one of the soldiers who was part of an American
team of F.B.I. agents and military personnel who were about to question her. No
one was hit, and another soldier returned fire with a 9-millimeter pistol,
hitting her at least once in the torso.

Ms. Siddiqui, 36, whose head was covered with a maroon scarf in court, sat
quietly as a magistrate judge rejected her lawyer's request that he dismiss the
charges immediately.

The lawyer, Elizabeth M. Fink, told the judge that the allegation that her
client, who the lawyer said weighed 90 pounds, had picked up the rifle and
attacked the Americans, was ''patently absurd.''

''Is that what happened, Judge?'' Ms. Fink asked.

But Judge Ronald L. Ellis of United States District Court said he saw ''no
reason to doubt the information'' in the complaint, and set a hearing for  next
Monday to address the government's request that Ms. Siddiqui be detained without
bond pending trial.

Ms. Siddiqui, who studied at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and
Brandeis University, was transferred to New York from Afghanistan on Monday.

United States intelligence agencies  have said that she had links  to at least 2
of the 14 men suspected of being high-level members of Al Qaeda who were moved
to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in September 2006.

The charges against her, however, do not appear to be related to those
allegations, but to  what prosecutors say was her assault on the Americans who
were about to question her.

Ms. Fink said after the hearing that her client was innocent and would fight the
charges.

The hearing cleared up none of the mysteries that have surrounded Ms. Siddiqui's
case since she disappeared with her three children while visiting her parents'
home in Karachi, Pakistan, in March 2003.

Her family and human rights groups have said they believe that she was being
held secretly; a family lawyer, Elaine Whitfield Sharp, said after the hearing
that it was ''in U.S. detention.''

The American authorities deny that assertion and say they have no knowledge of
where she was for the past five years, until she was taken into custody last
month. Sam Zarifi, the Asia-Pacific director for Amnesty International, on
Tuesday challenged the American government's version of the events that led to
Ms. Siddiqui's detention.

Mr. Zarifi said that Ismail Jahangir, a spokesman for the Ghazni provincial
governor, told him by telephone on Tuesday that he had no information about the
shooting and that Ms. Siddiqui was in ''fine condition'' when she was turned
over to American officials.

Attempts to reach Mr. Jahangir on Tuesday to corroborate that account were
unsuccessful.

In court, Ms. Siddiqui responded to some of the judge's questions but seemed
uncertain at times.

''She is a little fragile at the moment,'' Ms. Fink told the judge, adding that
her client was still recovering from her gunshot wound, and that she had been
without antibiotics or painkillers.

A federal prosecutor, Christopher L. Lavigne, responded that when Ms. Siddiqui
left Afghanistan, a physician was on the plane with her until she landed in the
United States, and that she had received medical care.

Other unanswered questions include what has happened to Ms. Siddiqui's children,
and where she says she has been for the past five years.

Ms. Siddiqui's lawyers said they met with her before the hearing but lacked
privacy and were unable to explore details of her case with her.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LAWYERS
(90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); BAIL (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); MAGISTRATES (78%); JUDGES (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
NEUROSCIENCE (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); SHOOTINGS (77%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (77%); POLICE FORCES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (84%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); KARACHI,PAKISTAN (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CUBA (86%); ASIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             307 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 21, 2008 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Iranian Execution Revives Debate Over Minors

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 432 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN


Iran has executed a 20-year-old man who was sentenced to death for a murder he
committed when he was 15, reviving an international debate over its punishment
of minors.

The man, Reza Hejazi, was hanged Tuesday in a prison in the central city of
Isfahan  for stabbing a man in a fight in 2003, according to the daily newspaper
Etemad. Four others, including two drug smugglers in Tehran and a rapist and a
drug smuggler in Isfahan, were also hanged on Tuesday, Iranian news agencies
reported.

That brings the number of executions in Iran to more than 190 this year,
according to  Amnesty International. Last year, Iran executed 317 people, more
than any other country except China, the organization says.

Human rights groups condemned Mr. Hejazi's execution, arguing that he was a
minor at the time of the murder and therefore fit the category of a juvenile
offender.

Iran is a signatory to the International Convention on Civil and Political
Rights and the International Convention on the Rights of the Child, neither of
which allows the execution of anyone under the age of 18.

However, according to Iran's Islamic law, boys are punishable from the age of 15
and girls from the age of 9. Iranian officials say they wait until  offenders
reach 18 before they carry out  death sentences.

Amnesty International says that  Mr. Hejazi's hanging brings the number of
executions of juvenile offenders  in Iran to five this year. Some 36 have been
executed since 1990 and 132 are on the death row, the group says.

''The execution of juvenile offenders is prohibited under international law,''
the group said Tuesday in a statement. As a party  to the international
conventions, Iran has agreed ''not to execute anyone for crimes committed when
they were under the age of 18,'' the statement added.

Meanwhile, the judiciary summoned two prominent actors, Parviz Parastui and
Ezzatolah Entezami, and a movie director, Kiumars Poorahmad, for trying to
collect money to help Behnood Shojaee, who is on death row for a murder he
committed when he was 17.

The three  have been asking people for donations to save Mr. Shojaee's life.
They said  the victim's family had agreed to spare him  in return for a generous
amount of money, called blood money under Iran's law.

The bank account the three had set up for the donations was blocked by the
judiciary.

A judiciary official, Mohammad Hossein Shamloo, told the ISNA news agency on
Tuesday that the three were summoned after relatives of the victim filed a
complaint denying that they had agreed to forgive the murder in return for blood
money.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MURDER (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); JUVENILE CRIME (88%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); SMUGGLING (76%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (71%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); RELIGION (51%); FILM
DIRECTORS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%)

CITY: ESFAHAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (89%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (89%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); IRAN (89%)

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             310 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

MILITARY SENDING FOREIGN FIGHTERS TO HOME NATIONS

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and ERIC SCHMITT; Mohamed Hussein contributed reporting
from Baghdad.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1771 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The United States military has secretly handed over more than 200 militants to
the intelligence services of Saudi Arabia, Egypt and other countries, nearly all
in the past two years, as part of an effort to reduce the burden of detaining
and interrogating foreign fighters captured in Iraq and Afghanistan, according
to American military officials.

The system is similar in some ways to the rendition program used by the Central
Intelligence Agency since the Sept. 11 attacks to secretly transfer people
suspected of being militants back to their home countries to be jailed and
questioned.

But there are significant differences; the prisoners can block their transfers
to home countries, military officials say. Officials of the International
Committee of the Red Cross interview all detainees before they are returned to
their home countries, Bernard Barrett, a Red Cross spokesman, said.

Many of these militants are initially held, without notification to the Red
Cross, sometimes for weeks at a time, in secret at a camp in Iraq and another in
Afghanistan run by American Special Operations forces,  the military officials
said.

They said that foreign intelligence officers had been allowed access to these
camps to question militants there, as a prelude to the transfers.

In interviews, the military officials said the transfers represented an effort
by the United States to find a better way to detain and interrogate the
militants.

The American military's prison at  Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and the secret prisons
abroad run by the C.I.A. have drawn criticism, and there have been concerns over
the use of Iraqi and Afghan jails.  Some have questioned whether those
facilities should play any future role in housing terrorism suspects.

As a rationale for the approach, the American officials said that language
skills and cultural knowledge in most cases made the Saudis, Egyptians and
others best suited to question the captured suspects, and best equipped to act
on any intelligence they provide about militant networks in their countries.

The effort was described in interviews over the last six weeks with more than a
dozen current and former American military, intelligence and foreign policy
officials, some of whom would speak only on condition of anonymity.

Unlike in Afghanistan, where many prisoners captured by American forces were
sent to Guantanamo Bay in the first five years after the Sept. 11 attacks,
prisoners captured by the United States in Iraq have never been sent to American
detention centers outside Iraq, and until The New York Times began to conduct
interviews for this article in July, military officials had not acknowledged
that any had been repatriated.

American military officials said the transfers required assurances that the
prisoners would be well taken care of, but they would not specify those
assurances, and human rights advocates questioned whether compliance could be
monitored.

While the militants are in American custody, Pentagon rules allow them to be
held at the Special Operations sites in Balad, Iraq, and Bagram, Afghanistan,
for up to two weeks, with extensions permitted with the approval of Defense
Secretary Robert M. Gates or his representative, military officials said.

About 30 to 40 foreign prisoners are held at the Iraq camp at any given time,
the officials said; they did not provide an estimate for the Afghan camp, but
suggested that the number was smaller.

Saudi and Egyptian intelligence officers have been permitted to interrogate
militants at the camps, although United States military officials say that the
foreign interrogators who operate in the American camps are monitored by
American soldiers, and that they must follow American rules.

They said restrictions on interrogation techniques and on the length of secret
detentions were carefully regulated, a response to problems within the American
military detention system, including the abuses at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and
the Special Operations site in Balad, Iraq, that emerged beginning in 2004.

The officials said the prisoners who were repatriated were sent home only after
being moved into the general American-run prison population, a step that meant
that their names were reported to the Red Cross.

In all, they said, 214 prisoners in Iraq and at least two more in Afghanistan
have been transferred to the custody of their home countries over the past four
years, and while the Iraqi government has helped to facilitate some of the
transfers, they were not subject to the approval of either the Iraqi government
or the Afghan government.

Henry A. Crumpton, who in 2006 was the State Department's top counterterrorism
official, said the decision to begin repatriating detainees was driven ''by the
realization that Guantanamo was a strategic failure.''

''All of us in the discussion agreed that Guantanamo was not working for lots of
reasons and that the simplest way to proceed is that when you have foreign
fighters captured you send them back home,'' he said. ''If you don't send them
to Gitmo, and the C.I.A. doesn't want them, then where do you put them?''

The American military now holds about 170 foreign prisoners in Iraq, down from
about 465 in December 2005, and the current group includes more than 30
Egyptians, 20 Syrians, 20 Jordanians, 10 Yemenis, 10 Saudis and 10 Libyans,
according to Maj. Neil V. Fisher II, a spokesman for Task Force 134, the
American unit in charge of detention operations in Iraq. In addition to these
numbers, the Iraqi government is holding 426 foreigners, mostly combatants, in
its own prisons, and American officials say some foreign fighters have been
convicted in Iraqi courts and executed.

Defense Department officials would not say how many prisoners in all had been
held in the Special Operations camps, or how many had been held under the rule
that allowed their secret detentions to be extended beyond two weeks.

The Defense Department officials also refused to talk in detail about the
interrogations conducted at the military camps by representatives of foreign
intelligence services. A Pentagon spokesman said that all foreign interrogators
who were  taken to the Special Operations sites were ''monitored by D.O.D.
personnel, and their conduct must be consistent with D.O.D. policy,''
specifically the United States Army Field Manual, which bans coercive
interrogation techniques.

''The U.S. has aggressively looked for opportunities to repatriate detainees,''
said Rear Adm. Gregory J. Smith, the chief spokesman for the United States
Central Command. ''In countries where we know they have a program to
rehabilitate detainees, like Saudi Arabia, we've had good success.''

The Saudis have sought to use their jails to convert militants into ambassadors
against extremism, a program that American officials have praised, though they
caution that it is too soon to say whether it will have a long-term impact.

A Saudi official said, ''What you have is a situation in which the U.S. wants to
get all the Saudi prisoners to Saudi Arabia because the Saudis know how to deal
with them.''

Admiral Smith said the current repatriation system hinged on a series of
bilateral agreements that the United States had reached with participating
countries. He said the United States must receive assurances from each country
that detainees would be treated humanely and that they would not simply be
released.

Christoph Wilcke, who researches the prison systems of Middle Eastern countries
for Human Rights Watch, said that international organizations had very little
information about the treatment of detainees in the prisons run by the Saudi
intelligence service, in part because the Red Cross had never been allowed to
operate inside the country.

''When it comes to sending people back home, there is really no way for us to
find out how they are doing,'' he said.

Current and former American officials interviewed for this article said the Bush
administration decided in 2006 to begin steadily reducing the number of foreign
fighters in military detention.

The decision was influenced by several factors, the officials said. First, there
was a growing realization that the prison at Guantanamo Bay was doing
irreparable damage to America's image abroad and might actually be a catalyst
for the spread of Islamic radicalism. Also, that year the Supreme Court shot
down the Bush administration's plans for trying Guantanamo detainees by military
commission.

There was also pressure building at the time to empty the secret prisons run by
the C.I.A. and reduce the agency's role in detention and interrogation of
terrorism suspects.

In September 2006, President Bush ordered that the 14 prisoners who at the time
were in C.I.A. detention be transferred to Guantanamo Bay.

Maj. Gen. Douglas M. Stone, who until June  led detention operations in Iraq,
said in a telephone interview that he was not aware of any detainee held beyond
two weeks without an authorized seven-day extension, nor of  any detainee being
held at a field detention site longer than a total of three weeks.

But General Stone said foreign fighters detained in the general prison
population in Iraq could be interrogated again by Special Operations forces if
interrogators obtained new information. ''Detainees can be checked out,'' said
General Stone, who noted that he monitored such cases very closely. ''It happens
all the time.''

The Special Operations prison in Afghanistan has occasionally been a temporary
holding site for prisoners captured outside of the country, a move that has
drawn criticism from some American officials.

One person suspected of belonging to Al Qaeda, who was captured by American
Special Operations forces during the Ethiopian invasion of Somalia in late 2006,
was taken to Bagram.

Ronald E. Neumann, who was the United States ambassador to Afghanistan from 2005
to April 2007, recalled in a telephone interview that he objected to the plans
because the military intended to spirit the detainee into the country without
notifying the Afghan government.

Mr. Neumann, who is now president of the American Academy of Diplomacy in
Washington, said: ''It's the kind of action that if it leaks, can cause
political reverberations in the street. There were qualities of imperial hubris
that I thought were wrong.''

In the end, a compromise was reached. The detainee was taken  to Bagram briefly
before being transferred to another undisclosed location, and the Afghan
government was notified after the prisoner was transferred out of Afghanistan.

''The guy didn't stay very long,'' Mr. Neumann said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: United States military personnel at the air base in Bagram,
Afghanistan, in 2005. Foreign fighters who are captured in Afghanistan are held
at the base.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KEITH BEDFORD FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates and President Bush. Mr. Gates must approve
extending American custody of detainees.(PHOTOGRAPH JONATHAN ERNST/REUTERS)(pg.
A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); PRISONS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (89%); TERRORISM (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); ESPIONAGE
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (76%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE
RED CROSS (56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (56%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%);
EGYPT (93%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             314 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 9, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside The Times: September 9, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2276 words


International

RUSSIA AGREES TO LIMITED PULLOUT

Of Troops From Georgia

President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia agreed to a troop withdrawal from
Georgian territory by mid-October, after talks with President Nicolas Sarkozy of
France. He has also consented to allow observers from the European Union to
monitor the conflict and will take part in international talks on the region's
future on Oct. 15. Page A8

CIVILIAN AFGHAN DEATHS TRIPLED

Civilian deaths in Afghanistan nearly tripled in 2007, compared with 2006,
because of airstrikes by the United States and NATO, a new report by Human
Rights Watch said. The report also blames the Taliban, citing their consistent
deployment in civilian areas. While the report spread the blame, it said tactics
used by American and NATO forces have hurt public support for the Afghan
government, making it easier for the Taliban to increase their foothold. Page
A10

MEETINGS FOR IRAQI PATROLS

Awakening Council members met with Iraqi officials to learn what their future
would hold once their patrols, which are Sunni dominated, begin reporting to,
and being paid by, the Iraqi government on Oct. 1. The meetings served to help
allay speculation and rumor that have run unchecked, among them: that Awakening
members would endure mass arrests and that American forces would not be
involved. Page A8

IN THAILAND, BY COOK OR BY CROOK

A court in Thailand is set to rule on whether Prime Minister Samak Sundaravej
violated the Constitution when he appeared several times on a local television
cooking show. Thailand forbids cabinet ministers from working for private
companies. His political opponents seized on the appearances and brought the
case against him, hoping to force him to step down.  Page A10

YOU'VE GOT TOO MUCH BAGGAGE

In a convoluted trial involving dirty deeds and political machinations, American
prosecutors are trying to introduce evidence in the trial of Franklin Duran to
show he got rich through a string of illict deals involving Venezuelan
officials. He and a partner made more than $100 million, according to court
documents.  Page A8

CHINA PLACES LIMITS ON MUSLIMS

Local governments in a western desert region of China have strictly curtailed
religious practices during the traditional fasting month of Ramadan. According
to a Chinese government Web site, women are prohibited from wearing veils, men
are not allowed to grow beards and government officials are strictly forbidden
to observe the holiday. The limitations appear to be part of a crackdown after
recent activity from separatist groups. Page A7

National

COLLEGE PRESIDENTS DEFEND

Rising Cost of College Tuition

At a roundtable discussion convened by lawmakers, two dozen college presidents
and policy experts defended the rising costs of tuition and argued against
forcing colleges to spend more of their endowments. But the legislators, Senator
Charles E. Grassley, Republican of Iowa, and Representative Peter Welch,
Democrat of Vermont, were skeptical, saying that they would continue their
effort to push universities to justify their tax exemptions by spending more of
their endowment money. PAGE A19

AN APPEAL TO WOMEN VOTERS

Hillary Rodham Clinton campaigned across Florida to oppose the Republican
presidential ticket -- ''no McCain, no Palin'' -- but she otherwise avoided
criticizing a new rival for female voters, Gov. Sarah Palin of Alaska. Ms. Palin
has been explicitly courting women, and new national polls taken in the wake of
the Republican convention last week indicate that the McCain-Palin ticket is
drawing their interest and support.  PAGE A20

V.A. LOOSENS VOTER SIGN-UP RULES

The Department of Veterans Affairs said that it would no longer ban voter
registration drives among veterans living at federally run nursing homes,
shelters for the homeless and rehabilitation centers across the country, after
saying this year that such drives would violate the prohibition on political
activity by federal employees and be disruptive. PAGE A19

A CAMPAIGN'S RULES OF ETIQUETTE

When Walter Mondale picked Geraldine Ferraro to be his running mate in 1984, he
almost never touched her on the campaign trail. Such were the thorny rules of
etiquette in a mixed-sex major-party ticket. But times have changed, and so
Senator John McCain and Gov. Sarah Palin can give each other short, businesslike
hugs after their stump speeches. Still, there is protocol: Cindy McCain, Mr.
McCain's wife, is introduced before Ms. Palin on the campaign trail.  PAGE A21

MIAMI SUPERINTENDENT TO RESIGN

After a turbulent tenure at the helm of the Miami-Dade County School Board in
Florida, Rudy Crew, the bold superintendent who four years ago promised to
overhaul education as he did in New York City, agreed to step down from his
post. Over the last year, with Miami-Dade schools struggling under the strain of
state budget cuts and declining enrollment, Mr. Crew has increasingly come under
fire, and a growing mood of racial distrust has also poisoned the debate
surrounding his initiatives. PAGE A21

New York Report

JUDGE RULES AGAINST AUTHOR

Of Harry Potter Guidebook

In a 68-page ruling, Judge Robert P. Patterson Jr. of Federal District Court in
Manhattan blocked the publication of a Harry Potter lexicon written by Steven
Vander Ark, saying that the book bore too close a resemblance to the
best-selling works by J. K. Rowling. Undaunted, Mr. Vander Ark is focused on his
next project: a memoir of his travels to locations similar to the ones described
in the Harry Potter books. PAGE C11

REVIVING THE DOUBLE-DECKER BUS

High gas prices and increased ridership has the Metropolitan Transportation
Authority thinking of bringing back double-decker bus, an idea with which it
flirted briefly in the 1970s. So beginning Thursday, the M.T.A. will rotate the
bus through several routes for 30 days, and then solicit opinions from
passengers to gauge how the bus handles in city traffic.  PAGE C12

Restoring a Rock and Roll Mecca  C11

Business

OPENING UP THE TOO BIG DOOR

For the 'Too Big' Argument

The government's bailout of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac has opened the door for
other entities to make the ''too big to fail'' argument, like struggling U.S.
automakers. It also creates a lot of questions for policy makers, like when to
intervene and when not to do so. And even supporters of the bailout say that
federal officials may have opened a Pandora's box. PAGE C1

CRITICISM FOR NEW ANTITRUST POLICY

A 215-page report from the Justice Department laid out a broad new policy on
antitrust enforcement, but it was sharply criticized by three of the four
commissioners of the Federal Trade Commission, who said in a joint statement
that the plan was ''a blueprint for radically weakened enforcement'' against
anti-competitive practices. The head of the department's antitrust division
rejected the idea that its approach favored big business. ''We're comfortable
that this is pro-consumer,'' he said. PAGE C1

A CRIMP IN THE EXPENSE ACCOUNT

The euro and pound are still going strong, which puts a crimp in the travel
plans of Americans who do trans-Atlantic business. The expensive hotels and
taxis that are part of their travels elsewhere are out of the question. In their
place are bed and breakfasts or the extra beds or sofas at the homes of kindly
friends.  PAGE C6

Outage Halts London Exchange  C5

ARTS

FROM BEASTIE TO INDIE,

Despite Formidable Odds

Adam Yauch, the Beastie Boy better known as MCA, is pursuing his cinematic
interests with a new company that will acquire, produce and distribute
independent films. Its next release is ''Flow,'' a documentary about a possible
global water crisis. Also on the schedule is ''Wendy and Lucy,'' a Cannes
favorite starring Michelle Williams. But the company's arrival comes at a time
of upheaval in the independent film world. PAGE B1

FROM THE SCI-FI FRONTIER

The starting point of J. J. Abrams's new science-fiction series on Fox is a
mysterious midair disaster on an international flight. That is also how Mr.
Abrams began his last major television hit, ''Lost.'' This new venture is called
''Fringe,'' but it could easily be called ''Found.'' This time, the plane
doesn't crash: passengers and crew are all accounted for, but all are dead --
melted by unknown forces. As pilots go, this one is sensational, Alessandra
Stanley writes.  PAGE B1

SHARDS OF A FAMILY'S PAST

Marilynne Robinson's new novel, ''Home,'' explores the same themes as her
Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, ''Gilead'' -- fathers and sons, faith and familial
fate -- but in a more somber and effortful fashion. It reads like grave,
measured music, Michiko Kakutani writes, an inward-looking story about three
people computing the losses in their lives and their distance from God.  PAGE B1

CELEBRATING NED ROREM

The composer Ned Rorem is known primarily for his more than 500 art songs, which
overshadow the rest of his considerable oeuvre. He has also written many
symphonies, concertos, operas, string quartets and other chamber works, some of
which were performed at a Bargemusic concert celebrating his 85th birthday.
PAGE B6 SONG OF THE BRUNDLEFLY

It makes sense for the Los Angeles Opera to recruit talents from the film
industry. Their latest effort came when the Los Angeles Opera presented ''The
Fly,''  based on the director David Cronenberg's 1986 film and scored by the
Oscar-winning composer Howard Shore. But despite the inventive staging and
all-out efforts of an admirable cast, Anthony Tommasini writes, ''The Fly'' is
ponderous and enervating.  PAGE B1

Obituaries

DON HASKINS, 78

In the 1966 N.C.A.A. championship, he started five black players on his Texas
Western basketball team -- a decision that changed the face of college
basketball. His team's defeat of the all-white University of Kentucky squad was
dramatized in the 2006 movie ''Glory Road.''  PAGE C17

Science Times

AS BARRIERS DISAPPEAR,

Some Gender Gaps Widen

When men and women take personality tests, some of those old stereotypes about
the sexes keep popping up. A new study that analyzed personality tests given to
men and women in more than 60 countries found that personality differences
between men and women are smaller in traditional cultures like India's or
Zimbabwe's than they are in the Netherlands' or the United States'. In other
words, the more Venus and Mars have similar jobs, the more their personalities
seem to diverge. John Tierney, Findings.  PAGE D1

STEM CELLS ON THE BATTLEFIELD

Some scientists have thought up a novel, if prosaic, application for human
embryonic stem cells: making red blood cells for transfusions. They hope that
those red blood cells could eventually supplement blood donations, which are
often in short supply, and say that the blood might be free of the infectious
diseases that can be found in donated blood. That's an especially attractive use
for the military, because it can be hard to find and store red cells for use on
the battlefield. PAGE D5

PAYING DOCTORS FOR PERFORMANCE

The general idea behind an initiative called pay for performance, or P4P for
short, is to reward doctors for providing better medical care, and Medicare,
employers and insurers have rolled out the programs around the country. But Dr.
Sandeep Jauhar writes that there are serious unforeseen consequences with P4P,
like unnecessary treatments for undiagnosed patients and heart surgeons choosing
to perform operations only on the relatively healthy.  PAGE D5

Can Aloe Vera Gel Heal Burns?  D5

Sports

PATRIOTS CONFIRM BRADY'S INJURY,

If Very Little Else

The New England Patriots made it official: Tom Brady, the team's superstar
quarterback and reigning N.F.L. Most Valuable Player, is done for the year after
suffering a knee injury in the team's season opener. As is the organization's
wont, the Patriots offered little on how extensive the damage to Brady's knee
was and had no speculation on the length of his rehabilitation, beyond
confirming that Brady would have surgery and be placed on injured reserve.  PAGE
C13

ARMSTRONG, BACK FOR MORE?

After months of rumors that he was coming out of retirement, Lance Armstrong
will join the Astana team next year, sources say, and will compete in five road
races -- including the Tour de France, the race he won seven times. In August,
he finished second in the Leadville Trail 100, a 100-mile mountain bike race
through the Rocky Mountains.  PAGE C14

Editorial

THE BAILOUT'S BIG LESSONS

As an act of crisis management, the government takeover of Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac was a reasonable and reassuring move. But it raises a number of
disturbing issues that may get lost in the tumult of the moment.  Page A26

DEBUNKING AN AUTISM THEORY

Ten years ago a clinical research paper triggered widespread fears that a
vaccine may cause autism. That theory has been soundly refuted over the years,
and now a new study provides further evidence that it was a false alarm.  Page
A26

Op-Ed

DAVID BROOKS

The presidential campaign has become a battle between two different definitions
of change. But a few things are clear. From voters, the demand is: Surprise Me
Most. For candidates, the lesson is: Weirdness Wins.  Page A27

BOB HERBERT

Liberals, who have contributed much and get little credit, need to stop being
cowed by the canards from the right.  Page A27

ON NOV. 4, REMEMBER 9/11

In an Op-Ed article, Jeffrey Goldberg, a national correspondent for The Atlantic
magazine who has interviewed both Barack Obama and John McCain on security
issues recently, raises a question: Which candidate is better prepared to keep
America safe from a nuclear attack by terrorists?  Page A27

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (89%); TUITION
FEES (88%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (77%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (75%); RELIGION (72%); RAMADAN (72%); WEB SITES (71%); EVIDENCE (70%);
PRIME MINISTERS (68%); TAX LAW (65%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (65%); TELEVISION
PROGRAMMING (64%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (63%); STUDENT EXPENSES (63%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%); EUROPEAN UNION (58%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%)

PERSON: NICOLAS SARKOZY (73%); SAMAK SUNDARAVEJ (53%); CHUCK GRASSLEY (53%);
PETER WELCH (50%)

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); GEORGIA (94%); CHINA (93%); IRAQ (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); THAILAND
(90%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             316 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Despite New Law, Subsidized Tenants Find Doors Closed

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1280 words


In March, New York City enacted a law making it illegal for landlords to
discriminate against tenants who planned to use federal subsidies known as
Section 8 vouchers to help pay their rent.

But Section 8 discrimination remains a widespread problem, housing advocates,
tenant lawyers and voucher holders say. Renters are routinely turned away by
landlords who refuse to accept the vouchers, and apartment listings continue to
discourage Section 8 tenants from seeking advertised units with phrases like
''No Section 8'' and ''No programs,'' supporters of the law said.

Dilcia Escano tells what housing advocates assert is a common story. Ms. Escano,
34, a single mother and pharmacy worker who lives in Washington Heights with her
three children, said her landlord and the landlord's representatives refused to
take her voucher before the law passed and then refused to take it afterward.

''He said, 'No, we don't recognize that,''' Ms. Escano said her landlord told
her. ''I thought, all is lost.''

The nonprofit Fair Housing Justice Center released a report this month that
found that on one day in July on the Web site www.craigslist.org, there were
1,543 apartment listings posted by landlords and real estate brokers that
discriminated against renters who receive government subsidies.

''If this ad said 'No blacks allowed' or 'No Catholics allowed,' there would
rightfully be a huge uproar,'' said City Councilman Bill de Blasio, a Brooklyn
Democrat who introduced the bill that became the law. ''Effectively what they're
doing is illegal, and it has to stop.''

The law prohibits landlords from discriminating against tenants based on their
use of Section 8 vouchers or any other form of local, state or federal
government assistance. It amended the city's Human Rights Law by adding a
person's ''lawful source of income'' to the list of protected classes.

The law applies to landlords with six or more units. Owners of five or fewer
units are excluded, with two exceptions. The law applies to rent-controlled
tenants in buildings with five or fewer units, and to buildings with five or
fewer units that are owned by a landlord who also owns a building with six or
more units.

The vouchers, financed by the federal government but administered by two city
agencies, had for decades virtually guaranteed landlords in struggling
neighborhoods a modest profit for housing low-income New Yorkers. But as those
neighborhoods have gentrified, voucher holders are finding that property owners
who might have taken their vouchers in the past are now turning them away,
despite the new law.

Section 8 tenants, many of whom are poor, disabled or elderly black and Hispanic
residents, pay about 30 percent of their income toward rent, and the vouchers
cover the rest.

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg criticized the bill for prohibiting private owners
from making sound business decisions about their property while turning a
voluntary government program into a mandatory one. The mayor vetoed the measure,
but the City Council overrode the veto on March 26, and the law took effect
immediately.

Since then, housing advocates have complained that the city has not done enough
to enforce the law or to notify the public about its passage. Lawyers for
landlords and tenants, meanwhile, are disputing whether the law applies to both
prospective and current tenants.

A recent cursory review of Craigslist found dozens of listings for New York City
apartments with phrases like ''No Section 8.'' Some of the listings make it a
point to welcome renters with pets, but state bluntly, ''No programs accepted in
this building.''

Mr. de Blasio has written two letters to executives at Craigslist, advising them
to discontinue the listings, and said he was considering protests or legal
action against the Web site if the listings continue.

The law prohibits the circulation of housing advertisements that discriminate
based on a person's source of income.

A spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio said that a lawyer for Craigslist contacted the
Council's General Welfare Committee, of which Mr. de Blasio is chairman, and
said that the Web site was taking the matter seriously.

An e-mail message sent to Craigslist seeking comment did not receive a response.

One ad reading ''No Section 8'' for a two-bedroom apartment in a 32-unit
building in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, boasted that the building ''has more
than 60 percent gentrified.'' When asked about the law, a man listed as the
''showing agent'' said the landlord did not accept Section 8. ''You're asking
questions I can't answer,'' he said before hanging up.

Others who placed ads barring Section 8 tenants said they were unaware of the
law. ''I didn't know that,'' said Veronica Dumitru, a real estate agent who
posted a Craigslist ad for a Queens apartment reading, ''No Section 8 or other
programs please.'' She said she was going to remove the language from her
listings.

Diane L. Houk, executive director of the fair housing group, said the report,
the advertisements and other data from their research were given to the
authorities, including the state attorney general's office. She said the report
illustrated the frequency of the practice in just one month on one Web site.

''It's not limited to any particular size apartment or to a borough or to a
price range or to a kind of building or broker,'' Ms. Houk said. ''If you're the
tenant looking, it's going to hit you at some point in your search.''

The city's Commission on Human Rights opposed the bill when it was before the
City Council, saying that it would add an unnecessary layer of bureaucracy to an
already successful program. Now the commission is in charge of enforcing the new
law for the city.

Since March, the commission has investigated or received 77 complaints of source
of income discrimination, said Cliff Mulqueen, its deputy commissioner and
general counsel. Of those complaints, 15 were resolved and the tenants' vouchers
were accepted after the commission contacted the property owners. The 62 other
complaints became official cases. Some of those cases have since been settled,
while 33 of them remain unresolved and active, he said.

The commission has the power to fine a landlord and award the tenant
compensatory damages. No landlord has received a fine, he said. ''We're actively
enforcing the law,'' said Mr. Mulqueen, adding that the commission also monitors
and looks into ''No Section 8'' advertisements on Craigslist. ''I guess we could
always do more. We're doing what we can do.''

The Legal Aid Society has sued about 90 landlords from around the city in three
separate lawsuits, alleging that they violated the law by refusing to take the
vouchers of dozens of tenants. One of the tenants they are representing is Ms.
Escano in Washington Heights.

Maxwell Breed, a lawyer for Ms. Escano's landlord, Mon-Rose Realty Corporation,
said: ''Our policy is not to comment on pending litigation.''

Landlords who opposed the creation of the law said their refusal to accept the
vouchers had nothing to do with race or class. They said that getting involved
in the city's Section 8 program by accepting vouchers was a bureaucratic
nightmare of payment delays, apartment inspections and other problems.

Mitchell Posilkin, general counsel for the Rent Stabilization Association, a
trade group that represents thousands of New York City landlords and property
managers, said the group does not condone violations of the source of income
law.

''On the other hand,'' he said, ''it seems pretty evident to us that a lot of
people in the industry simply don't know that this sort of practice is illegal.
At least for the last decade it's been entirely lawful to refuse to rent to
tenants with vouchers.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dilcia Escano, with two of her children, Mageline, 13, left, and
Juan Felipe, 4, says her voucher was refused. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNIE TRITT FOR THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); LEGISLATION (90%);
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); REAL ESTATE (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); LANDLORD & TENANT LAW (78%); RENT CONTROL (78%); EMPLOYMENT
DISCRIMINATION (78%); RACE & RACISM (77%); LAWYERS (75%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (71%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (71%);
LOW INCOME PERSONS (67%); PUBLIC FINANCE (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); GOVERNMENT
GRANTS & SUBSIDIES (58%); SINGLE PARENTS (54%); RELIGION (50%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (50%)

PERSON: BILL DE BLASIO (79%); MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             317 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Despite New Law, Subsidized Tenants Find Doors Closed

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1292 words


In March, New York City enacted a law making it illegal for landlords to
discriminate against tenants who planned to use federal subsidies known as
Section 8 vouchers to help pay their rent.

But Section 8 discrimination remains a widespread problem, housing advocates,
tenant lawyers and voucher holders say. Renters are routinely turned away by
landlords who refuse to accept the vouchers, and apartment listings continue to
discourage Section 8 tenants from seeking advertised units with phrases like
''No Section 8'' and ''No programs,'' supporters of the law said.

Dilcia Escano tells what housing advocates assert is a common story. Ms. Escano,
34, a single mother and pharmacy worker who lives in Washington Heights with her
three children, said her landlord and the landlord's representatives refused to
take her voucher before the law passed and then refused to take it afterward.

''He said, 'No, we don't recognize that,''' Ms. Escano said her landlord told
her. ''I thought, all is lost.''

The nonprofit Fair Housing Justice Center released a report this month that
found that on one day in July on the Web site www.craigslist.org, there were
1,543 apartment listings posted by landlords and real estate brokers that
discriminated against renters who receive government subsidies.

''If this ad said 'No blacks allowed' or 'No Catholics allowed,' there would
rightfully be a huge uproar,'' said City Councilman Bill de Blasio, a Brooklyn
Democrat who introduced the bill that became the law. ''Effectively what they're
doing is illegal, and it has to stop.''

The law prohibits landlords from discriminating against tenants based on their
use of Section 8 vouchers or any other form of local, state or federal
government assistance. It amended the city's Human Rights Law by adding a
person's ''lawful source of income'' to the list of protected classes.

The law applies to landlords with six or more units. Owners of five or fewer
units are excluded, with two exceptions. The law applies to rent-controlled
tenants in buildings with five or fewer units, and to buildings with five or
fewer units that are owned by a landlord who also owns a building with six or
more units.

The vouchers, financed by the federal government but administered by two city
agencies, had for decades virtually guaranteed landlords in struggling
neighborhoods a modest profit for housing low-income New Yorkers. But as those
neighborhoods have gentrified, voucher holders are finding that property owners
who might have taken their vouchers in the past are now turning them away,
despite the new law.

Section 8 tenants, many of whom are poor, disabled or elderly black and Hispanic
residents, pay about 30 percent of their income toward rent, and the vouchers
cover the rest.

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg criticized the bill for prohibiting private owners
from making sound business decisions about their property while turning a
voluntary government program into a mandatory one. The mayor vetoed the measure,
but the City Council overrode the veto on March 26, and  the law  took effect
immediately.

Since then, housing advocates have complained that the city has not done enough
to enforce the law or to notify the public about its passage. Lawyers for
landlords and tenants, meanwhile, are disputing whether the law applies to both
prospective and current tenants.

A recent cursory review of Craigslist found dozens of listings for New York City
apartments with phrases like ''No Section 8.'' Some of the listings make it a
point to welcome renters with pets, but state bluntly, ''No programs accepted in
this building.''

Mr. de Blasio has written two letters to executives at Craigslist, advising them
to discontinue the listings, and said he was  considering protests or legal
action against the Web site if the listings continue.

The law prohibits the circulation of housing advertisements that discriminate
based on a person's source of income.

A spokeswoman for Mr. de Blasio said that a lawyer for Craigslist contacted the
Council's General Welfare Committee, of which Mr. de Blasio is chairman, and
said that the Web site was taking the matter seriously.

An e-mail message sent to Craigslist seeking comment did not receive a response.

One ad reading ''No Section 8'' for a two-bedroom apartment in a 32-unit
building in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, boasted that the building ''has more
than 60 percent gentrified.'' When asked about the law, a man listed as the
''showing agent'' said the landlord did not accept Section 8. ''You're asking
questions I can't answer,'' he said before hanging up.

Others who placed ads barring Section 8 tenants said they were unaware of the
law. ''I didn't know that,'' said Veronica Dumitru, a real estate agent who
posted a Craigslist ad for a Queens apartment reading, ''No Section 8 or other
programs please.'' She said she was going to remove the language from her
listings.

Diane L. Houk, executive director of the fair housing group, said the report,
the advertisements and other data from their research were given to the
authorities, including the state attorney general's office. She said the report
illustrated the frequency of the practice in just one month on one Web site.

''It's not limited to any particular size apartment or to a borough or to a
price range or to a kind of building or broker,'' Ms. Houk said. ''If you're the
tenant looking, it's going to hit you at some point in your search.''

The city's Commission on Human Rights  opposed the bill when it was before the
City Council, saying that it would add an unnecessary layer of bureaucracy to an
already successful program. Now the commission is in charge of enforcing the new
law for the city.

Since March, the commission has investigated or received 77 complaints of source
of income discrimination, said Cliff Mulqueen, its  deputy commissioner and
general counsel. Of those complaints, 15 were resolved and the tenants' vouchers
were accepted after the commission contacted the property owners. The 62 other
complaints  became official cases. Some of those cases have since been settled,
while 33 of them remain unresolved and active, he said.

The commission has the power to fine a landlord and award the tenant
compensatory damages. No landlord has received a fine, he said. ''We're actively
enforcing the law,'' said Mr. Mulqueen, adding that the commission also monitors
and looks into ''No Section 8'' advertisements on Craigslist. ''I guess we could
always do more. We're doing what we can do.''

The Legal Aid Society has sued about 90 landlords from around the city in three
separate lawsuits, alleging that they violated the law by refusing to take the
vouchers of dozens of tenants. One of the tenants they are representing is Ms.
Escano in Washington Heights.

Maxwell Breed, a lawyer for Ms. Escano's landlord, Mon-Rose Realty Corporation,
said: ''Our policy is not to comment on pending litigation.''

Landlords who opposed the creation of the law said their refusal to accept the
vouchers had nothing to do with race or class. They said that getting involved
in the city's Section 8 program by accepting vouchers was a bureaucratic
nightmare of payment delays, apartment inspections and other problems.

Mitchell Posilkin, general counsel for the Rent Stabilization Association, a
trade group that represents thousands of New York City landlords and property
managers, said the group does not condone violations of the source of income
law.

''On the other hand,'' he said, ''it seems pretty evident to us that a lot of
people in the industry simply don't know that this sort of practice is illegal.
At least for the last decade it's been entirely lawful to refuse to rent to
tenants with vouchers.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Dilcia Escano, with two of her children, Mageline, 13, left,
and Juan Felipe, 4, says her voucher was refused. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANNIE TRITT FOR
THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); LEGISLATION (90%);
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); REAL ESTATE (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); LANDLORD & TENANT LAW (78%); RENT CONTROL (78%); EMPLOYMENT
DISCRIMINATION (78%); RACE & RACISM (77%); LAWYERS (75%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (71%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (71%);
LOW INCOME PERSONS (67%); PUBLIC FINANCE (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); GOVERNMENT
GRANTS & SUBSIDIES (58%); SINGLE PARENTS (54%); RELIGION (50%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (50%)

PERSON: BILL DE BLASIO (79%); MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             322 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 7, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

South Ossetians Complain to Court

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 148 words

DATELINE: LONDON


The European Court of Human Rights has received nearly 2,000 applications from
South Ossetians complaining of illegal treatment at the hands of Georgia, the
president of the court, Jean-Paul Costa, said Monday.

The complaints, filed in the two months since Russia and Georgia went to war
over South Ossetia, a breakaway region of Georgia, on Aug. 7, underline the
extent of the legal minefields each country is trying to lay for the other.

They follow applications by Georgia to the International Criminal Court, the
International Court of Justice and the European Court of Human Rights against
Russia, accusing it of war crimes, including ethnic purges.

Russia has also made complaints to international courts against Georgia, and
Russia's foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said last month that Russia would
help any citizens of South Ossetia wanting to make complaints against Georgia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); SOUTH OSSETIAN CONFLICT (88%); WAR CRIMES
(88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (55%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (53%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(57%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (57%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); GEORGIA (94%); EUROPE (93%); NETHERLANDS
(78%)

LOAD-DATE: October 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             324 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 14, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Arrests Militia Chief Facing Trial In The Hague

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


The Sudanese government has arrested one of the most wanted men in the country,
a notorious janjaweed militia leader charged by an international court with
orchestrating mass murder in Darfur, Sudanese officials disclosed on Monday.

The move is widely being interpreted as a way for Sudan to improve its image
abroad and try to head off the possible genocide prosecution of the country's
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, in the International Criminal Court.

Human rights groups have said the militia leader, Ali Kushayb-- also known as
Ali Muhammad Ali Abd-al-Rahman and the ''colonel of colonels'' -- led attacks on
civilians and ordered villages to be burned to the ground and the women in them
raped.

In 2007, the International Criminal Court charged him with crimes against
humanity and demanded that Sudan hand him over. Sudan refused, denying that he
had done anything wrong and insisting that any criminals it did arrest would be
handled in its own courts.

But with Sudan under increasing pressure to curb the violence in Darfur and Mr.
Bashir being pursued by international prosecutors, the government appears to
have changed its tack. Mr. Kushayb is now in police custody, said Rabie A. Atti,
a government spokesman, without disclosing where he was being kept. Nor did he
say whether the government would turn the militia leader over to the
international court.

''We are investigating him to see if he has committed crimes in Darfur or not,''
Mr. Rabie said Monday evening.

Shortly afterward, Sudan's  justice minister reiterated the government's
longstanding position that it would conduct its own trials for war crimes
suspects, according to The Associated Press.

In July, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court in The Hague
formally requested an arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir, saying that he had
''masterminded'' massacres in Darfur and that he should stand trial for
genocide. The judges in The Hague are deliberating whether to push ahead with
the prosecution. African and Arab leaders are urging the court to drop the case,
arguing that it could unleash a backlash against civilians and aid workers and
lessen the dim prospects for peace in Darfur, a region in western Sudan where
hundreds of thousands of people have died in a complex conflict that seems to
have no end.

In August, Sudanese officials said they had been offered a deal by France in
which they would hand over another suspect, Ahmad Harun, a government minister
accused by the international court of war crimes, in exchange for a suspension
of Mr. Bashir's prosecution. In that light, the arrest of Mr. Kushayb could be a
compromise on a compromise. Instead of giving up a government minister who is
suspected of committing wide-scale atrocities, the Sudanese have chosen to
arrest a tribal leader who is one degree of separation away from the government.

Analysts said the arrest might help the Sudanese authorities appear to be
cooperating, without going after one of their own.

''Whilst my heart hopes that this is the start of a real, Sudanese-led, judicial
process, my head tells me it's yet another ploy by Khartoum to buy some time,''
said James Smith, chief executive of Aegis Trust, an antigenocide group.

But when asked if Mr. Kushayb had become a bargaining chip, Mr. Rabie said no.

''This is not something for show,'' he said. ''This is part of President Omar
Hassan al-Bashir's commitment to bring a final and comprehensive solution to
Darfur.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); KENYA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 29, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Militia Chief From Haiti Is Sentenced to Up to 37 Years for Fraud

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 532 words


A former Haitian paramilitary leader accused by human rights groups of
committing murder and torture in Haiti was sentenced on Tuesday to as many as 37
years in prison for his role in a mortgage fraud scheme in Brooklyn that bilked
lenders out of more than $1 million.

In his sentencing remarks, Justice Abraham G. Gerges of State Supreme Court in
Brooklyn linked the defendant, Emmanuel Constant, to the American foreclosure
crisis and the current global economic turmoil.

''This case, while serious in and of itself, takes on an added resonance given
the current global financial crisis,'' the judge said. ''While the defendant and
his confederates cannot be held accountable for the nationwide economic meltdown
and the foreclosure crisis, this scheme, and others like it, have played a role
in the situation.''

In the fraud, Mr. Constant and his collaborators used straw home buyers,
falsified information on loan applications and inflated appraisals to cheat
lenders.

The ''defendant was a full and active participant in this scheme,'' Justice
Gerges said, adding that he found it interesting that Mr. Constant showed no
remorse for the crimes he committed.

The sentence calls for a prison term of 12 1/3 to 37 years.

Mr. Constant's lawyer, Samuel Karliner, said he planned to file a notice of
appeal on Wednesday.

Human rights groups have accused Mr. Constant, known as Toto, of running a
paramilitary group in the early 1990s that raped, tortured or killed thousands
of people in Haiti in an effort to silence loyalists of President Jean-Bertrand
Aristide, who was toppled in a coup in 1991.

When Mr. Aristide returned to power in 1994, Mr. Constant fled Haiti and
surfaced in the United States, where he lived in Queens and worked as a real
estate agent until 2006, when he was jailed in the fraud case.

He was convicted in July on six counts of fraud, grand larceny and falsifying
business records.

Mr. Constant pleaded guilty in 2007 to involvement in a similar scheme on Long
Island. He was sentenced to one to three years in that case.

In a statement prior to the sentencing on Tuesday, the prosecutor, Thomas
Schellhammer, an assistant deputy attorney general, urged the judge to consider
Mr. Constant's ''past criminal conduct'' in Haiti in determining the penalty.
''Those were extraordinary evils,'' Mr. Schellhammer said.

In response, Mr. Karliner implored the judge to base his sentence only on the
crimes at issue in the New York case. ''We punish people for what they have done
on our soil,'' he said.

Mr. Constant also addressed the judge, saying that his role in the mortgage
fraud scheme was ''completely minimal.'' He said that he had been unfairly
accused of crimes in Haiti. ''No one ever witnessed Emmanuel Constant promoting
violence,'' he said. ''I've always promoted reconciliation and peace.''

Justice Gerges said he hoped that Mr. Constant would remain in the State of New
York to serve out his sentence but that federal officials may move to deport
him.

While the judge mentioned Mr. Constant's past in Haiti, noting his ''truly
heinous record of violence, murder, torture and intimidation,'' he did not
explicitly say he had weighed this history in his evaluation of a sentence.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Emmanuel Constant in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn.(POOL PHOTO
BY JESSE WARD)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); FORECLOSURE (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); MORTGAGE FRAUD (90%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%);
FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); CREDIT CRISIS (90%); REAL ESTATE FRAUD (89%);
TORTURE (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); MISCONDUCT (78%); JUDGES (78%); LARCENY
& THEFT (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (71%); COUPS (69%);
MURDER (58%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (50%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: HAITI (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             329 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 5, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombian Army Commander Resigns in Scandal Over Killing of Civilians

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Jenny Carolina Gonzalez contributed reporting from
Bogota, Colombia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 837 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela


The commander of Colombia's army resigned Tuesday after an investigation tied
dozens of military personnel under his command to an intensifying scandal over
the killing of civilians by the armed forces in what apparently were attempts to
inflate the number of insurgents or criminal gang members killed in combat by
security forces.

The resignation of the commander, Gen. Mario Montoya, 59, an American-trained
officer who won acclaim for battlefield achievements during his 39-year career,
comes amid a broad shake-up in the Colombian military even as it celebrates a
string of victories in recent months against leftist guerrillas.

The government of President Alvaro Uribe fired 27 officers and soldiers last
week, including three generals, over reports that impoverished young men had
been lured from the slums around Bogota and taken to a war zone in northern
Colombia, where they were killed by troops, classified as subversives and later
found in unmarked graves.

''These killings permeate the entire military hierarchy and their civilian
overseers,'' Senator Gustavo Petro, an outspoken opposition figure, said in a
telephone interview from Bogota, the Colombian capital. ''General Montoya's
resignation was necessary, but the administration must be held responsible for
allowing crimes like these to occur.''

The scandal has focused scrutiny on Mr. Uribe's government and its top ally, the
United States, which is responsible for vetting Colombian military units for
human rights abuses before they can receive American aid. The United States
provides Colombia with about $500 million a year in assistance to fight rebels
and drug trafficking.

In addition to the recent deaths of 11 young men from the slums near Bogota that
are at the heart of the scandal, prosecutors are investigating accusations that
1,015 civilians  had been killed outside combat since 2002, when Mr. Uribe
intensified the long war against two leftist insurgencies, the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, and the National Liberation Army, or E.L.N.

General Montoya was viewed as the most prominent figure among senior officers
who chafed at greater judicial scrutiny of their methods at a time of major
victories against the FARC, Colombia's largest rebel group, including the daring
rescue of 15 hostages in July.

He was also an outspoken military leader who enjoyed the support of Mr. Uribe,
dating from his command of combat forces earlier this decade in Antioquia, the
president's home department, or province, at a time of conflict there with
guerrillas. The general received training early in his military career in the
United States.

Political analysts in Colombia said the isolation of General Montoya from an
investigation in recent weeks into the latest claims involving civilian killings
signaled a move by Mr. Uribe's government to reduce its exposure to him.

''Montoya was without doubt a man of the president,'' said Pedro Medellin, a
political analyst and columnist for El Tiempo, a daily newspaper in Bogota. ''In
this sense, any decision affecting General Montoya would have come from
President Uribe's heart.''

A C.I.A. memo obtained last year by The Los Angeles Times tied General Montoya
to collaborations with paramilitaries, right-wing militias that are classified
as terrorist groups by the United States, in joint operations with security
forces in 2002 to vanquish guerrillas from impoverished areas of Medellin, the
capital of Antioquia.

And earlier this year, Parmenio de Jesus Usme, a former paramilitary combatant,
testified that General Montoya was involved in a cover-up of an alleged episode
in March 2002 in which five civilians were killed in Antioquia; they were later
presented to the news media as rebels, their bodies dressed in combat fatigues.

In an interview last month, Gen. Freddy Padilla de Leon, the commander of
Colombia's armed forces, said preliminary investigations of the events were
under way.

Prosecutors and human rights researchers contend that patterns have emerged in
recent years in the killing of civilians; they say that in dozens of cases,
civilians were killed by the armed forces and then afterward their bodies were
dressed in guerrilla uniforms or weapons or rebel communications equipment were
placed nearby. The term for these cases in Colombia is ''false positives.''

General Montoya did not refer to any of these cases by name in the statement
announcing his resignation, but he called on Colombians to allow officials who
have been implicated in the scandal the right to defend themselves. Elvira
Vasquez, the mother of one of the men lured from Bogota and then killed in a
distant combat zone, had a different view.

''If he resigned, he must have been involved in some way; what more is there to
say?'' asked Ms. Vasquez, whose son Joaquin Castro, a 28-year-old steelworker,
was discovered in an unmarked grave hundreds of miles north of Bogota in
September. ''It seems the government is finally paying attention to this
issue.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gen. Mario Montoya after announcing his resignation on Tuesday
in Bogota, Colombia.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JOSE MIGUEL GOMEZ/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (94%); ARMIES (91%); SCANDALS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); NARCOTERRORISM (89%); POLITICS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF
COLOMBIA (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); NATIONAL
LIBERATION ARMY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); SLUM DWELLINGS
(74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (66%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (64%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%)

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (50%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (79%)

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (92%); MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (73%); CARACAS, VENEZUELA (59%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(79%); VENEZUELA (59%)

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             338 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 6, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lankan Army Is Pushing for End to 25-Year War Against the Tamil Rebels

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: VELLANKULAM, Sri Lanka


With Sri Lanka's military making its deepest push into rebel territory in a
decade, Asia's longest-running civil war appears to be edging closer to a
military solution -- though one that has already extracted a high cost for the
divided country's civilians.

Following a hard-line strategy designed by the country's defense secretary,
Gotabhaya Rajapaksa, an American who once worked as a computer systems
administrator in Southern California, the government says its troops have ringed
the rebel capital, Kilinochchi, near the northern tip of the island.

Journalists are not allowed to visit rebel strongholds, and so the claim is
impossible to verify. But a rare visit near the front, with an escort of
soldiers, revealed the remnants of Mr. Rajapaksa's uncompromising assault all
along the highway that snakes its way up this island's northwest coast.

The miscellany of war was everywhere. The fishing village of Vellankulam was
empty, save for the odd box of mortar rounds.  Houses lay in ruins. There were
no civilians left, only soldiers and birds.

The destruction was evidence that Mr. Rajapaksa, the brother of President
Mahinda Rajapaksa, is determined to do what no Sri Lankan government has been
able to do in the 25-year conflict: crush the rebels militarily. He has ended
long-running peace negotiations and ignored international calls to improve Sri
Lanka's human rights record.

Over the last year, the military has bombed rebel strongholds, sent commandos to
execute high-profile rebel leaders and pressed steadily into the rebels' lair,
driving an estimated 250,000 civilians ahead of the military advance.

Having fled as many as seven times over the last year, according to aid workers,
some of the displaced are huddling in lean-tos in perilous, open paddy fields
and, when they can, taking shelter from shelling in rebel-built bunkers.

How long the military can hold on to the jungles and paddy fields remains
uncertain. An even bigger mystery may be what happens if the rebel force, the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, are genuinely defeated and the continent's
most persistent civil conflict actually comes to an end.

Despite pressure from its allies, the government has yet to present a serious
proposal on how Sri Lanka, a polarized multiethnic country of 21 million people,
will be governed. At the nub of the war is the question of political rights of
the Tamil minority.

The rebels have fought to carve out a homeland for Tamils on this island for a
generation. It has been the government's aim to stop that.

Asked in a recent interview if his mission was accomplished, Mr. Rajapaksa, 59,
offered a look of immense satisfaction. Yes, he said, his government had not
only bolstered the morale of its own troops and weakened the rebels, but it had
also, more importantly, turned public opinion in favor of war. ''Earlier, the
thinking was, the L.T.T.E. is so strong that militarily, we can't defeat them,''
he argued. ''We have proved we can.

''We were tolerating them for so long,'' he added of the rebels. ''To have a
meaningful political solution, you have to eliminate terrorism.''

Privately, Mr. Rajapaksa's friends and associates say that his resolve is deeply
personal: The Tamil Tigers tried to kill him two years ago.

After more than a decade in the United States, during most of which he said he
worked as a Unix systems administrator at Loyola Law School in Los Angeles, Mr.
Rajapaksa returned to Sri Lanka in 2005, just before his brother, a veteran of
Sinhalese populist politics, was elected.

While Mr. Rajapaksa makes no apologies for his hard-line approach, the
stepped-up war effort has drawn a wave of international criticism over Sri
Lanka's deteriorating record on human rights and civil liberties charges.

Extortion, abductions and extrajudicial killings continue in government-held
areas, and pro-government militias are usually blamed.

Mr. Rajapaksa dismisses this criticism as pro-rebel propaganda. He defends a
botched government effort last year to deport ethnic Tamils from the capital,
Colombo, to the Tamil-dominated north.

His office vets the movement of all humanitarian aid agencies. In September, he
ordered them all to leave rebel-controlled areas in the northeast.

And he insists that journalists should not be allowed to report anything that
demoralizes the war effort. Journalists have in fact come under sustained
scrutiny, and some have been jailed under the country's preventive detention
law.

The restrictions have made divining exactly what is happening on the rebel side
all but impossible. Recently the famously elusive rebel leader, Vellupillai
Prabhakaran, gave an interview to a Tamil newspaper in India, and described the
military's aim of capturing the guerrillas' de facto capital, Kilinochchi, ''a
daydream.''

For its part, the army says it is now on the outskirts of Kilinochchi, which one
recent visitor described as ''a ghost town.'' According to the military, the
Tamil Tigers hold less than half of the land they administered under a 2002
cease-fire agreement.

This month, the army announced the capture of a strategic crossing, about 19
miles north of here, called Pooneryn, which connects the island to Jaffna
peninsula to the north and robs the guerrillas of a crucial smuggling corridor.

But no one knows for sure, since Mr. Rajapaksa does not allow journalists, aid
workers or other independent monitors into the conflict area.

It is clear that Mr. Rajapaksa's drive to eliminate the Tamil Tigers has been no
cakewalk for the military, either. In October, a suicide bombing killed more
than two dozen people, including a retired army major general in Anuradhapura,
an ancient Buddhist pilgrimage site in the heart of the island.

The same month, crudely made Tamil Tiger fighter planes bombed a power station,
plunging the capital into darkness. No longer does the military promise a
deadline for the war to end; it has missed all previous deadlines.

Perhaps the military's biggest obstacle is the civilians still holed up in rebel
territory, alongside the rebels. Artillery fire and aerial attacks would
inevitably yield heavy civilian casualties, something the government has
repeatedly said it wants to avoid.

According to aid workers who have visited the area, the displaced are sleeping
in makeshift tents of plastic and stick, or if they are lucky, crowding into
temples and community halls. Schools, if they are not housing homeless families,
are taking in students from three or four other schools as well as their own.
Classes are going on in shifts. It is a cruel testament to how well this country
has adjusted to unending war.

Mr. Rajapaksa has allowed the United Nations to ferry dry food rations to the
displaced, but despite pleas from Sri Lankan and foreign aid agencies, neither
tents nor tarpaulins, not even after the winter rain and snake bites have set
in.

The plight of the displaced is virtually unknown. Phone lines are dead in the
rebel-controlled areas. Very few people are able to cross the rebel front line.
Those who succeed are kept in military-run camps on the government side.

Sometimes, a small slice of life slips out. In the ground floor women's ward of
the main hospital in government-held Vavuniya town the other day sat a
65-year-old woman, with a mane of gray hair, wide stunned eyes and a tube
through her side.

She had been hiding in a bunker in a rebel-held village, holding her baby
grandson tightly to her chest, she said, when the bunker was shelled. A piece of
shrapnel punctured her left side, perforating the left lung.

Her grandson lay in the pediatric ward next door. His mother had been killed in
a previous bout of fighting, the old woman said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A herd of cows, abandoned by their Tamil owners, ran across a
road while government soldiers passed last month in captured territory in
northwestern Sri Lanka.
 An abandoned Christian shrine in the Mannar district of Sri Lanka, where
government forces have gained ground.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY RUTH FREMSON/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)  MAP: The government says its forces threaten Kilinochchi. Map details
area of SRI LANKA.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); ARMIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
CIVIL WAR (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (85%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); PEACE
PROCESS (77%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); ISLANDS & REEFS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             345 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Pursuing Terror Cases, Respect Our Freedoms

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 202 words


To the Editor:

''A Terror Threat in the Courts,'' by John Farmer (Op-Ed, Jan. 13), recommends
detaining terrorism suspects without trial because he claims prosecutions are
incapable of preventing terrorism without perilously distorting the criminal
justice system. But his solution is more dangerous than the problem.

Criminal prosecutions can play a preventive role because the crime of conspiracy
is committed whether or not an intended illegal act is completed. All that is
required is that two or more people agree to pursue a criminal plot and that one
take any step to advance it.

Judges must guard against abuse, but they can do so because evidence must be
public and subject to cross-examination. By contrast, preventive detention
invites government officials to detain suspects on the basis of secret
intelligence of dubious reliability, which the suspects have no meaningful
opportunity to challenge.

The risks to our basic freedoms are simply too great to justify abandoning a
criminal justice system that is fully capable of incapacitating terrorists
before they strike. Kenneth Roth

New York, Jan. 14, 2008

The writer, a former federal prosecutor, is executive director of Human Rights
Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS
(78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             346 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canada to Rewrite Manual Linking U.S. and Torture

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 451 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


The Canadian minister of foreign affairs, Maxime Bernier, said Saturday that he
had ordered officials to rewrite an internal government manual that listed the
United States among countries that potentially torture or abuse prisoners.

''I regret the embarrassment caused by the public disclosure of the manual used
in the department's torture awareness training,'' Mr. Bernier said in a
statement. ''It contains a list that wrongly includes some of our closest
allies. I have directed that the manual be reviewed and rewritten.''

The United States government has repeatedly said that it does not torture
prisoners, an assurance that has been accepted by Canada's Conservative
government.

Although the Department of Foreign Affairs would not specify which countries
would be removed from the list, the United States is a close ally and had
complained to Canada about its inclusion.

The 89-page PowerPoint presentation now under review is used to train diplomats
on how to detect and handle cases involving the torture of Canadians held by
other countries. It became public after being turned over last week to Amnesty
International Canada as part of a lawsuit.

The document includes the United States on a list of nations under the heading:
''Possible Torture/Abuse Cases.'' Another slide, titled ''Definition of
Torture,'' lists six ''U.S. interrogation techniques'' that it describes as
nonphysical, including blindfolding, covering heads in hoods, forced nudity and
sleep deprivation.

The presentation concludes, ''All of the above have the same long-term effects
as physical torture.''

It was not clear from Mr. Bernier's statement if the rewriting of the manual
would  remove all references to the United States or any other nation. When
asked if that would be the case, Neil Hrab, a spokesman for Mr. Bernier, replied
in an e-mail message: ''The statement speaks for itself. The manual is being
reviewed and rewritten.''

Other countries identified in the document include Afghanistan, Israel, China,
Egypt, Iran, Mexico, Saudi Arabia and Syria. The American military base and
prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, is included on the list separately from the
United States.

Afghanistan is included on  the list although the  Canadian government says
that prisoners turned over to the Afghan government by Canadian troops are not
ill treated or tortured in violation of Canadian laws.

Amnesty International's lawsuit is an attempt to end those handovers.

The current Canadian government has rejected calls from human rights groups to
ask the United States to return the one Canadian currently held at Guantanamo
Bay. Other allies of the United States have asked for their citizens to be
returned.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
PRISONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%); LITIGATION (71%); ARMED
FORCES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%)

PERSON: MAXIME BERNIER (89%)

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (73%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%);
ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             350 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 1, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Allies of Israeli Leader Offer Support as Inquiry Criticizes His Handling of '06
War

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 654 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The prime minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, received crucial support from senior
ministers of his own Kadima Party on Thursday, and leaders of a public campaign
to oust him said they were not immediately planning mass demonstrations. Those
developments improved  Mr. Olmert's chances of surviving a formal inquiry that
found ''grave failings'' in the handling of the 2006 war against Hezbollah in
Lebanon.

Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni was quoted as telling  Kadima ministers that the
government-appointed investigative commission's findings were ''harsh,'' but
that ''we need to continue together -- that is the meaning of taking
responsibility.'' Ms. Livni had called on Mr. Olmert to resign last May after
the publication of a scathing preliminary report by the same commission.

While the preliminary report assigned personal responsibility to the prime
minister and other political and military leaders, the final report, released
Wednesday, was more forgiving of Mr. Olmert than many expected and has been
hailed by some supporters as a kind of exoneration.

Even before its release, Mr. Olmert made it clear that he had no intention of
resigning.

Other ministers who had been critical of Mr. Olmert rallied around him on
Thursday. Ronnie Bar-On, the finance minister and a close ally of Mr. Olmert,
said the prime minister had ''wall-to-wall support'' within his party.

Both the preliminary and final reports were prepared by the Winograd Commission,
named for the retired judge, Eliyahu Winograd, who headed it.

The 34-day war against Hezbollah ended without Israel achieving its  goals of
bringing back two soldiers seized in the cross-border raid that set off the war
and of destroying Hezbollah, which continued to bombard northern Israel with
rockets until a cease-fire was put into effect.

Benjamin Netanyahu, leader of the opposition Likud Party, said  Thursday that
Mr. Olmert had ''failed in war'' and  ''was running away from responsibility.''

But Mr. Olmert's political fate now depends mainly on Ehud Barak,  defense
minister and  leader  of the Labor Party, a major partner in the governing
coalition. Mr. Barak and his  allies  are not expected to announce their plans
before Sunday. If Labor does pull out of the coalition, Mr. Olmert's government
will be left without a parliamentary majority.

Polls published  Wednesday  and Thursday indicated that a majority of Israelis
thought  Mr. Olmert should resign, though in lesser numbers than those who
thought so after the  preliminary report's release last spring.

Amnesty International criticized the Winograd Commission  on Thursday, saying
that it ''made no serious attempt to investigate violations of international
humanitarian law, including war crimes, committed by Israeli forces.''

Israel has been censured by international human rights groups for what they said
was a failure to discriminate between the Lebanese civilians  and Hezbollah
combatants, who often operated from villages during the war.

Amnesty concluded that of about  1,190 Lebanese killed, ''the vast majority were
civilians not involved in the hostilities, among them hundreds of children.''
More than 160 Israeli soldiers and civilians were killed in the war.

The Winograd report, more than 600 pages long, deals generally with issues of
international law. But in an implicit criticism of the army, it recommends a
re-evaluation of the rules governing  the  use of cluster bombs.

Cluster bombs are not prohibited in war, but their use is questioned because
they contain ''bomblets'' that explode over a wide area and may strike
unintended targets.

The Winograd report found no evidence that the army had ''knowingly'' violated
international laws in its use of cluster bombs. But it points to an
''obtuseness'' in the army regarding the terms of their use, particularly
against military targets in  areas where residents had  fled but were likely to
return.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%); LAW OF WAR (76%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BANKING &
FINANCE AGENCIES (73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%);
PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (71%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (71%); ARMED FORCES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: KADIMA (91%); HEZBOLLAH (57%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (92%); EHUD BARAK (79%); TZIPORA LIVNI (73%); BENJAMIN
NETANYAHU (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); LEBANON (88%)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             354 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tactic Called Torture

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 97 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY


Waterboarding, an interrogation technique that has been used by the United
States, qualifies as torture, the United Nations human rights chief said Friday.

Louise Arbour, the High Commissioner for Human Rights, was referring to  whether
American officials could be tried for the use of waterboarding. Gen. Michael V.
Hayden, the Central Intelligence Agency director, told Congress Tuesday that his
agency had used it on three detainees.

Violators of the United Nations Convention against Torture should be prosecuted
under the principle of ''universal jurisdiction,''  Ms. Arbour said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (86%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (58%)

PERSON: MICHAEL HAYDEN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MEXICO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             358 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 26, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gates Pledges U.S. Help For Indonesian Military

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 615 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates pledged arms upgrades and other Pentagon
support for Indonesia on Monday, as the Bush administration forged closer ties
to the military of a country still viewed skeptically by some in Congress for
past human rights abuses.

During a series of meetings in Jakarta, Mr. Gates tried to broaden the focus of
American relations with Indonesia beyond the fight against terrorist networks,
giving only passing mention to the threats they represent,  in a speech before a
group of foreign policy experts.

Instead, he emphasized the emergence of Indonesia as the ''bedrock'' of
Southeast Asia and vowed that the United States would help to shore up the
country's aging military hardware. He was not specific in the types of upgrades
he would approve, but Indonesian officials have, among other things, sought
replacement parts for its fleet of C-130 cargo planes.

Aides to Mr. Gates said that in the years immediately after the Sept. 11, 2001,
terrorist attacks, American policy toward Indonesia was driven too often by the
Bush administration's demands for an aggressive campaign against terrorist cells
in Indonesia.

During a visit in 2006 by Donald H. Rumsfeld, the defense secretary at the time,
his Indonesian counterpart, Juwano Sudarsono, publicly warned the Bush
administration that its counterterrorism policies were overbearing and
self-defeating.

In his speech on Monday, Mr. Gates occasionally struck humble chords, admitting
that at times the United States had been ''arrogant'' in dealings with other
countries.

Mr. Gates called the development of Indonesia's military ''a key component'' of
relations between the United States and Indonesia, and ''a vital aspect of
Indonesia's emergence as a prosperous and stable democracy with global reach.''

In 1992, Congress restricted arms sales and most American training for
Indonesia, citing human rights abuses by the Indonesian military under
Indonesia's longtime dictator, Gen. Suharto. Internal dissent forced Mr. Suharto
to resign in 1998, but Congress enacted new curbs the next year, after a rampage
by an army-backed militia in what was then East Timor Province, and again in
2003, after the killings of two American teachers in Papua Province in 2002.

Meanwhile, Islamic separatists within Indonesia and Al Qaeda were believed to
have begun collaborating. Security experts blamed the groups for a series of
terrorist strikes on Indonesian territory, including the bombings in Bali in
2002 that killed more than 200 people. Military ties between Jakarta and
Washington were restored in late 2005.

Indonesia has largely emerged from the economic woes that crippled the country
in the late 1990s, but is still viewed by many Western security experts as a
potential hotbed of Islamic radicalism. More recently, the Indonesian government
has been credited for cracking down on militants through a combination of
successful police work and a campaign to turn the population against them.

Senior American military officials have long railed against the restrictions on
training and equipping Indonesia's military imposed by Congress, saying they
served only to weaken American influence over a country of growing strategic
importance.

During a visit to Jakarta last September, the Russian president, Vladimir V.
Putin, signed an agreement with Indonesian officials to use a $1 billion Russian
loan to sell the country Kilo-class submarines, helicopters and tanks.

American officials worry that even though the ban on weapons  sales has been
lifted, labyrinthine procedures and what Mr. Gates on Monday called
''bureaucratic inertia'' could still hold up the flow of military hardware.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT
(79%); ARMIES (79%); FOREIGN POLICY (79%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
AL-QAEDA (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); TEACHING &
TEACHERS (62%); RELIGION (60%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (91%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); INDONESIA (96%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA
(79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             383 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 11, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gen.Vang Pao's Last War

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER.

Tim Weiner is a reporter for The New York Times. His history of the C.I.A.,
''Legacy of Ashes,'' won the National Book Award in 2007.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 4939 words


The wars of the 20th century destroyed many millions of people who once lived in
the hillsides and valleys of remote rural worlds. Few were hit as hard as the
Hmong, an ancient tribe whose members hewed out rough lives upcountry in Laos,
west of Vietnam. Half a century ago, Laos became a cockpit of the cold war. The
Hmong, led by a charismatic soldier named Vang Pao, sided with the United States
in the fight against Communism in Southeast Asia. They lost everything -- their
land, their way of life, their country.

Now the war on terror has engulfed Vang Pao in his land of exile, California. It
has given him cause to question his faith in America. Last year, the United
States indicted the 78-year-old general as a terrorist, accusing him of plotting
to overthrow the Communist government of Laos. His prosecutors painted him as a
Laotian bin Laden; they said he conspired ''to murder thousands and thousands of
people.'' In open court, they called the case a conspiracy as immense as the
attacks of Sept. 11. Few former friends of American foreign interests have
fallen further from favor in Washington's eyes.

The case against Vang Pao grew out of a sting operation, a crime created in part
by the government itself. What evidence there is rests largely on secretly
recorded conversations led by an undercover federal agent, and while the
transcripts implicating some of the co-defendants in the case seem damning, the
agent barely met Vang Pao. The talk between them was brief; though Vang Pao may
have dreamed aloud of a glorious revolution in Laos in years gone by, his role
in the conspiracy charged by the government may be hard to prove. The government
presents the case as a clear-cut gunrunning conspiracy in violation of the
Neutrality Act, which outlaws military expeditions against nations with which
the United States is at peace. But the old general's defenders contend that the
case against him is the consequence of a misguided post-9/11 zeal. If convicted
in a trial, the former American ally could face the rest of his life in prison.
And already his indictment has apparently emboldened Laotian and Thai
authorities to crack down on the beleaguered Hmong who remain in refugee camps
or in hiding in the jungles of Laos.

The government has a checkered record of late in its sting operations against
people subsequently charged with planning acts of political terror. In 2006, to
take one example, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales announced that a joint
terrorism task force had broken up a plot to ''levy war'' and to blow up the
110-story Sears Tower in Chicago. In that case, as two trials have shown, an
F.B.I. informant known to the defendants as Brother Mohammed created some of the
key evidence -- leading the group in an oath of loyalty to Al Qaeda, for
instance. He provided them with plans and plots and gave them military gear like
combat boots. The defendants never had contact with actual terrorists, never
obtained weapons or explosives. Two juries have failed to see the logic of the
case; a federal judge has had to declare two mistrials. (The government plans to
try the case a third time.)

The sting operation against Vang Pao exhibits some similar traits. It has also
dismayed a number of American intelligence officers who worked with the Hmong
against the army of North Vietnam in the 1960s and 70s. ''We taught him how to
do these things -- to fight political warfare, to try to defeat the enemy,'' I
was told by Larry Devlin, a former C.I.A. station chief who worked with the
general in Laos. ''We helped Vang Pao learn to do some of the things that he and
his troops are now charged with.''

The United States forged a bond with Vang Pao and his people decades ago. The
pact was created after North Vietnam began carving the Ho Chi Minh Trail through
the jungles of Laos in 1959 to send its soldiers and spies southward. The
Central Intelligence Agency set to work installing a pro-American government in
Laos and building guerrilla forces to attack the trail; the North Vietnamese, in
turn, infiltrated Laos and backed the local Communists, the Pathet Lao. In 1960,
the C.I.A.'s Bill Lair recruited Vang Pao, an officer in the Royal Lao Army, to
lead the agency's paramilitary fight upcountry. Vang Pao had said, '' 'We can't
live with the Communists,' '' Lair recounted seven years ago in an interview for
the Vietnam Archive Oral History Project at Texas Tech University. '' 'You give
us the weapons, and we'll fight the Communists.' '' In the final days of the
Eisenhower administration, the C.I.A. began shipping weapons and military
materiel to the Hmong, a mountain tribe whose members were an isolated minority
in Laos. (The country's dominant Lao are largely lowland dwellers.) Within a few
months, Vang Pao had organized some 9,000 tribesmen to join the battle. Leonard
Unger, the American ambassador to Laos under Presidents Kennedy and Johnson, has
a vivid memory of Vang Pao saying at the time: ''It is I, Vang Pao, and my
people who certainly have to keep the Vietnamese from moving into and taking
over our country.'' His force grew threefold over the next eight years, to some
39,000 Hmong guerrillas.

Recently I met Vang Pao in his lawyer's office in San Francisco. The ex-general,
who is out on bail, has an upright bearing and an impassive gaze and talks in
formal and rehearsed sentences; he seems weighed down by decades of political
warfare and by the burden of speaking for an entire people. ''There were three
missions that were very important that were given to us and to me,'' he
recalled. ''One was stopping the flow of the North Vietnamese troops through the
Ho Chi Minh Trail to go to the south through Laos. Second was to rescue any
American pilots during the Vietnam War. Third, to protect the Americans that
navigated the B-52s and the jets to bomb North Vietnam.'' Many thousands of
Hmong died on these various missions, which were an official U.S. government
secret throughout the 1960s and remain one of the least-known chapters in the
annals of the American experience in Vietnam.

When Hmong soldiers died, their sons picked up their guns, and when the elder
sons died, their younger brothers took over. In 1969, Richard Helms, then the
director of Central Intelligence, sent a downbeat report to the White House
about Vang Pao and his soldiers. They had ''borne a major share of the active
fighting'' against the Communists in Laos, Helms reminded President Nixon.
''These irregular forces are tired from eight years of constant warfare,'' Helms
wrote. Vang Pao ''has been forced to use 13- and 14-year-old children to replace
his casualties.'' And the secret war in Laos went on for six more years, until
the final collapse of American forces in Southeast Asia. ''The U.S. put the
Hmong into this meat grinder, mostly to save U.S. soldiers from fighting and
dying there,'' says Lionel Rosenblatt, president emeritus of Refugees
International, who has followed the plight of their exile for three decades.
''The U.S. had no compunction about putting the Hmong into this role, which
saved thousands of American lives.''

By all accounts, Vang Pao did not lose confidence during those difficult days.
''Honor with one another, sympathy for one another, faith for one another,
that's how we survived,'' he told me. His American counterparts felt the same.
''This guy was like a brother,'' said Devlin, the C.I.A. station chief, who
worked with Vang Pao from 1967 to 1970. ''He was an extremely good leader. He
was worshiped by his troops. We all admired him. Respected him. Liked him.'' The
C.I.A. and Vang Pao had an understanding about what would happen if the war went
badly. ''I had been told when I went out there to tell the Hmong we'll back them
to the end, and if we have to pull out, we'll pull them out too,'' Devlin told
me. But that was not how things worked out. The end came 33 years ago this week,
in May 1975. It was a disaster. Saigon had fallen; the final rout of American
military and intelligence officers from the war zones of Southeast Asia was
nearly complete. The C.I.A.'s last outpost in Laos was its mountain air base at
Long Tieng, the hub of the paramilitary operation. Tens of thousands of Hmong
gathered at the primitive airstrip, looking for planes. Very few came, for there
was no coherent evacuation plan after 15 years of secret missions. As Dan
Arnold, the last C.I.A. station chief in Laos, later recounted, authorization
for an airlift had to come from Washington. In his words, the request met
''delays at the highest political levels.''

The evacuation was abandoned after a chaotic race against time. ''Of course,
most of the Hmong wanted to fly along with me to Thailand, but they couldn't
because we only had enough aircraft to lift the officers and family members,''
Vang Pao said. At least 50,000 Hmong, including many fighters and their
families, were left behind in and around Long Tieng even as Vang Pao and his
C.I.A. case officer flew to safety. Thousands were killed by the victorious
Communists, according to survivors. Tens of thousands fled into the jungle and
wound up as refugees in Thailand; many became boat people, cold-war flotsam,
forsaken. Vaughn Vang, now a 50-year-old school counselor in Green Bay, Wis.,
and chairman of the Lao Human Rights Council, an organization seeking to bring
attention to the plight of the jungle Hmong, became a teenage refugee when Laos
fell to the Communists. ''I ran through the jungle for two years,'' he said.
''We were 260 when we left, and 39 of us made it out to Thailand.''

The luckiest of the refugees made their way to the United States. Their
traditions were hunting and gathering; they had been slash-and-burn farmers who
cultivated opium as a cash crop, animists who believed in the spirit world. They
were not well suited for life in Sacramento. Today more than 200,000 Hmong live
in the United States, mostly in California, Wisconsin and Minnesota. More than
half are under 18. While many of the second and third generation are adapting to
life in America, overall a quarter or more of the Hmong live in poverty and
speak little English, if any.

Over the years, Vang Pao and the other Hmong leaders in the United States have
by and large sustained themselves by raising money -- raising it by raising hope
that someday the Hmong would go back to their land. During the cold-war years,
he gave stirring speeches about liberating Laos. The promise proved empty.
Unlike, say, Miami's Cubans, the Hmong have no real hope of return. Their
survival has depended far more on social services and welfare agencies than on
the political dreams of their aging patriarchs.

''Their way of life has been destroyed,'' Dick Holm, a C.I.A. officer who served
in Laos, wrote in a memoir. ''They can never return.'' The United States, in his
view, ''failed to assume the moral responsibility that we owed to those who
worked so closely with us during those tumultuous years.'' His colleague, Larry
Devlin, said, ''We let the Hmong down terribly.''

Thousands of Hmong survive today as refugees in dismal camps in Thailand.
Perhaps 1,000 are still on the run in the jungles of Laos itself. Human rights
groups, filmmakers and journalists have documented their plight. Though the
jungle Hmong are believed to have staged occasional hit-and-run attacks in the
past, Amnesty International reported last year that ''the jungle-dwellers'
military capacity is all but depleted decades after some Hmong fought in the
C.I.A.-funded 'secret army' in Laos during the Vietnam War.'' The jungle Hmong
say they are being slaughtered by Lao military units who hunt them with
automatic weapons and rocket-propelled grenades, exacting blood vengeance for
the wars of the 1960s and '70s. Veterans -- American and Hmong -- of the secret
missions in Laos see this struggle as the last battle of the Vietnam War. ''The
Communists accuse the Hmong of bringing American bombs to Laos,'' Vaughn Vang,
the Lao human rights advocate, told me. ''This country used the Hmong. They
trained them how to fight. Now the Hmong are dying because they were allies of
the United States.''

This struggle is where the case against Vang Pao began, though the government
asserts that the suffering of the jungle Hmong is irrelevant to its indictment.
If the aim of the defendants was ''to prevent genocide, while one may say that's
politically a good thing to happen in a battle between a Communist government
and free peoples, that's a macropolitical question,'' the lead federal
prosecutor, Bob Twiss, argued in a pretrial hearing. ''We're talking about: Did
these folks conspire to set in motion a plan to kill human beings in a foreign
country? If the answer is yes, it makes no difference whether they were going to
overthrow the government or overthrow a bank and steal money. The point is, they
were going to use those weapons in Laos to kill people.''

The government's case got under way early last year when an undercover agent of
the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms placed a call to a
61-year-old retired United States Army officer named Harrison Jack at his home
in Woodland, Calif., just west of the state capital, Sacramento. The federal
agent, posing as an arms dealer, said his name was Steve Hoffmaster. He had
received a tip, he said, that Jack was in the market for some AK-47 assault
rifles to arm the jungle Hmong.

In late January of last year, the two met at a Thai restaurant in Sacramento in
the first of many such meetings secretly recorded by the undercover agent, a
balding, unimposing, pleasant-faced man in his mid-40s. ''Hoffmaster''
introduced himself as a Special Forces veteran who traveled in and out of Iraq
and sold weapons on the side. Jack -- a generation older than the agent, going
gray, trim physique, friendly demeanor -- was a 1968 graduate of West Point. He
served on spooky missions in Vietnam: an Army Ranger going deep into the jungle
on long-range reconnaissance patrols in search of the enemy. After leaving
active duty in 1977, he became a lieutenant colonel in the California National
Guard, ran a state project on converting disused military bases and then served
as a member of a state commission on terrorism. He created a nonprofit Hmong
Emergency Relief Organization. Its acronym is HERO.

Court documents and lawyers in the case depict another side of Jack: he had a
somewhat mystical bent -- a New Age faith in the metaphysical powers of
''kinetically charged water,'' magic crystals and the like -- and held a
contract to sell his favorite healing water at Hmong festivals in California.
His most recent resume maintains that he has a Ph.D. in clinical hypnotherapy.
The transcripts of the undercover agent's meetings, which the government turned
over to defense lawyers in pretrial discovery proceedings, suggest a kind of
autohypnosis as well: the Vietnam veteran was transfixed by a romantic vision of
saving the Hmong refugees and exiles still struggling against the Communists of
Laos.

At the Thai restaurant, Jack gave the agent who called himself Hoffmaster a
Hollywood version of Hmong history. Jack, according to transcripts I have read
of the taped conversations, explained how the C.I.A. had ''recruited Vang Pao,
flew in airplane-loads of counterfeit money, bought off the Hmong, put 'em in
uniforms, gave 'em status, trained 'em up in like 30 to 90 days and put 'em in
the field. Gen. Vang Pao was their leader. So they ran for 15 years like that.
Took on everybody. Vang Pao basically led them out of the country when the U.S.
left . . . and he's been their military leader, their spiritual leader and their
political leader.''

The agent wasn't that interested in the back story. He wanted to get down to
business and sell weapons, but at first it was no sale. Jack left the undercover
agent a telephone message six days later saying his friends among the Hmong
weren't going forward: ''It doesn't look like the Hmong community is going to be
in a position to continue with their activities.''

Jack himself had no money to buy the guns and yet showed a desire to help the
jungle Hmong acquire arms. The undercover agent stoked that desire and kept his
investigation alive.

The following week, on Feb. 7, 2007, Jack brought a number of Hmong leaders,
Vang Pao included, back to the Thai restaurant to meet ''Steve.'' It was there
that the agent had his only recorded face-to-face conversation with Vang Pao:

Jack: ''General?''

Vang Pao: ''Hi.''

Jack: ''This is Steve.''

Vang Pao: ''How do you do? Gen. Vang Pao.''

Steve: ''Nice to meet you.''

Vang Pao: ''Yeah.''

The undercover agent had something to show the group, a surprise. Out in the
parking lot was a recreational vehicle, and he led them to it. Inside was an
arsenal: not just AK-47s, but also M-16 machine guns, C-4 explosives, Claymore
mines, rockets and rocket-propelled grenade launchers. ''Good selection,'' Vang
Pao said. That ended his direct involvement in the matter, insofar as the
evidence to date reflects. The undercover agent provided an inventory list for
the weapons at a total cost of $9.8 million. No money changed hands, then or
ever. The Hmong never had anything like that kind of cash on hand. But the agent
kept raising the stakes.

''I just got my hands on three Stingers,'' he told Jack a few weeks later. The
Stinger missile is a sophisticated shoulder-fired weapon designed to shoot down
aircraft. Illegal possession of a Stinger is punishable by a mandatory minimum
sentence of 25 years to life in prison. (Through his attorney, a federal public
defender, Jack declined a request for an interview.)

The investigation began to enter a political and military never-never land on
March 5, 2007, when the undercover agent leaned over the table at the Hangar 17
restaurant in Sacramento and confided to Harrison Jack: ''I'm willing to bet,
Harrison, that the C.I.A. is aware of what's going on.'' He continued: ''They
know what the hell's going on. They don't want to get into another Vietnam, but
if Vang Pao goes in there and takes over the frickin' country and gets things
squared away and then wants to have democratic elections -- it's going to be
like that. I have no doubt in my mind.''

Jack replied: ''O.K., that's good to hear. That's good to hear. You see, part of
the question and concern I have is where is the embarrassment factor politically
for the C.I.A.? They went in there; they left behind 75,000 to 100,000 people.''

The undercover agent said: ''Well, you've got a different C.I.A. today than you
had then, Harrison. I think that -- I think they'll step in and go, hey, you
know, this is what we can do and this is why we can do it. Because we have the
backing of our government, not just the agency, and we want to back your
political endeavor of democracy.'' At this meeting, the government asserts in
its indictment, Jack said that Vang Pao had told him that he ''wanted to
overthrow the government of Laos immediately.''

Two days later, Jack telephoned the undercover agent. He reported that his Hmong
friends ''have made an informal contact with the C.I.A. already'' and that they
were ''looking for a meeting down the road.''

But all of this C.I.A. talk may have been just talk. One of Vang Pao's younger
acolytes, named Lo Cha Thao, seems to have been the protagonist in his own
reverie about recruiting the C.I.A. Now 35 years old, Lo Cha Thao was once an
aide to a Wisconsin state senator who did prison time for taking kickbacks; he
has supported himself in recent years by raising money for the Hmong cause. He
told Jack in late March that he had met with Steve Kappes, the deputy director
of the C.I.A.

Jack relayed this riveting information to the undercover agent in a March 28,
2007, telephone message: ''They seem basically supportive,'' Jack said. ''They
also mentioned that they had some funding available.'' A week later, Jack passed
on assurances from Lo Cha Tho that the C.I.A. would provide intelligence as well
as money for the Hmong. In a third recorded conversation, Jack told the
undercover agent that he had asked Lo Cha Thao, ''Where does the agency stand?''
He said Lo replied, ''They can make funds available as soon as we're able to
provide them the intel, the requirements and, you know, meet some of the
terms.'' Federal prosecutors in the case have said in open court that they were
assured by the C.I.A.'s general counsel that no such meeting took place --
although given the nature of the C.I.A.'s work, it is theoretically possible
that the agency's representatives might not have been fully forthcoming with an
assistant United States attorney from Sacramento. But no available evidence
contradicts the prosecutors' assertion that the C.I.A. played no role. Indeed,
it is highly unlikely that a high-ranking intelligence officer would ever sit
down with a man like Lo Cha Thao and provide such an offer. The United States
and the C.I.A. have no evident interest in avenging the long-ago loss of Laos.
These days American foreign policy toward the nation is more focused on trade
than on human rights or regime change.

The reported meeting with the C.I.A. ''didn't happen,'' said Lo Cha Thao's
lawyer, Mark Reichel. ''Lo Cha Thao is a hustler and a half,'' not a master spy
or a wannabe terrorist. But it was his cockeyed vision of an assault upon the
government of Laos that brought the case closer to fruition.

According to the indictment, on April 24, 2007, in a room at a Hilton Hotel in
Sacramento, Lo Cha Thao looked over a cache of weapons offered by the undercover
agent -- five crated AK-47s, three antitank rockets, one M-14 rifle and one
Stinger missile -- and said he would take two Stingers. Then, on May 11, he and
Harrison Jack sat down with the agent, who pumped Lo Cha Thao for his battle
plan.

No worries about the money for the weapons, Lo Cha Thao assured the agent. Vang
Pao had plenty: ''He's like the fifth-richest guy in the world,'' Lo Cha Thao
said. This was nonsense. So was his plan of attack. He laid out a chain of
events in which Hmong insurgents would infiltrate the capital, Vientiane. Their
fellow warriors would transport the weapons from a safe house in Thailand.
According to the indictment and the undercover recordings, Lo Cha Thao told the
agent that he wanted seven or eight key government buildings blown up at the
same time.

''You want it to be rubble, it'll be rubble,'' said the undercover agent.

The Communist government of Laos would flee the capital at the first shot, Lo
Cha Thao said. The Lao military would surrender instantly, and Laos would become
a neutral country, ''just like Switzerland.'' It would all be over in as little
as three days.

The plot proposed ''was not a serious plan by any stretch of the imagination,''
Bill Lair, the C.I.A. veteran who was Vang Pao's case officer and who spent more
than 20 years training security forces in the region, said in a sworn affidavit
in the case. ''To think that large amounts of weapons and explosives could be
delivered and transported freely within Thailand and across the border into Laos
is utterly naive and unrealistic.''

Three weeks later came the arrests. Two hundred federal agents executed search
warrants as the indictments of Harrison Jack, Vang Pao, Lo Cha Thao and eight
other Hmong were announced with fanfare.

The indictment charged that Vang Pao led a conspiracy aimed at ''the overthrow
of the existing government of Laos by violent means, including murder, assaults
on both military and civilian officials of Laos and destruction of buildings and
property'' in the Laotian capital. The government charged that the defendants
aimed ''to destroy these government facilities, to reduce them to rubble and
make them look like the results of the attack upon the World Trade Center in New
York on Sept. 11, 2001.''

Steve, the undercover man, collared Jack. The two men had a talk once Jack was
in custody. This one was recorded on videotape.

''I've got you,'' Steve said. ''I've got you wrapped up. . . . You're not gonna
walk away, but the more you cooperate, the better.''

So, he asked, how deeply was Vang Pao involved in the case?

''I can't speak to Gen. Vang Pao very well,'' Jack said. ''He has his own style.
Keeps everything insulated. And I've heard he's even going in a different
direction. That he's not directly involved in this effort.''

The same day, Scott Maldonado of the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
Firearms interviewed Salen Tong Va Lor, a Vang Pao associate who would not be
indicted. ''You said on June 2 that Lo Thao [another defendant] met with Gen.
Vang Pao and discussed this plan to buy weapons and take them over and fight a
war over there -- right?'' Maldonado asked. ''Yeah,'' came the answer. ''And you
said that Gen. Vang Pao was not in agreement with this plan and that's what Lo
Thao told you?'' The answer, again, was yes.

The investigation, which had been given the cinematic title of ''Operation
Tarnished Eagle,'' was proclaimed as a stellar piece of work by leading federal
law-enforcement officials. Notably, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms
acting director, Michael J. Sullivan, said, ''This investigation read like a
movie script, but turned out to be reality.''

Vang Pao's lawyer had a different view. ''The notion of the Hmong people taking
over the government of Laos is a fantasy,'' John Keker argued in open court
during a bail hearing, a fever dream created and stoked by the government. Bail
was granted.

Prosecutors expect it may take a year or more before the case comes to trial.
When it does, Keker told the court, ''we happen to believe it's going to be a
fiasco and that the jury is going to be chasing the prosecutors down the street
for having brought it.''

The news that Vang Pao had been indicted by the government of the United States
on a charge of conspiring to kill the leaders of Laos reverberated throughout
Southeast Asia. The Thai government and the Lao military accelerated plans to
repatriate Hmong refugees a week after the was handed up; the Thais deported 160
people trying to reach a wretched border encampment. The State Department said
nothing about the matter. ''We had to leave Laos because we are the children of
the C.I.A. allies,'' one leader of the Hmong refugees, Ly Seu, said at the time.
''We would rather die in Thailand than be sent back to die in Laos.''

Thousands more may follow, and the likelihood that they will be questioned
harshly -- or worse -- is very real, says Lionel Rosenblatt of Refugees
International: ''The Lao are feverish to get their hands on refugees who might
be able to shed light on the remaining 1,000 Hmong fighters still in Laos. This
heightens the Lao military's pressure on the Thai government to force the
refugees back to Laos to interrogate some of them about the resistance.'' The
Thai military is reportedly financing and helping to construct a site in Laos
for Hmong refugees, but ''the Hmong will almost certainly resist'' forcible
repatriation, he said, and ''there will be Hmong suicides to avoid being forced
back to Laos. Press stories and photos of this will not be pretty.''

In the days when Vang Pao worked with the United States to kill Communists in
Laos, his troops saw him as more than a military leader. His ability to provide
his soldiers with food and a wage and a gun was unfailing (all were supplied
through the C.I.A.'s airlifts rice and money and guns quite literally fell from
the skies). This was a kind of magic, and it made him something of a secular
demigod. Yet he is no saint, even if some of his aging adherents still see him
that way. There have long been credible, if unproven, allegations that he has
sold commissions in a nonexistent Hmong army. And there isn't much question that
for years he also sold false hopes among his fellow exiles that someday they
would return in triumph to Laos. But he seemed to have abandoned that dream five
years ago, when he startled many of his followers by saying it was time to find
peaceful ways to negotiate with the government of Laos.

Some of his dwindling generation still have relatives in Laos and among the
jungle Hmong. Some still hold out a hope of being buried in their ancestral
land, but it is held by fewer and fewer. In the Reagan years, even after the
cold war died down, ''a lot of the Hmong said, 'Wouldn't it be wonderful if I
could get my land back, my family back, my farm, my silver necklaces that I
buried,' '' I was told by Jane Hamilton-Merritt, an American expert on Hmong
history and culture. But the second- and third-generation exiles, born after
1975, have never seen Laos. Few evince an overwhelming desire to go back; many,
if not most, are reconciled to no return. That is not the burning issue among
them at the moment. The issue is the case against Vang Pao.

''Are the Hmong right when they whisper to themselves that the United States set
up the general?'' Hamilton-Merritt said. ''That's a question the Hmong community
is asking. They are frightened. They say if they can take down the general and
tear his home apart, they can tear my home down, too. The Hmong see this as an
attack on them. They are afraid they are going to be in jail next.''

After his arrest, Vang Pao suffered cardiac problems and was brought to a
hospital bed. A SWAT team stood guard over him, said Keker, his lawyer. Then a
judge granted his release, but he remained under house arrest. Today he is free,
though he may spend the rest of his life fighting the government he once fought
for. His lawyer says he would like to get the case dismissed before the old man
dies.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Vang Pao at his home in Westminster, Calif.
Vang Pao, top, at the Pa Dong base in Laos in 1961. Bottom: The general, in
camouflage fatigues, with an American adviser and Thai officers near Long Tieng,
Laos, circa 1969
Many Hmong remain hidden in the Laotian jungle. These men were photographed in
November. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT MAXWELL
TOP: JOHN DOMINIS/TIME L IFE PICTURES/GET T Y IMAGES. BOT TOM: FROM VANG PAO
 TOMAS VAN HOUTRYVE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); CONSPIRACY (90%); INDICTMENTS (88%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (87%); COLD WAR (78%); COUPS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(75%); WAR ON TERROR (75%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); REFUGEES (72%);
CORRECTIONS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (71%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); JAIL SENTENCING (68%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (67%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (55%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (54%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (50%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (99%); UNITED STATES (98%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); THAILAND (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             385 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 22, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

What the F.B.I. Agents Saw

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 614 words


Does this sound familiar? Muslim men are stripped in front of female guards and
sexually humiliated. A prisoner is made to wear a dog's collar and leash,
another is hooded with women's underwear. Others are shackled in stress
positions for hours, held in isolation for months, and threatened with attack
dogs.

You might think we are talking about that one cell block in Abu Ghraib, where
President Bush wants the world to believe a few rogue soldiers dreamed up a
sadistic nightmare. These atrocities were committed in the interrogation centers
in American military prisons in Iraq, Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. And
they were not revealed by Red Cross officials, human rights activists, Democrats
in Congress or others the administration writes off as soft-on-terror.

They were described in a painful report by the Justice Department's inspector
general, based on the accounts of hundreds of F.B.I. agents who saw American
interrogators repeatedly mistreat prisoners in ways that the agents considered
violations of American law and the Geneva Conventions. According to the report,
some of the agents began keeping a ''war crimes file'' -- until they were
ordered to stop.

These were not random acts. It is clear from the inspector general's report that
this was organized behavior by both civilian and military interrogators
following the specific orders of top officials. The report shows what happens
when an American president, his secretary of defense, his Justice Department and
other top officials corrupt American law to rationalize and authorize the abuse,
humiliation and torture of prisoners:

-- Four F.B.I. agents saw an interrogator cuff two detainees and force water
down their throats.

-- Prisoners at Guantanamo were shackled hand-to-foot for prolonged periods and
subjected to extreme heat and cold.

-- At least one detainee at Guantanamo was kept in an isolation cell for at
least two months, a practice the military considers to be torture when applied
to American soldiers.

The study said F.B.I. agents reported this illegal behavior to Washington. They
were told not to take part, but the bureau appears to have done nothing to end
the abuse. It certainly never told Congress or the American people. The
inspector general said the agents' concerns were conveyed to the National
Security Council, but he found no evidence that it acted on them.

Mr. Bush claims harsh interrogations produced invaluable intelligence, but the
F.B.I. agents said the abuse was ineffective. They also predicted, accurately,
that it would be impossible to prosecute abused prisoners.

For years, Mr. Bush has refused to tell the truth about his administration's
inhuman policy on prisoners, and the Republican-controlled Congress eagerly
acquiesced to his stonewalling. Now, the Democrats in charge of Congress must
press for full disclosure.

Representative John Conyers, who leads the House Judiciary Committee, said he
would focus on the F.B.I. report at upcoming hearings. Witnesses are to include
John C. Yoo, who wrote the infamous torture memos, and the committee has
subpoenaed David Addington, Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff. Mr.
Conyers also wants to question F.B.I. Director Robert Mueller and Attorney
General Michael Mukasey, both of whom should be subpoenaed if they do not come
voluntarily.

That is just the first step toward uncovering the extent of President Bush's
disregard for the law and the Geneva Conventions. It will be a painful process
to learn how so many people were abused and how America's most basic values were
betrayed. But it is the only way to get this country back to being a defender,
not a violator, of human rights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); TORTURE
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); PRISONS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); DOGS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); LAW OF WAR (76%); ARMED
FORCES (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); CORRUPTION (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); JOHN CONYERS (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             388 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 27, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Scandal

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 141 words


To the Editor:

Re ''What the F.B.I. Agents Saw'' (editorial, May 22):

In the long run, the insights of the F.B.I. agents who witnessed torture may
help reposition the country's moral fulcrum and tip the balance toward respect
for human rights, not widespread abuse, in the war on terror.

The Justice Department's report screams for effective action by Congress to halt
continuing abuses. The Guantanamo interrogation center is still open for
business. The military commission trials of five detainees continue to move
forward, even with the possibility of evidence obtained through torture and ill
treatment.

Congress should have investigated immediately. It must now dig deeper into the
torture scandal or it will be complicit and culpable.  Curt Goering

Senior Deputy Executive Director

Amnesty International USA

New York, May 22, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
MILITARY COURTS (68%); EXECUTIVES (65%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (73%)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             392 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Freedom to Offend Outside U.S., Hate Speech Can Be Costly

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; AMERICAN EXCEPTION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1943 words

DATELINE: VANCOUVER, British Columbia


A couple of years ago, a Canadian magazine published an article arguing that the
rise of Islam threatened Western values. The article's tone was mocking and
biting, but it said nothing that conservative magazines and blogs in the United
States do not say every day without fear of legal reprisal.

Things are different here. The magazine is on trial.

Two members of the Canadian Islamic Congress say the magazine, Maclean's,
Canada's leading newsweekly, violated a provincial hate speech law by stirring
up hatred against Muslims. They say the magazine should be forbidden from saying
similar things, forced to publish a rebuttal and made to compensate Muslims for
injuring their ''dignity, feelings and self-respect.''

The British Columbia Human Rights Tribunal, which held five days of hearings on
those questions here last week, will soon rule on whether Maclean's violated the
law. As spectators lined up for the afternoon session last week, an argument
broke out.

''It's hate speech!'' yelled one man.

''It's free speech!'' yelled another.

In the United States, that debate has been settled. Under the First Amendment,
newspapers and magazines can say what they like about minorities and religions
-- even false, provocative or hateful things -- without legal consequence.

The Maclean's article, ''The Future Belongs to Islam,'' was an excerpt from a
book by Mark Steyn called ''America Alone'' (Regnery, 2006). The title was
fitting: The United States, in its treatment of hate speech, as in so many other
areas of the law, takes a distinctive legal path.

''In much of the developed world, one uses racial epithets at one's legal peril,
one displays Nazi regalia and the other trappings of ethnic hatred at
significant legal risk, and one urges discrimination against religious
minorities under threat of fine or imprisonment,'' Frederick Schauer, a
professor at the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, wrote in a
recent essay called ''The Exceptional First Amendment.''

''But in the United States,'' Professor Schauer continued, ''all such speech
remains constitutionally protected.''

Canada, England, France, Germany, the Netherlands, South Africa, Australia and
India all have laws or have signed international conventions banning hate
speech. Israel and France forbid the sale of Nazi items like swastikas and
flags. It is a crime to deny the Holocaust in Canada, Germany and France.

Earlier this month, the actress Brigitte Bardot, an animal rights activist, was
fined $23,000 in France for provoking racial hatred by criticizing a Muslim
ceremony involving the slaughter of sheep.

By contrast, American courts would not stop a planned march by the American Nazi
Party in Skokie, Ill., in 1977, though a march would have been deeply
distressing to the many Holocaust survivors there.

Six years later, a state court judge in New York dismissed a libel case brought
by several Puerto Rican groups against a business executive who had called food
stamps ''basically a Puerto Rican program.'' The First Amendment, Justice Eve M.
Preminger wrote, does not allow even false statements about racial or ethnic
groups to be suppressed or punished just because they may increase ''the general
level of prejudice.''

Some prominent legal scholars say the United States should reconsider its
position on hate speech.

''It is not clear to me that the Europeans are mistaken,'' Jeremy Waldron, a
legal philosopher, wrote in The New York Review of Books last month, ''when they
say that a liberal democracy must take affirmative responsibility for protecting
the atmosphere of mutual respect against certain forms of vicious attack.''

Professor Waldron was reviewing ''Freedom for the Thought That We Hate: A
Biography of the First Amendment'' by Anthony Lewis, the former New York Times
columnist. Mr. Lewis has been critical of efforts  to use the law to limit hate
speech.

But even Mr. Lewis, a liberal, wrote in his book that he was inclined to relax
some of the most stringent First Amendment protections ''in an age when words
have inspired acts of mass murder and terrorism.'' In particular, he called for
a re-examination of the Supreme Court's insistence that there is only one
justification for making incitement a criminal offense: the likelihood of
imminent violence.

The imminence requirement sets a high hurdle. Mere advocacy of violence,
terrorism or the overthrow of the government is not enough; the words must be
meant to and be likely to produce violence or lawlessness right away. A fiery
speech urging an angry mob to immediately assault a black man in its midst
probably qualifies as incitement under the First Amendment. A magazine article
-- or any publication -- intended to stir  up racial hatred surely does not.

Mr. Lewis wrote that there was ''genuinely dangerous'' speech that did not meet
the imminence requirement.

''I think we should be able to punish speech that urges terrorist violence to an
audience, some of whose members are ready to act on the urging,'' Mr. Lewis
wrote. ''That is imminence enough.''

Harvey A. Silverglate, a civil liberties lawyer in Cambridge, Mass., disagreed.
''When times are tough,'' he said, ''there seems to be a tendency to say there
is too much freedom.''

''Free speech matters because it works,'' Mr. Silverglate continued. Scrutiny
and debate are more effective ways of combating hate speech than censorship, he
said, and all the more so in the post-Sept. 11 era.

''The world didn't suffer because too many people read 'Mein Kampf,' '' Mr.
Silverglate said. ''Sending Hitler on a speaking tour of the United States would
have been quite a good idea.''

Mr. Silverglate seemed to be echoing the words of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes
Jr., whose 1919 dissent in Abrams v. United States eventually formed the basis
for modern First Amendment law.

''The best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in
the competition of the market,'' Justice Holmes wrote.

''I think that we should be eternally vigilant,'' he added, ''against attempts
to check the expression of opinions that we loathe and believe to be fraught
with death.''

The First Amendment is not, of course, absolute. The Supreme Court has said that
the government may ban fighting words or threats. Punishments may be enhanced
for violent crimes prompted by racial hatred. And private institutions,
including universities and employers, are not subject to the First Amendment,
which restricts only government activities.

But merely saying hateful things about minorities, even with the intent to cause
their members distress and to generate contempt and loathing, is protected by
the First Amendment.

In 1969, for instance, the Supreme Court unanimously overturned the conviction
of a leader of a Ku Klux Klan group under an Ohio statute that banned the
advocacy of terrorism. The Klan leader, Clarence Brandenburg, had urged his
followers at a rally to ''send the Jews back to Israel,'' to ''bury'' blacks,
though he did not call them that, and to consider ''revengeance'' against
politicians and judges who were unsympathetic to whites.

Only Klan members and journalists were present. Because Mr. Brandenburg's words
fell short of calling for immediate violence in a setting where such violence
was likely, the Supreme Court ruled that he could not be prosecuted for
incitement.

In his opening statement in the Canadian magazine case, a lawyer representing
the Muslim plaintiffs aggrieved by the Maclean's article pleaded with a
three-member panel of the tribunal to declare that the article subjected his
clients to ''hatred and ridicule'' and to force the magazine to publish a
response.

''You are the only thing between racist, hateful, contemptuous Islamophobic and
irresponsible journalism, and law-abiding Canadian citizens,'' the lawyer,
Faisal Joseph, told the tribunal.

In response, the lawyer for Maclean's, Roger D. McConchie, all but called the
proceeding a sham.

''Innocent intent is not a defense,'' Mr. McConchie said in a bitter criticism
of the British Columbia law on hate speech. ''Nor is truth. Nor is fair comment
on true facts. Publication in the public interest and for the public benefit is
not a defense. Opinion expressed in good faith is not a defense. Responsible
journalism is not a defense.''

Jason Gratl, a lawyer for the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association and
the Canadian Association of Journalists, which have intervened in the case in
support of the magazine, was measured in his criticism of the law.

''Canadians do not have a cast-iron stomach for offensive speech,'' Mr. Gratl
said in a telephone interview. ''We don't subscribe to a marketplace of ideas.
Americans as a whole are more tough-minded and more prepared for verbal
combat.''

Many foreign courts have respectfully considered the American approach -- and
then rejected it.

A 1990 decision from the Canadian Supreme Court, for instance, upheld the
criminal conviction of James Keegstra for ''unlawfully promoting hatred against
an identifiable group by communicating anti-Semitic statements.'' Mr. Keegstra,
a teacher, had told his students that Jews were ''money loving,'' ''power
hungry'' and ''treacherous.''

Writing for the majority, Chief Justice Brian Dickson said there was an issue
''crucial to the disposition of this appeal: the relationship between Canadian
and American approaches to the constitutional protection of free expression,
most notably in the realm of hate propaganda.''

Chief Justice Dickson said ''there is much to be learned from First Amendment
jurisprudence.'' But he concluded that ''the international commitment to
eradicate hate propaganda and, most importantly, the special role given equality
and multiculturalism in the Canadian Constitution necessitate a departure from
the view, reasonably prevalent in America at present, that the suppression of
hate propaganda is incompatible with the guarantee of free expression.''

The United States'  distinctive approach to free speech, legal scholars say, has
many causes. It is partly rooted in an individualistic view of the world. Fear
of allowing the government to decide what speech is acceptable plays a role. So
does history.

''It would be really hard to criticize Israel, Austria, Germany and South
Africa, given their histories,'' for laws banning hate speech, Professor Schauer
said in an interview.

In Canada, however, laws banning hate speech seem to stem from a desire to
promote societal harmony. While the Ontario Human Rights Commission dismissed a
complaint against Maclean's, it still condemned the article.

''In Canada, the right to freedom of expression is not absolute, nor should it
be,'' the commission's statement said. ''By portraying Muslims as all sharing
the same negative characteristics, including being a threat to 'the West,' this
explicit expression of Islamophobia further perpetuates and promotes prejudice
toward Muslims and others.''

A separate federal complaint against Maclean's is pending.

Mr. Steyn, the author of the article, said the Canadian proceedings had
illustrated some important distinctions. ''The problem with so-called hate
speech laws is that they're not about facts,'' he said in a telephone interview.
''They're about feelings.''

''What we're learning here is really the bedrock difference between the United
States and the countries that are in a broad sense its legal cousins,'' Mr.
Steyn added. ''Western governments are becoming increasingly comfortable with
the regulation of opinion. The First Amendment really does distinguish the U.S.,
not just from Canada but from the rest of the Western world.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The writer Mark Steyn outside the British Columbia courthouse
where a complaint by Muslims over excerpts of his book printed in the Canadian
magazine Maclean's was heard. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RICK COLLINS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); MAGAZINE PUBLISHING (90%);
CONSERVATISM (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (87%); MAMMALS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(77%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (76%);
DISCRIMINATION (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); FINES & PENALTIES (71%); ANIMAL RIGHTS
(69%); HOLOCAUST (67%)

CITY: VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (58%)

STATE: BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (88%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); FRANCE (90%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); INDIA (79%); ENGLAND (71%); GERMANY (66%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             397 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 27, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Testify On Memo Spelling Out Interrogation

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 644 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Two Bush administration lawyers who provided important legal justification for
harsh interrogation methods that critics denounce as torture made a rare public
appearance on Thursday to defend their actions.

The lawyers, John Yoo, the former Justice Department official who wrote several
major legal opinions on torture, and David S. Addington, who as Vice President
Dick Cheney's legal adviser provided support for the interrogation policies,
spent more than three hours sparring with a House Judiciary subcommittee.

Both men made clear that a controversial torture memorandum of Aug. 1, 2002, was
reviewed at the White House and in the office of Attorney General John Ashcroft
and was by no means a renegade initiative of Mr. Yoo, its chief author. The
memorandum, which said pain had to reach the level produced by ''death or organ
failure'' to be illegal torture, was later withdrawn.

Mr. Addington recalled discussing the document with Mr. Yoo and Alberto R.
Gonzales, then counsel to President Bush.

''My memory is of Professor Yoo coming over to see the counsel to the president
and I was invited in the meeting with the three of us, and he gave us an outline
of 'here are the subjects I'm going to address,' '' Mr. Addington said.

''We said, 'Good,' '' he added. ''And he goes off and writes the opinion.''

Mr. Yoo denied assertions by some officials that he had sought to bypass Mr.
Ashcroft in writing the 2002 memorandum and other opinions favored by the White
House.

Mr. Yoo, who worked in the Office of Legal Counsel, said he had supplied some
drafts of the memorandum and its final version, signed by his boss at the time,
Assistant Attorney General Jay S. Bybee, to top aides to Mr. Ashcroft and his
deputy, Larry Thompson. In written testimony, he said Mr. Ashcroft's staff
''made edits to the opinion'' and worked on it ''up until the very minute it was
signed.''

In the view of some human rights advocates, the 50-page memorandum set the stage
for abusive interrogations by both the Central Intelligence Agency, which had
sought the legal opinion, and the Defense Department, by giving a stamp of
legality to even extreme interrogation measures. After Mr. Yoo and Mr. Bybee
left the Justice Department, their successors formally withdrew the memorandum.

Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York and the subcommittee
chairman, said that as a result of the harsh interrogations and related
policies, ''the reputation of this nation, and our standing as the leading
exponent of human rights and human dignity, have been seriously damaged.'' Mr.
Nadler has organized a series of hearings examining interrogation policies.

Mr. Yoo and Mr. Addington, who rarely appears in public and was subpoenaed to
testify, formed a united front in the face of skeptical questioning from
Democrats, insisting that the administration's tough decisions had protected the
country from a repeat of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. But their styles
contrasted sharply.

Mr. Yoo, now a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley, was
polite and deferential, even as he declined to answer some questions, citing
attorney-client privilege or restrictions on classified information.

Mr. Addington, physically bigger and a more experienced government insider, was
more defiant, talking over subcommittee members who tried to cut him off and
parrying questions with sarcasm.

Mr. Nadler asked him whether he would bear some responsibility if the C.I.A.
interrogation program, which included the simulation of drowning called
waterboarding, was found by a court to be illegal.

''Is that a moral question?'' Mr. Addington, now Mr. Cheney's chief of staff,
shot back. ''A legal question?''

After more jousting with Mr. Nadler, Mr. Addington replied: ''No, I wouldn't be
responsible, is the answer to your question. Legally or morally.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: David S. Addington, now chief of staff to the vice president,
testified Thursday at a House subcommittee hearing on interrogation.
 John Yoo, a former Justice Department official, testified about writing several
major legal opinions on the subject of torture.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANDREW COUNCILL
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); SUBPOENAS (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); TORTURE (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (72%);
WRITERS (72%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%); JERROLD NADLER (58%); DICK
CHENEY (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             402 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Truth Commission

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 824 words


When a distinguished American military commander accuses the United States of
committing war crimes in its handling of detainees, you know that we need a new
way forward.

''There is no longer any doubt as to whether the current administration has
committed war crimes,'' Antonio Taguba, the retired major general who
investigated abuses in Iraq, declares in a powerful new report on American
torture from Physicians for Human Rights. ''The only question that remains to be
answered is whether those who ordered the use of torture will be held to
account.''

The first step of accountability isn't prosecutions. Rather, we need a national
Truth Commission to lead a process of soul searching and national cleansing.

That was what South Africa did after apartheid, with its Truth and
Reconciliation Commission, and it is what the United States did with the Kerner
Commission on race and the 1980s commission that examined the internment of
Japanese-Americans during World War II.

Today, we need a similar Truth Commission, with subpoena power, to investigate
the abuses in the aftermath of 9/11.

We already know that the United States government has kept Nelson Mandela on a
terrorism watch list and that the U.S. military taught interrogation techniques
borrowed verbatim from records of Chinese methods used to break American
prisoners in the Korean War --  even though we knew that these torture
techniques produced false confessions.

It's a national disgrace that more than 100 inmates have died in American
custody in Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantanamo. After two Afghan inmates were
beaten to death by American soldiers, the American military investigator found
that one of the men's legs had been ''pulpified.''

Moreover, many of the people we tortured were innocent: the administration was
as incompetent as it was immoral. The McClatchy newspaper group has just
published a devastating series on torture and other abuses, and it quotes Thomas
White, the former Army secretary, as saying that it was clear from the moment
Guantanamo opened that one-third of the inmates didn't belong there.

McClatchy says that one inmate, Mohammed Akhtiar, was known as pro-American to
everybody but the American soldiers who battered him. Some of his militant
fellow inmates spit  on him, beat him and called him ''infidel,'' all because of
his anti-Taliban record.

These abuses happened partly because, for several years after 9/11, many of our
national institutions didn't do their jobs. The Democratic Party rolled over
rather than serving as loyal opposition. We in the press were often lap dogs
rather than watchdogs, and we let the public down.

Yet there were heroes, including civil liberties groups and lawyers for
detainees. Some judges bucked the mood, and a few conservatives inside the
administration spoke out forcefully. The Times's Eric Lichtblau writes in his
terrific new book, ''Bush's Law,'' that the Immigration and Naturalization
Service commissioner, James Ziglar, pushed back against plans for door-to-door
sweeps of Arab-American neighborhoods.

The book recounts that in one meeting, Mr. Ziglar bluntly declared, ''We do have
this thing called the Constitution,'' adding that such sweeps would be illegal
and ''I'm not going to be part of it.''

Among those I admire most are the military lawyers who risked their careers,
defied the Pentagon and antagonized their drinking buddies  -- all for the sake
of Muslim terror suspects in circumstances where the evidence was often
ambiguous. At a time when we as a nation took the expedient path, these military
officers took the honorable one, and they deserve medals for their courage.

The Truth Commission investigating these issues ideally would be a non-partisan
group heavily weighted with respected military and security officials, including
generals, admirals and top intelligence figures. Such backgrounds would give
their findings credibility across the political spectrum  -- and I don't think
they would pull punches. The military and intelligence officials I know are as
appalled by our abuses as any other group, in part because they realize that if
our people waterboard, then our people will also be waterboarded.

Both Barack Obama and John McCain should commit to impaneling a Truth Commission
early in the next administration. This commission would issue a report to help
us absorb the lessons of our failings, the better to avoid them during the next
crisis.

As for what to do with Guantanamo itself, the best suggestion comes from an
obscure medical journal, PLoS Neglected Tropical Diseases. It suggests that the
prison camp would be an ideal research facility for tropical diseases that
afflict so many of the world's people. An excellent suggestion: the U.S. should
close the prison and turn it into a research base to fight the diseases of
global poverty, and maybe then we could eventually say the word ''Guantanamo''
without pangs of shame.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
PRISONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); ARMIES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%); DOGS (76%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (73%); KOREAN
WAR (73%); WORLD WAR II (73%); ASIAN AMERICANS (72%); SUBPOENAS (71%); TERRORISM
(71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (66%); CONSERVATISM (66%); NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (62%)

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (57%)

PERSON: NELSON MANDELA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             407 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 18, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecutor to Pursue Rebels In Next Case on Darfur Crisis

BYLINE: By ELISSA GOOTMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 405 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


Days after seeking an arrest warrant for the Sudanese president, the prosecutor
at the International Criminal Court said on Thursday that his next case on the
conflict in Darfur would focus on the rebels thought to be responsible for a
deadly attack on international peacekeepers in September.

The prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, already has two cases against figures within
or aligned with the Sudanese government. His latest, the pursuit of President
Omar Hassan al-Bashir on charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against
humanity, has prompted criticism from African countries, as well as China and
Russia.

At a closed session of the United Nations Security Council on Wednesday,
diplomats said, Russia and China expressed concerns that the prosecutor's move
against Mr. Bashir would hinder efforts to bring peace to the region,
potentially opening the door to intervention by the  Security Council.

''There were two camps,'' one diplomat said of Wednesday's talks, ''those who
were implying but not saying that the Council should defer the investigation or
the warrants, and those who were saying the independence of the court had to be
protected.''

By speaking about his investigation into wrongdoing by rebels, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo
may be able to soften the criticism of his action against Mr. Bashir, some
analysts said. Richard Dicker, director of the international justice program at
Human Rights Watch, said that Mr. Moreno-Ocampo's remarks were ''important in
demonstrating the impartiality of his efforts to look at alleged crimes
committed by all parties to the conflict.''

''He's not just going after the government; he's going after the rebel
contingents,'' he said.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo seemed to hint at this himself, telling reporters: ''When you
go to the Arab world or the African world, as you know, they are tired of double
standards. They are tired of justice for my enemies and protection for my
friends.''

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, who spoke at a news conference on Thursday to mark the 10th
anniversary of the treaty establishing the international court, said he had the
names of two commanders suspected of being responsible for the attack, in which
10 African Union peacekeepers were killed. He urged the rebels to cooperate in
the investigation.

He suggested that he would also look into a recent attack  in which seven
members of the joint United Nations-African Union peacekeeping force were
killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor at the International Criminal
Court, on Thursday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY DON EMMERT/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY
(73%); ANNIVERSARIES (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (62%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); AFRICA (93%); CHINA (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (87%)

LOAD-DATE: July 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             416 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

The Pursuit of Justice vs. the Pursuit of Peace

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MEMO FROM AFRICA; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 1330 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal


When Luis Moreno-Ocampo, prosecutor of the International Criminal Court,
reported to the United Nations Security Council last month, he painted a dire
tableau of death, rape and dispossession in Darfur, saying the entire state
apparatus was involved in a five-year campaign of terror there. His target, it
seemed, was Sudan's president.

On Thursday, the prosecutor's office said it had prepared its second case
involving war crimes in Darfur, a region of Sudan. Now analysts, diplomats, aid
workers and United Nations officials are bracing for the increasing likelihood
that Mr. Moreno-Ocampo will ask the judges for an arrest warrant for the
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir.

The indictment of a sitting head of state in a war-torn country would not be
unprecedented: Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and Charles Taylor of Liberia were
both charged by international war crimes courts while in office.

But the complexity and fragility of Sudan's multiple conflicts have led many
diplomats, analysts and aid workers to worry that the Sudanese government could
lash out at the prosecutor's move by expelling Western diplomats and relief
workers who provide aid to millions of people displaced by the fighting,
provoking a vast crisis and shutting the door to vital diplomatic efforts to
bring lasting peace.

The dueling objectives have exposed a growing tension: between justice and
peace, that is, between the prosecution of war criminals and the compromises of
diplomacy.

Darfur, in many ways, is in freefall. On Tuesday, seven peacekeepers were killed
in an ambush, sending shockwaves through the already demoralized international
peacekeeping force there.

''It is escalating every day,'' said a senior United Nations peacekeeping
official in Darfur. ''The government wants us to fail. We are doing our best,
but we are under attack everywhere.''

Aid groups are struggling to provide basic assistance, as they face increased
banditry and harassment. Last week Sudanese authorities expelled several staff
members of the aid group Doctors Without Borders. Hijackings of aid vehicles in
Darfur have become an almost daily occurrence, peacekeeping officials say.

Beyond that, in southern Sudan, the embers are cooling after a fierce battle in
May over the disputed oil-rich town of Abyei that displaced 50,000 people.
Tensions remain extraordinarily high between the sides, which fought a 20-year
civil war that ended in a fragile peace accord in 2005. A government of national
unity is holding, but only just.

Many argue that the added strain of war crimes charges against the head of state
would push an already precarious nation over the edge.

''It is certainly going to close off all sorts of options for diplomacy and
leave us very few options other than condemnation and isolation,'' said J.
Stephen Morrison, director of the Africa program at the Center for Strategic and
International Studies in Washington.

Other analysts and activists argue that it could increase pressure on the
Sudanese government at a critical moment -- when peacekeeping forces in Darfur
are increasingly under attack, the peace agreement with the south is in danger
of collapsing and the aid effort in Darfur hangs by a thread.

''I think it is absolutely imperative to go straight to the top,'' said John
Prendergast, a former Clinton administration official who co-founded Enough, a
group that seeks to end genocide. He argued that concerted pressure by the
international community had changed Sudan's behavior at times.

Sudanese officials declined to comment, saying they would wait until the
prosecutor made his announcement. But in the past, the Sudanese government has
rejected the legitimacy of the court, arguing that Sudanese courts are capable
of prosecuting any crimes. The international court has already brought criminal
charges against two senior government officials, but the government has refused
to hand them over. One was even given a promotion.

In the short term, a request for Mr. Bashir's arrest could have a potentially
devastating impact on the people of Darfur. Representatives of the Sudanese
government have long said that they view the entire aid and security apparatus
in Darfur as accomplices of the international court, bent on regime change.

Aid organizations say they are under intense scrutiny by Sudan's intelligence
agencies, which monitor their communications and tightly control their visas and
permits to work in Darfur. Several foreign aid workers have been expelled at
least in part on suspicion of providing information to the International
Criminal Court.

The government already accuses nongovernmental organizations and the United
Nations ''of passing information to the I.C.C.,'' said one senior aid official
in Khartoum, Sudan's capital,  speaking anonymously for fear of retribution.
''There is quite strong concern they will expel U.N. staff and possibly entire
agencies.''

Diplomats are also worried about the impact an indictment might have on efforts
to revive peace talks in Darfur, which have been stalled for the better part of
a year, and on efforts to prevent the complete dissolution of the strained 2005
peace deal between the north and south.

For months, talks have been taking place between the United States and Sudan,
with American officials trying to persuade Sudan to improve security in Darfur
and strengthen the peace agreement with the south.

In exchange, Sudanese officials would get better relations with the United
States, something they have sought for years, according to diplomats and
analysts. But that process would be much more difficult if Mr. Bashir were
formally charged with war crimes, Western diplomats said.

Diplomats have predicted dire consequences from arrest warrants before. When Mr.
Milosevic, then Yugoslavia's president, was first indicted in 1999 -- during the
conflict in Kosovo -- German, French and Russian politicians said it would put a
fatal obstacle in the way of peace negotiations. When he was transferred to The
Hague, diplomats worried it would destabilize the region.

Similarly, when the Special Court for Sierra Leone unsealed its arrest warrant
for Mr. Taylor, then Liberia's president, in 2003, in the midst of intense
fighting there, diplomats and others involved in peace negotiations privately
warned of disastrous consequences. Kofi Annan, then the United Nations secretary
general, was furious and reportedly told his aides it was a threat to the peace
process.

Both leaders ultimately fell from power, and the role the indictments played in
either prolonging or shortening conflict has been much debated.

More recently, diplomats have complained that arrest warrants hampered a peace
deal with the Lord's Resistance Army, which has ravaged northern Uganda for 20
years.

Led by Joseph Kony, the rebel group has kidnapped thousands of children and
turned them into soldiers and sex slaves. Mr. Kony agreed to take part in peace
talks, but only if the international arrest warrants against him were lifted.
The Security Council, which has the power to suspend prosecutions, was
reportedly ready to agree if Mr. Kony signed.

''But he failed to appear,'' said Richard Dicker, director of the international
justice program at Human Rights Watch. ''It turns out that the rebel group used
the talks as a screen to beef up its depleted ranks.''

The argument that peace trumps justice might be more compelling in Darfur, human
rights workers argue, if there were a peace process achieving results there. But
peace efforts are at a virtual standstill. Previous efforts to bring the
fractious rebel groups together to negotiate ended in failure.

Still, the short-term risks of seeking an indictment are grave, said Alex de
Waal, a Sudan expert at the Social Science Research Council in New York.

''Bashir is paranoid; he feels the world is out to get him,'' Mr. de Waal said.
''He is prone to irrational outbursts and could respond in a very aggressive
way.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: August 22, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on July 11 about an international prosecutor's efforts to
press charges of genocide against the president of Sudan referred incorrectly to
the status of staff members for the aid group Doctors Without Borders working in
the country's Darfur region. A coordinator for the group was initially told to
leave but was later permitted to return; several staff members were not expelled
from the region. A reader pointed out the error in an e-mail message shortly
after the article ran, and this correction was delayed for research.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Refugees hauled branches for firewood at the Farchana camp in
Chad, where many Sudanese have fled. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ISSOUF SANOGO/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 Omar Hassan al-Bashir, Sudan's president, may soon face war crimes
charges.(PHOTOGRAPH BY PHILLIP DHIL/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); ARREST WARRANTS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); HIJACKING (73%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (70%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: OMAR AL-BASHIR (79%)

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AFRICA (79%); SENEGAL (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%); CHAD (79%); LIBERIA (79%); SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             417 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tough Love for Israel?

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 797 words


On his visit to the Middle East, Barack Obama gave ritual affirmations of his
support for Israeli policy, but what Israel needs from America isn't more love,
but tougher love.

Particularly at a time when Israel seems to be contemplating military strikes on
Iranian nuclear sites, the United States would be a better friend if it said:
''That's crazy''  --  while also insisting on a 100 percent freeze on
settlements in the West Bank and greater Jerusalem.

Granted, not everybody sees things this way, and discussions of the Middle East
usually involve each side offering up its strongest arguments to wrestle with
the straw men of the other side. So let me try something different.

After I wrote a column last month from Hebron in the West Bank, my
blog,nytimes.com/ontheground, was flooded with counterarguments -- and plenty of
challenges to address them. In the interest of a civil dialogue on the Middle
East, here are excerpts from some of the readers' defenses of Israel's conduct
in the West Bank and my responses:

Jews lived in Hebron for 1,800 years continuously ... until their community was
murdered in 1929 by their Arab neighbors. The Jews in Hebron today  --  those
''settlers''  --  have reclaimed Jewish property. So I don't see what makes them
illegitimate or illegal. (Irving)

True, Jews have deep ties to Hebron, just as Christians do to Jerusalem and
Bethlehem, but none of these bonds confer any right to live in these places or
even visit them. If Israel were to bar American Christians from Jerusalem, that
would not be grounds for the United States to send in paratroopers and establish
settlements. And if Israel insists on controlling the West Bank, then it needs
to give citizenship to Palestinians there so that they can vote just like the
settlers.

One side is a beautiful, literate, medically and scientifically and artistically
an advanced society. The other side wants to throw bombs. Why shouldn't there be
a fence? (Mileway)

So, build a fence. But construct it on the 1967 borders, not Palestinian land
--  and especially not where it divides Palestinian farmers from their land.

While I do condemn this type of violence, it pales in contrast to Palestinian
suicide bombers, rockets and other acts of terror against Jews. (Jay)

B'Tselem, the Israeli human rights organization, reports that a total of 123
Israeli minors have been killed by Palestinians since the second intifada began
in 2000, compared with 951 Palestinian minors killed by Israeli security forces.

To withdraw from the West Bank without a partner on the Palestinian side will
find Israel in the same fix it has once it withdrew from Gaza: a rain of daily
rockets. Yes, the security barrier causes hardship, but terrorist attacks have
almost disappeared. That means my kids can ride the bus, go to unguarded
restaurants and not worry about being blown up on their way to school. Find
another way to keep my kids safe, and I'll happily tear down the barrier.
(Laura)

This is the argument that I have the most trouble countering. Laura has a point:
The barrier and checkpoints have reduced terrorism. But as presently
implemented, they  --  and the settlements  --  also reduce the prospect of a
long-term peace agreement that is the best hope for Laura's children.

If Israel were to stop the settlements, ease the checkpoints, allow people in
and out more freely, and negotiate more enthusiastically with Syria over the
Golan Heights and with the Arab countries on the basis of the Saudi peace
proposal, then peace might still elude the region. But Israel would at least be
doing everything possible to secure its long-term future, rather than bolstering
Hamas.

If there is no two-state solution, there will be a one-state solution  --  and
given demographic trends, that will mean either the end of Israeli democracy or
the end of the Jewish state. Zionists should be absolutely clamoring for a
Palestinian state.

Laura is right about the need for a sensible Palestinian partner, and the
failures of Palestinian leadership have been legion. At the moment, though,
Israel has its most reasonable partner ever  --  Palestinian President Mahmoud
Abbas  --  and it is undermining him with its checkpoints and new settlement
construction.

Peace-making invariably involves exasperating and intransigent antagonists and
unequal steps, just as it did in the decades in which Britain struggled to end
terrorism emanating from Northern Ireland. But London never ordered air strikes
on Sinn Fein or walled in Catholic neighborhoods. Over time, Britain's
extraordinary restraint slowly changed attitudes so as to make the eventual
peace possible.

I hope Mr. Obama, as a candidate or as a president, will be a true enough friend
of Israel to say all this, warmly but firmly.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); RELIGION (89%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); TERRORISM (85%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(77%); BOMBINGS (77%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (60%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (73%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (93%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(95%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             419 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Extremist Cleric in Britain Moves Closer to U.S. Trial

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 585 words

DATELINE: LONDON


An Egyptian-born Muslim cleric fighting extradition to the United States on
terrorism charges failed in his bid to take the case to Britain's highest
appeals court in the House of Lords on Wednesday. One of the country's most
senior judges ruled that there was ''no point of law or general importance''
that justified a further appeal.

The ruling moved the 51-year-old cleric, Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, a step closer to
facing trial in the United States on charges that include taking part in a
worldwide conspiracy to wage Islamic holy war against the United States.
Britain's home secretary, Jacqui Smith, has signed an order approving his
extradition, and officials have said they plan to fly the cleric out of Britain
as  soon as his last legal recourse has been exhausted.

But lawyers for the cleric, who goes by the pseudonym Abu Hamza al-Masri, have
said they may try to take the case one step further, to the European Court of
Human Rights, a move that could delay extradition by months.

The lawyers have said they would argue that Mr. Mostafa has reason not to trust
formal assurances given to the British courts by American officials that he will
not face the death penalty in an American court or be mistreated. That is the
same argument that was rejected Wednesday by Igor Judge, the appeal court judge
in London.

Officials of the United States Justice Department have said the cleric's trial
will probably take place in New York, with an 11-count indictment based on his
activities in London during the years he was the imam of the Finsbury Park
mosque, a center for Islamic militant ferment until the government closed it in
2004.

After the Sept. 11 attacks in the United States, he became known for his fiery
sermons in support of Al Qaeda and his praise of Muslims involved in suicide
bombings.

His notoriety has been heightened by lurid coverage in British tabloid
newspapers. One paper, The Sun, branded him Captain Hook, a reference to the
steel prosthesis he has used as a hand since he stepped on a land mine in
Afghanistan in the early 1990s, blowing off both his hands and blinding him in
one eye.

Although he later said in his London sermons that he had suffered the injuries
while fighting with a jihadist group against the Soviet-backed government in
Kabul, he told a reporter for The New York Times in 1999 that the land mine
explosion occurred after the war, when he was working as a surveyor on a
road-building crew.

The federal charges against him in the United States include allegations that he
masterminded a terrorist ambush in 1998 in which 16 foreign tourists, some of
them Americans, were taken hostage in a remote area of Yemen. Four hostages --
three Britons and an Australian -- were later killed during a gunfight between
government forces and the kidnappers.

Mr. Mostafa is also charged with conspiring to establish a terrorist training
camp in Bly, Ore., where Muslim followers were said to have received combat
training for possible missions in Afghanistan.

He has fought extradition with more than $2 million in government legal aid,
from a base in the south London prison where he is serving a seven-year sentence
imposed in 2006 for terrorist offenses in Britain, including inciting racial
hatred and encouraging followers to kill non-Muslims.

Because of the two years he spent in custody pending trial, he has reached the
point in his sentence where, with remission, he would have been eligible for
release had he not been indicted in the United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mostafa Kamel Mostafa, a terrorism suspect with the pseudonym
Abu Hamza al-Masri, near his London mosque in 2004.  (PHOTOGRAPH BY ODD
ANDERSEN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JUDGES
(90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
RELIGION (89%); AL-QAEDA (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (75%); LANDMINES
(75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS
(67%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (65%); DEATHS (65%); DAILY NEWSPAPER PUBLISHING (61%);
INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (50%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (50%); HIGHWAYS &
STREETS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(54%)

PERSON: JACQUI SMITH (54%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); YEMEN
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             423 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 28, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran Executes 29 Convicts In One Day

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 262 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN


Iran executed 29 convicted drug smugglers and other criminals at dawn on Sunday
in Evin prison in Tehran, state news media reported, as part of an expanded
crackdown on crime.

The execution of several people at the same time is often reported in Iran, but
rarely do the authorities carry out death sentences against so many people
simultaneously.

Human rights  advocates and Western governments often accuse Iran of rights
abuses, but Iranian officials usually dismiss the criticism and accuse the West
of  hypocrisy.

''The 29 who were executed this morning were involved in the smuggling of
narcotics on a wide scale, organized crime, murder and armed robbery,'' said the
Tehran prosecutor, Saeed Mortazavi, according to state radio.

The police have arrested dozens of people in recent weeks in a new drive against
what the authorities call ''immoral behavior.'' Iran carried out at least 317
executions in 2007, more than any country except China, according to Amnesty
International.

Iran said Saturday that it planned to execute 30 people for murder, rape, drug
smuggling and other crimes.

''We are hoping Tehran will become the most unsafe place for drug dealers, thugs
and troublemakers and also violators of people's honor,'' Mr. Mortazavi said.

''These convicts had long criminal records and after being released from prison
they returned to the same criminal activities,'' he said.

Murder, adultery, rape, armed robbery, apostasy and drug trafficking are all
punishable by death under Iran's Shariah law, enforced since the country's
Islamic Revolution in 1979.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (92%); SMUGGLING (91%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(91%); MURDER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAPITAL CRIMES (78%);
SENTENCING (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ORGANIZED
CRIME (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%);
ARRESTS (73%); ROBBERY (69%); RELIGION (64%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             425 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 2, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Leader Is Questioned For 4th Time In Graft Case

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The prime minister of Israel, Ehud Olmert, underwent a fourth round of police
questioning on Friday, part of an unfolding corruption inquiry that has eclipsed
his political career.

Officers of the National Fraud Unit questioned the prime minister at his
official residence for almost three hours, an hour longer than scheduled, a
police spokesman said, describing the investigation as intensive.

Bowing to public and political pressure, Mr. Olmert announced on Wednesday that
he would resign after his party chose a new leader in September elections.

The police spokesman, Micky Rosenfeld, said that the police had originally
requested a midweek appointment with Mr. Olmert to last for several hours, but
that Mr. Olmert's lawyers had only agreed to a two-hour session on Friday.

Mr. Rosenfeld said the questioning on Friday focused on two affairs. One
concerned allegations that in the years before he became prime minister, Mr.
Olmert, as mayor of Jerusalem and then as a government minister, received
illicit funds from an American businessman, Morris Talansky.

There were no details about the second subject of Friday's interrogation. But
the police announced last month that the investigation against Mr. Olmert had
broadened to include suspicions that he had billed multiple state and charitable
agencies for the same airline flights in the years before becoming prime
minister, using the extra money for private family trips.

Mr. Olmert is the subject of several other investigations, some of which have
been pending for more than a year. He denies wrongdoing and has not been
charged.

Inevitably, the spectacle of a sitting prime minister being investigated for
crimes including bribery, fraud and breach of trust has caused palpable tension
between the Israeli premier and the law enforcement authorities.

Mr. Olmert's lawyers have contended that the state prosecutors and the police
marked the prime minister, determined to bring him down. On the other hand the
attorney general, Menachem Mazuz, suggested last week that Mr. Olmert had been
trying to obstruct the investigation, saying ''the police have met considerable
difficulties in setting dates to interrogate the prime minister and in setting
the length of the sessions.''

Mr. Olmert has also complained of being tried in public, with complete
transcripts of his interrogations by the police appearing in the popular
newspapers.

One central witness in the Talanksy affair, Uri Messer, a longtime associate of
Mr. Olmert's, reportedly stopped talking to the police after a transcript of one
of his interrogation sessions appeared in the widely circulated newspaper Yediot
Aharonot.

The police are now investigating the source of the leaks.

In Gaza on Friday, Hamas forces detained several senior officials of the rival
Fatah organization in what a Hamas spokesman described as a response to Fatah's
roundup earlier in the week of Hamas political leaders in the West Bank,
according to news reports.

Hamas, the Islamist group that took control of Gaza in June 2007, routing Fatah
forces there, said it would hold the Fatah leaders until its own loyalists were
released. The latest sweep capped a week of tit-for-tat detentions that followed
a bomb blast last Friday in Gaza, in which five Hamas militants and a young girl
were killed. Hamas blamed the bombing on Fatah, but Fatah officials denied
responsibility.

On Thursday Hamas released a Palestinian cameraman, Sawah Abu Saif, for the
German broadcaster ARD in Gaza. Mr. Abu Saif had been in detention since last
Saturday, and ARD representatives said he was tortured.

Two human rights organizations, the Palestinian Al Haq and Human Rights Watch,
released reports this week detailing serious abuse over the past year of Fatah
detainees by Hamas in Gaza, and of Hamas detainees by Fatah-dominated
Palestinian Authority security agencies in the West Bank.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CORRUPTION (90%); POLICE
FORCES (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); AL FATAH (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HAMAS (89%); WITNESSES (78%); BRIBERY (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (76%); LAWYERS (74%); AIRLINES (72%);
CHARITIES (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (92%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (73%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%)

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             426 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 5, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Gaza, a Blurry Line Between Enemies and Friends

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER; Taghreed el-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The events of the past few days in and around Gaza -- mortar and grenade
battles, negotiations drawing  in Israel and Egypt, and the bizarre denouement
in which Israel both saved and interrogated scores of Palestinian fighters --
offer a glimpse of the byzantine nature of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

While broadly presented to the world as a fight between the two main Palestinian
factions, Hamas and Fatah, the developments in fact mirror a more complex set of
relationships and shifting alliances that help explain why this conflict remains
so difficult to resolve.

Any fight here has its origins in earlier violence, so where to begin is
problematic. Nonetheless, these particular events began at dawn on Saturday when
Hamas forces, which have ruled Gaza for the past year, surrounded the home of
the sprawling, well-armed and once powerful Hilles clan, whose chief had been
associated with Fatah.

In part, Hamas was looking for the perpetrators of a bombing a week earlier that
killed five of its men and a girl, but more broadly it was taking the next step
in the consolidation of its power and rule over 1.5 million Palestinians in the
coastal Gaza Strip.

Fighting raged all Saturday, and 11 people were killed: two Hamas fighters,
eight members of the clan and a passer-by. By dusk, scores of clan members were
running to the Israeli border fence demanding to be let in to avoid death.

Urged by Fatah leaders in the West Bank to comply, Israel, which is negotiating
peace with Fatah and trying to isolate Hamas, let them in. Some 181 people were
allowed to cross into Israel, with 22 taken to hospitals and treated and the
rest put up overnight on a military base. It was said they would soon be
transferred to safety among their associates in the West Bank.

On Sunday, Fatah leaders in the West Bank made clear they had no desire to
welcome those 181 people. The reasons offered were vague -- Gaza should not be
stripped of all Fatah followers, and more would doubtless follow if they were
let in -- and promises were given through Egypt that the men would not be harmed
if they returned home.

In truth, the relationship between the Fatah leadership in the West Bank and the
Hilles clan was poor. President Mahmoud Abbas, the head of Fatah, who is allied
with other former Fatah leaders in Gaza, was angry that the Hilles clan stood on
the sideline when street fighting broke out between Hamas and Fatah in Gaza in
June 2007. Some Hilles members are with Hamas. And generally the clan cares
about itself more than about either party. Send them back, Mr. Abbas told the
Israelis.

So Israel sent about three dozen men back and said the others were on their way.
As soon as the men stepped into Gaza, Hamas arrested them. Since human rights
groups have recently reported on torture in Gaza, alarms were raised. The
Association for Civil Rights in Israel sent an urgent appeal to the Supreme
Court demanding that Israel stop returning the men to Gaza.

On Monday morning, the Israeli military announced that it would not send them
all to Gaza and that it had persuaded Mr. Abbas to allow many of them into the
West Bank. So the civil rights group backed off, replaced by two right-wing
activists who petitioned the court to stop the transfer of dangerous men across
Israel. By day's end, the army had moved 88 of the men on military buses to
Jericho. Several dozen others were sent to Gaza, while 16 were still in the
hospital.

And the rest? Israeli security forces were interrogating them because Israeli
intelligence considered them terrorists who had possibly shot Israeli soldiers,
launched rockets at Israeli towns or engaged in other anti-Israel violence.

So for now, the Hilles clan has been neutralized, Hamas has increased its power,
Fatah leaders are seen as two-timing and indecisive, and Israel helped save the
lives of some of its enemies. The streets of Gaza were deserted Monday night as
Hamas police officers raided apartment buildings where Fatah loyalists lived.

Still, each side had its own interpretation of the meaning of it all. Israel
felt it was not getting the credit it deserved. As Avi Benayahu, an army
spokesman, said on Army Radio, ''There is no other army in the world that would
take such a humanitarian approach to help Palestinians, some armed, being chased
and fired at by Hamas.'' He added that ''Israel has not received any praises for
its actions. Yet this is the kind of army we have.''

Sufian Abu Zaida, a Fatah lawmaker, told Army Radio he had a slightly different
interpretation of what the Hilles drama meant from a Palestinian perspective.

''When a person is faced with the choice of being killed by his own people or
arrested by his enemy, he will prefer to be arrested by his enemy,'' he said.
''And this gives you a pretty good picture of how bad and cruel the situation is
in Gaza.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Fatah fighters were detained on an Israeli Army base at the
Nahal Oz crossing after fleeing Hamas gunmen in the Gaza Strip.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
URIEL SINAI/GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HAMAS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TORTURE (69%); BANKING &
FINANCE REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); EGYPT (93%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             429 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 10, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blasts in China Kill at Lease 2 Amid Sweep

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Five people were killed early Sunday morning after a violent confrontation in
western China's tense Xinjiang region in which the police fired on assailants
who had attacked a police station with homemade bombs, state media reported.

The violence, coinciding with the first weekend of the Beijing Olympics, comes
amid a police crackdown in Xinjiang. The authorities say Uighur militants in the
region pose a potential security threat to the Games. Last week the authorities
said two Uighur militants attacked a police station in the Xinjiang city of
Kashgar, killing 16 paramilitary police and wounding 16 others.

The blasts that happened Sunday took place in Kuqa County in a succession of
explosions between 3:20 a.m. and 4 a.m., according to Xinhua, China's official
news agency. Witnesses told Xinhua of seeing ''flashes of fire'' and also of
hearing ''sporadic gunshots'' after the explosions.

Xinhua said that a group of ''criminals'' held a drive-by attack against a
public security office in Kuqa and another building, tossing homemade explosives
that destroyed two police cars. Initial accounts indicated that two officers
were killed, though later accounts suggested that two officers were wounded.
Officers shot dead five of the assailants.

The police were continuing to search for suspects in Kuqa, a city of about
400,000 people that is located in the southern part of Xinjiang.

Chinese officials have been waging a security crackdown in Xinjiang that many
human rights advocates consider a thinly-veiled repression of the region's
Uighurs, a Turkic Muslim ethnic group. China has labeled the East Turkestan
Islamic Movement, commonly known as ETIM, as a terrorist organization leading a
Uighur separatist movement in Xinjiang. Several specialists on Xinjiang say the
true size and threat posed by ETIM is uncertain.

One obscure militant group, the Turkestan Islamic Party, has released videos
taking responsibility for previous explosions in China, including two unsolved
bus bombings in the city of Kunming. The group also has made threats to launch
attacks against the Olympics. The IntelCenter, a private group based in
Washington that monitors terrorism activity, has concluded that this group is
the same as ETIM.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
POLICE FORCES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%);
SHOOTINGS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AL-QAEDA
(76%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); RELIGION (69%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); ETHNIC GROUPS (64%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (63%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (50%); ETHNICITY (50%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (94%); XINJIANG, CHINA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             430 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 11, 2008 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

New Spasm of Violence in Western China as 11 Die in Wave of Bombings

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY; Huang Yuanxi contributed research...

Huang Yuanxi contributed research from Beijing.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


The violence in the western Chinese region of Xinjiang rose sharply Sunday
morning with the deaths of a security guard and at least 10 suspects after a
daring series of bombings that began with a predawn assault on a police station,
the state news media reported.

The attacks, coinciding with the first weekend of the Beijing Olympics, occurred
less than a week after what the Chinese authorities had  described as China's
worst terrorist assault in recent memory, in the Xinjiang city of Kashgar. Last
Monday, two Uighur Muslims rammed a truck into a group of paramilitary officers
who were doing their morning exercises, then attacked with explosives and
knives, the authorities say. Sixteen officers were killed and several more were
wounded.

Xinhua, the country's official news agency, described the suspects in Sunday's
attack as ''terrorists,'' though the authorities have not  attributed the attack
to any terrorist group. In recent weeks, the Chinese authorities have accused
the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, or ETIM, of plotting terrorist  attacks
against the Olympics. The Chinese government and the United States State
Department list the group as a terrorist organization, though some specialists
on Xinjiang question its scope and potency. Some human rights groups have
accused China of exaggerating the threat to justify its crackdown against
Uighurs.

More recently, an obscure militant group, the Turkestan Islamic Party, released
videos claiming responsibility for recent bus bombings in southwestern China and
threatened to carry out attacks on the Olympics. Last week, IntelCenter, a
private American group that monitors terrorism, concluded that this group was
the same as ETIM.

The violence on Sunday erupted in Kuqa, a city of 400,000 people in the southern
part of Xinjiang. None of the details could be independently confirmed, though
witnesses in Kuqa said they had heard explosions. In all, the authorities said,
12 explosive devices were detonated in attacks on at least four local government
buildings, a supermarket and hotels, state media reported.

''I woke up to the sounds of blasts, one after another,'' said a 45-year-old
resident of Kuqa, who refused to give his name after being reached by telephone.
''First, I heard several blasts, then I heard some gunshots. One of my son's
classmates who lives in another neighborhood even had a piece of a bomb fall on
his doorstep.''

The man said local authorities had not yet given residents any information about
the blasts. ''To be honest, this is not rare in Xinjiang,'' he added.

The death toll reported by the state media was inconsistent and changed several
times. By late Sunday, the authorities were quoted as saying that eight suspects
had been fatally shot by the police and that at least two others had died as
suicide bombers.

Xinhua described a series of attacks that began at 2:30 a.m. when a vehicle
drove into the yard outside a public security bureau and exploded. A security
guard was killed and two police officers and two civilians were wounded, Xinhua
reported.

Police officers returned fire, shooting and killing one militant and capturing
another.

Roughly six hours later, other assailants began hurling homemade bombs at
government buildings and local businesses, Xinhua reported. The police shot and
killed more attackers.

A 30-year-old woman who identified herself only as Ms. Zhang said in a telephone
interview that she had been awakened by the blasts. ''It lasted so long I
couldn't fall asleep again,'' she said. ''Now I can see a lot of armed police
patrolling on the plaza near my neighborhood.''

One captured militant told the police that 15 people had been  involved in the
attack. Investigators told Xinhua that the explosives  had been made of bent
pipes, gas canisters and liquid gas tanks. The police also seized a taxi that
the group was using.

The local authorities cordoned off the city. The police briefly detained an
Associated Press reporter and a photographer who were working outside the
security perimeter near where the bombings occurred. They reported seeing a
burned-out storefront from one explosion and a three-wheel vehicle in front of
the store that was completely charred.

''This doesn't usually happen,'' a local resident told The A.P. ''It's happening
now because of the Olympics, but I don't know who is doing it.''

On Wednesday, the Turkestan Islamic Party released a video showing a burning
Olympic logo and warning Muslims not to go to the Games.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: August 14, 2008



CORRECTION: An Inside the Times summary in some editions on Monday for an
article about a terrorist attack in the western Xinjiang region of China
misstated the number of people killed in the attack. As the summary headline and
the article itself stated, 11 were killed -- not seven.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A building in Kuqa, in the Xinjiang region of China, after a
series of bombings early Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY NG HAN GUAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); BOMBINGS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); SUMMER OLYMPICS
(76%); RELIGION (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (67%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (95%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); XINJIANG, CHINA (92%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             440 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Jihad Grows in Kashmir

BYLINE: By PANKAJ MISHRA.

Pankaj Mishra is the author, most recently, of ''Temptations of the West: How to
Be Modern in India, Pakistan, Tibet and Beyond.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 954 words

DATELINE: New Delhi


FOR more than a week now, hundreds of thousands of Muslims have filled the
streets of Srinagar, the capital of Indian-ruled Kashmir, shouting ''azadi''
(freedom) and raising the green flag of Islam. These demonstrations, the largest
in nearly two decades, remind many of us why in 2000 President Bill Clinton
described Kashmir, the Himalayan region claimed by both India and Pakistan, as
''the most dangerous place on earth.''

Mr. Clinton sounded a bit hyperbolic back then. Dangerous, you wanted to ask, to
whom? Though more than a decade old, the anti-Indian insurgency in Kashmir,
which Pakistan's rogue intelligence agency had infiltrated with jihadi
terrorists, was not much known outside South Asia. But then the Clinton
administration had found itself compelled to intervene in 1999 when India and
Pakistan fought a limited but brutal war near the so-called line of control that
divides Indian Kashmir from the Pakistani-held portion of the formerly
independent state. Pakistan's  withdrawal of its soldiers from high peaks in
Indian Kashmir set off the series of destabilizing events that culminated in
Pervez Musharraf assuming power in a military coup.

After 9/11, Mr. Musharraf quickly became the Bush administration's ally. Seen
through the fog of the ''war on terror'' and the Indian government's own cynical
propaganda, the problem in Kashmir  seemed entirely to do with jihadist
terrorists. President Musharraf could even claim credit for fighting extremism
by reducing his intelligence service's commitment to jihad in Kashmir -- indeed,
he did help bring down the level of violence, which has claimed an estimated
80,000 lives.

Since then Pakistan has developed its own troubles with Muslim extremists.
Conventional wisdom now has Pakistan down as the most dangerous place on earth.
Meanwhile, India is usually tagged as a ''rising superpower'' or ''capitalist
success story'' -- cliches so pervasive that they persuaded even so shrewd an
observer as Fareed Zakaria to claim in his new book ''The Post-American World''
that India since 1997 has been ''stable, peaceful and prosperous.''

It is true that India's relations with Pakistan have improved lately. But more
than half a million Indian soldiers still pursue a few thousand insurgents in
Kashmir. While periodically holding bilateral talks with Pakistan, India has
taken for granted those most affected by the so-called Kashmir dispute: the four
million Kashmiri Muslims who suffer every day the misery and degradation of a
full-fledged military occupation.

The Indian government's insistence that peace is spreading in Kashmir is at odds
with a report by Human Rights Watch in 2006 that described a steady pattern of
arbitrary arrest, torture and extrajudicial execution by Indian security forces
-- excesses that make the events at Abu Ghraib seem like a case of high spirits.
A survey by Doctors Without Borders in 2005 found that Muslim women in Kashmir,
prey to the Indian troops and paramilitaries, suffered some of the most
pervasive  sexual violence in the world.

Over the last two decades, most ordinary Kashmiri Muslims have wavered between
active insurrection and sullen rage. They fear, justifiably or not, the
possibility of Israeli-style settlements by Hindus; reports two months ago of a
government move to grant 92 acres of Kashmiri land to a Hindu religious group
are what provoked the younger generation into the public defiance expressed of
late.

As always, the turmoil in Kashmir heartens extremists in both India and
Pakistan. India has recently suffered a series of terrorist bombings, allegedly
by radicals among its Muslim minority. Hindu nationalists have already formed an
economic blockade of the Kashmir Valley -- an attempt to punish seditious
Muslims and to gin up votes in next year's general elections. In Pakistan, where
weak civilian governments in the past sought to score populist points by
stirring up the emotional  issue of Kashmir, the intelligence service can only
be gratified by another opportunity to synergize its jihads in Kashmir and
Afghanistan.

What of the Kashmiris themselves, who have repeatedly found themselves reduced
to pawns in the geopolitical games and domestic politics of their neighbors? In
1989 and '90, when few Kashmiris had heard of Osama bin Laden, hundreds of
thousands of Muslims buoyed by popular revolutions in Eastern Europe regularly
petitioned the United Nations office in Srinagar, hoping to raise the world's
sympathy for their cause. Indian troops responded by firing into many of these
largely peaceful demonstrations, killing hundreds of people and provoking many
young Kashmiris to take to arms and embrace radical Islam.

A new generation of politicized Kashmiris has now risen; the world is again
likely to ignore them -- until some of them turn into terrorists with Qaeda
links. It is up to the Indian government to reckon honestly  with Kashmiri
aspirations for a life without constant fear and humiliation. Some first steps
are obvious: to severely cut the numbers of troops in Kashmir; to lift the
economic blockade on the Kashmir Valley; and to allow Kashmiris to trade freely
across the line of control with Pakistan.

India's record of pitiless intransigence does not inspire much hope that it will
take these necessary steps toward the final and comprehensive resolution of
Kashmir's long-disputed status. In fact, an indefinite curfew has already been
imposed and Indian troops have again killed dozens of demonstrators. But a
brutal suppression of the nonviolent protests will continue to radicalize a new
generation of Muslims and engender a fresh cycle of violence, rendering Kashmir
even more dangerous -- and not just to South Asia this time.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ANTHONY RUSSO)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
RELIGION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); MILITARY RULE (78%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); WAR ON TERROR
(76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); MARTIAL LAW (73%); TORTURE (73%); COUPS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (61%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (78%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (98%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%); EARTH (88%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (98%); INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTHERN
ASIA (77%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             444 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            September 1, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES: September 1, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 416 words


International

FROM MERKEL'S DISTRICT,

Georgia Strife Seems Far Away

Germany and its chancellor, Angela Merkel, stand at the very center of the
European response to Russia's occupation of Georgian territory. Yet in her
parliamentary district on the Baltic coast, many say problems in the Caucasus
are a distant concern. Though Mrs. Merkel enjoys strong popular support there,
apprehensions tend to center on bread-and-butter matters rather than faraway
security issues.  PAGE A6

QUAKE TOLL IS WORSE THAN FEARED

The devastation from an earthquake that struck Sichuan Province in southwestern
China Saturday is much worse than initially feared, state-run news media
reported, saying that the quake had damaged more than 258,000 homes and that the
death toll had risen to at least 32 people.  PAGE A7

RUSSIA CLAIMS SPHERE OF INFLUENCE

A day before a summit meeting in Brussels where European leaders were to
reassess their relations with Russia, President Dmitri A. Medvedev of Russia
laid out what he said would become his government's guiding principles of
foreign policy after its landmark conflict with Georgia -- notably including a
claim to a ''privileged'' sphere of influence in the world.  PAGE A6

POLITICAL CRISIS IN THAILAND

Thailand's political crisis entered a more delicate and volatile phase when
government supporters took to the streets as a counterweight to the
antigovernment protesters who have occupied the prime minister's compound for
almost a week. The development heightened fears of violence between the two
groups, who were separated by only a few hundred yards.  PAGE A7

JOURNALIST SHOT DEAD IN RUSSIA

The Russian journalist Magomed Yevloyev, known for his opposition views, was
arrested at an airport in southern Russia and then fatally shot in the head in
what authorities said was an accident but human rights groups said was
suspicious. The shooting in Ingushetia, and other recent violence in southern
Russia, suggested a further clampdown on domestic dissent, such as it is, in
Russia's volatile North Caucasus border region in the wake of the war in
Georgia.  PAGE A6

BOMB SUSPECT IN PHILIPPINES

Philippine authorities said they had in custody Ruben Pestano Lavilla Jr., a
leader and founder of an Islamic extremist group involved in the bombing of a
passenger ship in 2004, which killed 116 people. It was the worst terrorist
attack in Southeast Asia since the Bali bombings in October 2002, when 202 died.
PAGE A6

Mideast Peace Effort Slows  A7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EARTHQUAKES (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); JOURNALISM (89%);
SHOOTINGS (88%); BOMBINGS (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (88%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (79%); NATURAL DISASTERS (78%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); PEACE PROCESS (76%);
TERRORISM (75%); SICHUAN EARTHQUAKE (75%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HEAD INJURIES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(68%); FOREIGN POLICY (68%); ARRESTS (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (60%); RELIGION
(50%)

PERSON: ANGELA MERKEL (90%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (78%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (90%); SICHUAN, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); GEORGIA (95%); CAUCASIAN STATES (93%); CHINA
(92%); PHILIPPINES (92%); THAILAND (91%); GERMANY (90%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA
(79%); ASIA (79%); BELGIUM (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             448 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Caught in the Cross-Fire

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 538 words


Civilians in Afghanistan are paying a deadly price in the war against the
Taliban and Al Qaeda. America is fast losing the battle for hearts and minds,
and unless the Pentagon comes up with a better strategy, the United States and
its allies may well lose the war.

According to Human Rights Watch, at least 540 Afghan civilians died in fighting
related to the conflict in the first seven months of this year. It says the
Taliban were responsible for 367 of those deaths;  119 Afghans died in United
States and NATO airstrikes, while 54 died in other American and NATO attacks.

The group's numbers for American and NATO-caused civilian deaths were much
higher last year -- 434 deaths, including 321 from airstrikes -- but the 2008
figures are still unacceptably high. And they do not count an airstrike last
month in which Afghan officials charge that 95 people died. Washington disputes
that number,  and there needs to be a credible investigation.

Afghans once looked on American troops as their liberators, but far too many
have come to see them as enemies. Add to that the corruption and incompetence of
the government of Afghanistan's American-backed president, Hamid Karzai, and we
fear Afghans are being driven back into the hands of the repressive Taliban.

There are too few American and NATO troops in Afghanistan to wage this fight on
the ground. So the war against an increasingly powerful Taliban is often fought
from the sky. Bombs dropped in populated areas increase the chances of deadly
mistakes. In 2007, under pressure from Mr. Karzai, NATO made changes in
targeting tactics, including delaying attacks in areas where civilians might be
harmed. This has had some impact but obviously not enough.

Defense Secretary Robert Gates wants to send 4,500 more American ground troops
to Afghanistan -- if they can be spared from the war in Iraq. But American
commanders in Afghanistan have been pleading for months for about three times
that number. NATO needs to step up its military efforts, and with other states
build up Afghanistan's security forces, administrative capacity and rural
development.

NATO commanders are also trying to coordinate operations more closely with the
Afghan military, giving it a bigger role in planning operations and conducting
searches. These changes are welcome but long overdue.

We have similar concerns about Pakistan. This week, helicopter-borne American
Special Operations forces attacked Qaeda militants in a Pakistani village near
the Afghan border. At least one civilian, a child, was killed and possibly more
in what may be the start of a new American offensive.

Pakistan's political situation is extremely fragile, and anti-American sentiment
there is fierce. Sending more American troops and planes into Pakistan's lawless
border regions might be worth the backlash if the mission apprehended a top
Qaeda operative. That apparently did not happen this week.

Pakistan's army, with intelligence help and carefully monitored financial
support, should do most of the fighting. Asif Ali Zardari, expected to be
Pakistan's new president, has promised to work to defeat the Taliban and ensure
that the country is not used for terrorist attacks. We hope he delivers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
BOMBINGS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA
(78%); ARMIES (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (74%); POLITICS
(66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (57%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (93%); AL-QAEDA (84%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (58%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%); ROBERT M GATES (50%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); PAKISTAN (94%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             463 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 20, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Insurgents in Afghanistan Stop Bus and Behead as Many as 30 Passengers

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and TAIMOOR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 551 words


KABUL, Afghanistan -- Taliban insurgents pulled some 50 passengers off a bus in
southern Afghanistan and beheaded as many as 30 of them after accusing them of
being soldiers traveling in civilian clothes, Afghan officials in the region
announced on Sunday.

The police chief of Kandahar Province, where the attack occurred on Thursday,
said that of six bodies retrieved so far, all had been beheaded, mutilated and
dumped. The police had received information that 24 other people had been killed
but had yet to find their bodies, the police chief, Gen. Matiullah Qati, said.

The attack was on the main road running from the southern city of Kandahar to
the western town of Herat, General Qati said. It took place in Maiwand District,
which is known as an area with a significant Taliban presence, where attacks on
military convoys are frequent. The road is also the main route for British and
Afghan army troops traveling to Helmand Province, where the insurgency is
strongest.

The attack follows a pattern of intimidation and brutality that Taliban
insurgents have pursued, spreading terror in an effort to undermine support for
the Afghan government.

A Taliban spokesman, Qari Yousuf Ahmadi, confirmed Sunday that the group was
responsible for the killings and said that 27 passengers had been taken from the
bus three days earlier and killed after appearing before a Taliban court.

''We discovered solid proof and documents that they were with the Afghan
National Army, and also we had solid information that they were going to Lashkar
Gah to help the army,'' he said by telephone, referring to the capital of
Helmand Province. He said the Taliban had called the men's families to announce
that they had been caught and that their throats would be cut.

Afghan officials angrily denied that the passengers were soldiers or police
officers and said that they were all men going west to Iran to find work.
Thousands of Afghans travel every year to neighboring Iran to seek work, via the
city of Herat.

''This is a very cruel act carried out by the Taliban,'' said Gulab Mangal, the
governor of Helmand Province. ''We condemn this crime and we request that human
rights organizations investigate thoroughly.''

The governor also denied the Taliban's assertion that the men had been traveling
to Lashkar Gah to join his administration and work to fight the Taliban
insurgency.

''I completely reject this,'' he said in a telephone interview from Lashkar Gah.
''It is a total lie.''

''They were actually going to Herat, and from Herat they were going to Iran to
work,'' he said. ''They were all civilian and were from different provinces.
They were just going there to get work.''

The Afghan military spokesman, Gen. Zaher Azimi, told The Associated Press that
the men could not have been soldiers because the army always traveled in
military convoys or by air.

The Taliban had also tried to stop another bus on Thursday as it passed through
Maiwand District, the police chief said. It did not stop, but the Taliban gunmen
opened fire on it, killing a child and wounding a man inside.

The passengers who were beheaded were on a second bus that was stopped; the 50
people on board were taken off and marched away, the police chief said. Ten were
released with the bus a day later, but 40 men were still unaccounted for, he
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Luis Soriano, a teacher from La Gloria, Colombia, traveled to
the village of El Brasil with his Biblioburro on Oct. 11. The donkeys are named
Alfa and Beto.
 Mr. Soriano's rule is that children, like these in El Brasil, must hear him
read before they can borrow his books. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY SCOTT DALTON FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (94%); ARMIES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); POLICE FORCES
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

CITY: HERAT, AFGHANISTAN (94%); LASHKAR GAH, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL,
AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             465 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 23, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Mistaken Identity' Cited in 9 Afghan Deaths

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and CARLOTTA GALL; Taimoor Shah contributed
reporting from Dehrawoot, Afghanistan, and Alan Cowell from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


An overnight airstrike by coalition forces that Afghan authorities said killed
nine Afghan Army soldiers may have been a case of mutually mistaken identity,
the United States-led military coalition said Wednesday.

Gen. Zahir Azimi, the spokesman for the Afghan Defense Ministry, said the
airstrike in Khost Province in eastern Afghanistan killed nine soldiers and
wounded three others, one seriously. Other officials in the area said the attack
might have been carried out by helicopter gunships.

In a statement, the coalition said a convoy of its troops  had been  ''involved
in multiple engagements'' that led to the deaths of the Afghan soldiers.
''Initial reports from troops on the ground indicate that this may be a case of
mistaken identity on both sides,'' the statement said.

It did not give a death toll or identify the nationality of the force
responsible for the strike.

Col. Greg Julian, a spokesman for American forces in Afghanistan, said the
fighting erupted as coalition troops approached an Afghan Army position.

Afghan anger over airstrikes has been deepening, but mainly over civilian
casualties. American and NATO airstrikes have killed some 500 Afghan civilians
in the past five years, according to Human Rights Watch and news reports. In one
of the most contentious cases, an American AC-130 gunship attacked a suspected
Taliban compound in August, prompting assertions by villagers that more than 90
civilians were killed, a majority of them women and children.

The American military initially said  five to seven civilians were killed, but a
subsequent report by a military investigator put the civilian death toll at
more than 30.

There have been fewer reports of accidental attacks on the Afghan military. In
June 2007, American forces called in air support when Afghan police officers
opened fire on them during a hunt for Taliban militants. Seven Afghan police
officers were killed. There have also been reports recently that Afghan officers
have  fired on coalition troops, raising concerns that militants have
infiltrated the forces.

The latest airstrike came as fighting in Afghanistan reached its highest level
since  late 2001.

The police in  Oruzgan Province said that about 150 militants attacked a
district center on Tuesday night and that the Afghan police killed 35 of them,
losing three of their own. Such figures are hard to corroborate.

Juma Gul Hitap, the Oruzgan governor, said the police called in coalition
airstrikes during  clashes that continued Wednesday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (86%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); POLICE FORCES (58%); HELICOPTERS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             468 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 1, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Zimbabwe: Justice Urged In Attacks

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 107 words


Beatings, rapes and killings of dissidents have escalated in Zimbabwe because
the politicians and the police who are responsible for the violence have not
been punished, Amnesty International said Friday. The group called on President
Robert Mugabe and the leaders of the political opposition, who are deadlocked in
their negotiations over a unity government, to address the need to bring human
rights violators to justice. Some people are concerned that the stalled talks
might collapse because Mr. Mugabe's supporters and perhaps the president fear
that they will face human rights trials if his authority is diminished through
power sharing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(85%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (95%)

LOAD-DATE: November 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             474 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times: Nov. 14, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2389 words


INTERNATIONAL

LAWYERS FILE CASE IN SPAIN

On 1989 El Salvador Massacre

Using the Spanish legal principle that crimes against humanity can be prosecuted
anywhere, human rights lawyers filed a criminal complaint to revisit one of the
most notorious events of El Salvador's civil war: the killing of six Jesuit
priests by the Salvadoran Army in 1989. Among those named is the Salvadoran
president at the time, Alfredo Cristiani Burkard, and 14 former members of the
military.   PAGE A10

SOME WANT TO LEAVE WEST BANK

The majority of West Bank settlers vow never to abandon the heart of the
historic Jewish homeland, but thousands of others say they want to move back to
within the pre-1967 borders of Israel. They say that the West Bank settlement
enterprise -- at least that part beyond the barrier of wall and fence that
Israel has been building -- is doomed and that their lives are at risk. Many say
something else as well: The Israeli occupation of land claimed by the
Palestinians is wrong.   PAGE A6

CRITICISM OF RUSSIAN THREAT

Russia's threat to station missiles along its border with Europe drew strong
criticism from senior United States and European officials as they prepared to
confront President Dmitri A. Medvedev on the matter before heading together to
Washington to discuss reforming the world financial system. The president of the
European Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso, warned that ''cold war rhetoric'' over
the issue was ''stupid.''  PAGE A12

BOMBER HITS AMERICAN CONVOY

A day after a fierce suicide bombing in southern Afghanistan, insurgents struck
an American military convoy in a crowded market in the eastern part of the
country, and officials said one soldier and 18 civilians were killed. A suicide
car bomber approached the convoy and then swerved into the market around 8 a.m.
PAGE A8

BULGARIA'S FABRIC OF CORRUPTION

A nongovernmental global watchdog called Bulgaria the most corrupt country in
the European Union, but exposing that corruption is not a battle for the
fainthearted. The coroner of the capital, Sofia, tried. He died hanging from the
jungle gym of a city playground, leaving behind what his longtime staff
considered cryptic clues that pointed toward suicide.    PAGE A13

QAEDA'S STRENGTHENING TIES

Even as Al Qaeda strengthens its hub in the Pakistani mountains, its leaders are
building closer ties to regional militant groups in order to launch attacks in
Africa and Europe and on the Arabian Peninsula, said the director of the Central
Intelligence Agency, Michael V. Hayden.   PAGE A12

Iranian Envoy Abducted   A8

national

AS PARTY REGROUPS AFTER ELECTION,

G.O.P. Veterans Set Examples

As Congressional Republicans lick their political wounds and try to figure out
how to bounce back in 2010 and beyond, they might want to consult with Susan
Collins, Lamar Alexander and Peter T. King. The three veteran politicians agreed
a more conservative, combative party focused on narrow partisan issues is not
the answer.   PAGE A22

VATICAN EXCOMMUNICATES PRIEST

The Vatican has informed a Roman Catholic priest, the Rev. Roy Bourgeois, that
he will be excommunicated for participating in a ceremony it considers illicit
and invalid: the ordination of a woman as a priest.   PAGE A19

U.S. TO DETAIN CHINESE PRODUCTS

All products from China that contain milk will be detained at the border until
tests prove that they are not contaminated, the federal government announced.
The Food and Drug Administration issued the alert because of concerns about
Chinese products being contaminated with the toxic chemical melamine.   PAGE A18

PLAN TO REMOVE DAMS ON KLAMATH

The Bush administration joined with the states of Oregon and California and
PacifiCorp, a major power generating company, to endorse a plan to remove four
hydroelectric dams on the Klamath River by 2020. The agreement can be seen as
marking the end to a bitter struggle among conservationists, Indian tribes and
fishermen in the Klamath basin, on the one hand, and farmers and local
communities on the other.  PAGE A18

A LAST TUNE FOR SEATTLE'S TUBA MAN

Edward Scott McMichael was a busker with perfect pitch and an improbable horn
whom most people in Seattle knew by another name, Tuba Man. His mission was to
make music in the streets and that he did. But a month ago, he was bludgeoned to
death. Along with the president of the Seattle Mariners, Chuck Armstrong, more
than 1,000 people turned out for a memorial service near Qwest Stadium.   PAGE
A14

obituaries

HENRY LOOMIS, 89

He extended the reach and defended the independence of the Voice of America as
its director in the late 1950s and early 1960s before resigning in a clash with
President Lyndon B. Johnson.  PAGE A24

FLORENCE S. WALD, 91

Her vision of bringing the terminally ill peace of mind and, to whatever extent
possible, freedom from pain led to the opening of the first palliative care
hospice in the United States.   PAGE A24

NEW YORK

ARGUING FOR A CHANCE

At a Police Uniform

Specialist Osvaldo Hernandez, just returned from Afghanistan, appeared in court
to argue that he had turned his life around so impressively since his guilty
plea to illegal gun possession in 2002 that he deserved the judge's help to
realize his dream of joining the New York police force. The judge agreed. But
police officials have said that the city's administrative code forbids hiring
anyone with a felony conviction as a police officer.   PAGE A25

TRYING TO SERVE UP SALES

Employing the same social lubricant that may coax timid traders onto a dance
floor  Kipton Davis, a real estate broker, lured a half-dozen bankers, traders
and friends on a condo tour of four TriBeCa buildings by offering wine and
whiskey at every stop. ''Alcohol brings everyone together,'' Ms. Davis said
after showing the group a $9.9 million penthouse with an eight-seat hot tub. But
did it loosen wallets?   PAGE A28

SPORTS

INDIANS PITCHER BOUNCES BACK

In an Award-Winning Way

Cliff Lee's career has had some ups and downs: he finished fourth in the
balloting for the American League Cy Young Award in 2005; in 2007, the Indians
left him off the playoff roster after a dismal season that included an abdominal
injury and a demotion to the minors. This was one of those up years: a 22-3
record with a 2.54 E.R.A. for a .500-team. And it won him the American League Cy
Young award.   PAGE B17

ON THE OUTSIDE LOOKING IN

For the last six years, the federal agent Jeff Novitzky has been at the heart of
virtually every major investigation into the use of performance-enhancing drugs
by professional athletes. But he now finds himself left on the periphery of one
of the highest-profile cases resulting from it all, the perjury investigation
into Roger Clemens.   PAGE B11

ANTIDOPING COMPANY SHUTS DOWN

In 2007, the Agency for Cycling Ethics was a leader of the new antidoping
paradigm in cycling. It  was seeking to compile a physiological baseline for
each athlete, so that any sudden variation  may indicate the body's reaction to
doping. But it quietly closed its doors last week.    PAGE B13

A SPORTING ALTERNATIVE

Few will draw parallels to a certain Giants Stadium co-tenant if  the Red Bulls
can complete an unlikely journey to the Super Bowl of Major League Soccer,
better known as the MLS Cup,  Harvey Araton writes. But he warns against
dismissing soccer in America as primarily kid stuff, the sporting equivalent of
the piano recital. Sports of The Times.   PAGE B11

BUSINESS

SUMMIT MEETING WILL CLARIFY

Reshaped Economic Map

Whatever else this weekend's summit meeting by the Group of 20 nations may or
may not accomplish, it stands to clarify one thing: how completely the world
economic crisis is reshaping the economic map -- rendering obsolete the old club
of Western powers that fashioned the financial pillars of the post-World War II
era.   PAGE B4

MANAGERS BACK HEDGE FUND RULES

Five prominent hedge fund managers, testifying before a House committee, said
that they would support rules that required hedge funds to provide information
about their funds to a regulator, provided the information was not divulged to
the public. The strength of their support varied, however, and they disagreed
over whether the tax treatment of their funds should be changed and on the need
for restrictions on their use of leverage.   PAGE B6

WRONG KIND OF HIT FOR G.M.

General Motors and NBC worked together on the TV drama ''My Own Worst Enemy,''
forming a partnership that represented a big push for both. The idea for G.M.
was to sell vehicles that were also integrated into the show; for NBC is was
finding an advertiser to help underwrite some of the production costs of a
series. NBC says it still likes the idea. But it canceled the show.   PAGE B10

CHINA EASES MEDIA RESTRICTIONS

China agreed to loosen restrictions on foreign news and information providers
inside the country, settling a trade dispute with the United States, the
European Union and Canada. The agreement allows international news and
information agencies to more freely compete and sell their services inside
China, where government controls were tightened in 2006.  PAGE B2

ESCAPES

FORGET WINE COUNTRY.

Think Wine City.

Recast your mental image of wine country with its rustic charms. A small group
of vintners is abandoning the countryside and opening wineries in old factories
and industrial showrooms in cities across the country. Even the Brooklyn
waterfront in Williamsburg now has its own winery.   PAGE D1

A PLACE FOR SCIENCE LOVERS

If your idea of fun is investigating the structure of DNA or designing a faster
toy bobsled, Boston is an inspiring place to spend a few days. One essential
stop on the science circuit is the M.I.T. Museum, featuring  rotating exhibits
on new research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Another is the
Boston Museum of Science, with its hundreds of interactive and informational
displays and kiosks on dozens of topics.  PAGE D1

Weekend

MI6'S FINEST IS BACK IN ACTION,

Now With 50 Percent More Angst

''Quantum of Solace'' is heavy on the violence and brooding, which almost
prompts one to quote a famous movie villain of this year: ''Why so serious?''
Daniel Craig's James Bond is a different animal than the series has been
accustomed to, which has always had a hint, if not more, of mischief to go with
the gadgets and womanizing. This Bond is angry, has a serious problem with
authority and brings to the table a brutal violence, A. O. Scott writes.  Page
C1

BACK, LOUD, CRASS AND GLORIOUS

It was heavy metal at its unadulterated, unapologetic finest, complete with a
giant inflatable and barely clothed woman, and AC/DC blasted Madison Square
Garden on Wednesday. The band's tour is in honor of its recent album, its first
in eight years, ''Black Ice.'' While the band, and the crowd, showed their age,
the performance was still what AC/DC always has been about -- unrelenting riffs,
base lyrics and astonishing volume, Jon Caramanica writes. Page C6

AN ARRAY OF MODERN ANTIQUES

The prices are fair, nobody is cutting them but as always they are all
negotiable. ''Modernism: A Century of Style and Design, 1905-2005,'' at the
Armory on Park Avenue, gives its dealers only one day to set up, forcing them to
do without lavish stands or trappings and allow the pieces to speak for
themselves. Some choice finds are on display in this version, the 23rd since the
event's inception, Wendy Moonan writes.  Page C31

VIOLENCE, RAPTURE AND DANCE

Robert Battle doesn't usually stoop to explaining his modern dance creations.
Often he allows the viewers to draw conclusions of their own. But in ''An
Evening With Robert Battle: Signature Solos,'' he broke with tradition, saying
that everything the audience would see on stage was valid -- and what they liked
was even better. A collection of his choreography from 1992 to 2008, it was full
of leading spins and falls. His informal manner suggests a possible
ambassadorship for modern dance in his future, Claudia La Rocco writes.  Page C6

IN THE VEIN OF 'ARE YOU KIDDING?'

Do you trust your cat to win a million dollars? Do you know what your cat is
thinking? A program on GSN, ''Meow Mix Think Like a Cat Game Show,'' may be
responsible for bringing about the apocalypse. An embarrassing half-hour of
television boils down to little more than a thinly veiled attempt to sell cat
food. A million-dollar prize is dangled before the participants and it hinges
seemingly on the level of telepathic connection they have with their house pet,
Neil Genzlinger writes.  Page C16

Editorial

IN IT TOGETHER

It is tempting to dismiss Saturday's economic summit. President Bush is
discredited and on his way out. President-elect Barack Obama has decided,
rightly, to stay away. There is a pressing need for leaders to agree on basic
steps to jump-start the sagging world economy. The leaders can also begin a
serious discussion about the roots of the financial crisis.  Page A28

THE HIGH COST OF HARSH WORDS

Steve Levy, the Suffolk County executive, is learning that words have
consequences. After seven teenagers were charged in the fatal stabbing of
Marcello Lucero, an Ecuadorean immigrant, Mr. Levy's past harsh words and
actions against undocumented workers have left him cornered with a tragically
limited ability to lead the county in confronting this brutal act.  Page A28

AREN'T THERE ENOUGH TRAILS?

A new plan to allow snowmobiles into Yellowstone is a bad and barely acceptable
compromise.  Page A28

Op-ed

PAUL KRUGMAN

The United States  economy has entered the realm of Depression economics, in
which the usual rules of economic policy no longer apply: virtue is vice,
caution is risky and prudence is folly.  Page A29

DAVID BROOKS

A Detroit bailout would set a precedent for every single politically connected
corporation in America. It is all a reminder that the biggest threat to a
healthy economy is not the socialists of campaign lore. It's politically
powerful crony capitalists who use their influence to create a stagnant
corporate welfare state.  Page A29

HAVE ANOTHER CUP OF COFFEE

Op-Ed contributor Michael Kinsley ponders the challenge facing American
consumers, who have been steadily losing interest in buying things. Ideally,
they would now go on one last spending spree -- and then start saving like mad.
Page A29

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
CORRUPTION (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); COLD WAR (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); VETERANS (77%); ARMIES (77%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (76%); POLITICS (76%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (76%); CONSERVATISM (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); RELIGION (72%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (71%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (71%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (67%); SUICIDE (67%); AL-QAEDA
(64%); CORONERS COURTS & OFFICES (64%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COMMISSION (54%)

PERSON: LAMAR ALEXANDER (56%); MICHAEL HAYDEN (50%); PETER T KING (50%); JOSE
MANUEL BARROSO (50%)

CITY: SOFIA, BULGARIA (79%)

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); ISRAEL (93%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); SPAIN (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%);
BULGARIA (89%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); AFRICA
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); GULF STATES (51%)

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             477 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 19, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Judge Drops Inquiry Into Atrocities of Franco and Allies

BYLINE: By VICTORIA BURNETT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 523 words

DATELINE: MADRID


A high-profile judge on Tuesday dropped a sensitive inquiry into atrocities that
took place during the era of Franco, Spain's former dictator, ending what had
promised to be the first criminal investigation of wrongs committed by Franco
and his allies.

The judge, Baltasar Garzon, last month declared himself competent to investigate
the killings of 114,000 people at the hands of Franco's supporters during the
1936-1939 civil war and the dictatorship that followed and ordered the
exhumation of at least 19 mass graves. He accused Franco and 34 former generals
and ministers of crimes against humanity.

However, Judge Garzon said Tuesday that he was dropping the case against Franco
and his allies after state prosecutors questioned his jurisdiction over crimes
committed 70 years ago by people who are now dead and whose crimes were covered
by an amnesty passed in 1977. In a 152-page statement, he passed responsibility
to regional courts for opening 19 mass graves believed to hold  the remains of
hundreds of victims, including those of Federico Garcia Lorca, the Spanish poet.

Advocates who have pressed for the state to take responsibility for exhuming
hundreds of graves and pursue some process of retroactive justice said Judge
Garzon's decision was a symbolic blow and blamed a lack of political will in the
Socialist government to push for a reckoning with Spain's dark past.

''It's a disgrace. We have teams of Spanish peacekeepers exhuming mass graves in
Bosnia and yet we can't even deal with our own graves,'' said Jose Maria
Pedreno, president of the State Federation of Forums for Historical Memory, by
telephone. ''As a Spaniard, I find this shameful. How can we call ourselves a
stable, mature democracy if we can't resolve this issue?''

However, those advocates said it was unclear how much Judge Garzon's statement
would affect the process of opening graves, begun by volunteers eight years ago.
Emilio Silva, head of the Association for the Recovery of Historical Memory, an
advocacy group, said Judge Garzon's court order would potentially help push a
process that so far has depended on weekend volunteers and has little official
backing. Mr. Pedreno said that  attempts to get regional courts to open
investigations were usually fruitless.

Some who had closely followed the legal debate over whether Judge Garzon had
jurisdiction over the civil war crimes said his decision was a setback for a
judge who had built an international reputation by pushing the limits of the law
to bring cases against human rights violators like Augusto Pinochet, the former
Chilean dictator.

However, they said they believed that the judge knew he was likely to be
challenged and that he opened the investigation partly in the hope of putting
pressure on the government of Jose Luis Rodriguez Zapatero. Judge Garzon's
investigation had provoked an outcry from conservatives who said  that raking
over the past would serve only to reopen wounds.

''From a social point of view it has been positive,'' Mr. Pedreno said. ''He has
sent up a cloud of dust, prompted debate about this issue and awoken our
consciences again.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
AMNESTY (72%); PEACEKEEPING (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%);
CONSERVATISM (65%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (60%)

PERSON: JOSE LUIS RODRIGUEZ ZAPATERO (58%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); CHILE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             483 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 6, 2008 Saturday
                                National Edition

Russia: Jury Trials Under Attack

BYLINE: By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 131 words


Russian lawmakers voted Friday for a measure to abolish jury trials for serious
crimes like terrorism, espionage and organizing mass demonstrations. The Duma,
the lower house of Parliament, passed the bill in the first of three required
readings, by a vote of 351 to 34,  the Interfax news agency reported. ''A
practice has been noted where juries acquit terrorists who have committed grave
crimes,'' Vladimir Vasilyev, head of the Duma's security committee, was quoted
as saying on the Web site of the pro-Kremlin party United Russia. Jury trials,
which were introduced in the post-Soviet era, have a much higher rate of
acquittal than trials presided over by a judge. Lawyers and human rights groups
criticized the bill, saying Russian courts are corrupt and judges are not
independent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JURY TRIALS (93%); TERRORISM (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (88%); ACQUITTAL (88%); CORRUPTION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); LAWYERS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ESPIONAGE (72%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%)

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             485 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Quotation of the Day

BYLINE: ANNEKE VAN WOUDENBERG,

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 46 words


Kiwanja was a disaster for everyone. The people were betrayed not just by rebels
who committed terrible war crimes against them but by the international
community that failed to protect them.

ANNEKE VAN WOUDENBERG, of Human Rights Watch, on a massacre in eastern Congo.
[A11]

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Quote

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             490 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 18, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Report

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 1287 words


Most Americans have long known that the horrors of Abu Ghraib were not the work
of a few low-ranking sociopaths. All but President Bush's most unquestioning
supporters recognized the chain of unprincipled decisions that led to the abuse,
torture and death in prisons run by the American military and intelligence
services.

Now, a bipartisan report by the Senate Armed Services Committee has made what
amounts to a strong case for bringing criminal charges against former Defense
Secretary Donald Rumsfeld; his legal counsel, William J. Haynes; and potentially
other top officials, including the former White House counsel Alberto Gonzales
and David Addington, Vice President Dick Cheney's former chief of staff.

The report shows how actions by these men ''led directly'' to what happened at
Abu Ghraib, in Afghanistan, in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and in secret C.I.A.
prisons.

It said these top officials, charged with defending the Constitution and
America's standing in the world, methodically introduced interrogation practices
based on illegal tortures devised by Chinese agents during the Korean War. Until
the Bush administration, their only use in the United States was to train
soldiers to resist what might be done to them if they were captured by a lawless
enemy.

The officials then issued legally and morally bankrupt documents to justify
their actions, starting with a presidential order saying that the Geneva
Conventions did not apply to prisoners of the ''war on terror'' -- the first
time any democratic nation had unilaterally reinterpreted the conventions.

That order set the stage for the infamous redefinition of torture at the Justice
Department, and then Mr. Rumsfeld's authorization of ''aggressive''
interrogation methods. Some of those methods were torture by any rational
definition and many of them violate laws and treaties against abusive and
degrading treatment.

These top officials ignored warnings from lawyers in every branch of the armed
forces that they were breaking the law, subjecting uniformed soldiers to
possible criminal charges and authorizing abuses that were not only considered
by experts to be ineffective, but were actually counterproductive.

One page of the report lists the repeated objections that President Bush and his
aides so blithely and arrogantly ignored: The Air Force had ''serious concerns
regarding the legality of many of the proposed techniques''; the chief legal
adviser to the military's criminal investigative task force said they were of
dubious value and may subject soldiers to prosecution; one of the Army's top
lawyers said some techniques that stopped well short of the horrifying practice
of waterboarding ''may violate the torture statute.'' The Marines said they
''arguably violate federal law.'' The Navy pleaded for a real review.

The legal counsel to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time
started that review but told the Senate committee that her boss, Gen. Richard
Myers, ordered her to stop on the instructions of Mr. Rumsfeld's legal counsel,
Mr. Haynes.

The report indicates that Mr. Haynes was an early proponent of the idea of using
the agency that trains soldiers to withstand torture to devise plans for the
interrogation of prisoners held by the American military. These trainers -- who
are not interrogators but experts only on how physical and mental pain is
inflicted and may be endured -- were sent to work with interrogators in
Afghanistan, in Guantanamo and in Iraq.

On Dec. 2, 2002, Mr. Rumsfeld authorized the interrogators at Guantanamo to use
a range of abusive techniques that were already widespread in Afghanistan,
enshrining them as official policy. Instead of a painstaking legal review, Mr.
Rumsfeld based that authorization on a one-page memo from Mr. Haynes. The Senate
panel noted that senior military lawyers considered the memo '' 'legally
insufficient' and 'woefully inadequate.' ''

Mr. Rumsfeld rescinded his order a month later, and narrowed the number of
''aggressive techniques'' that could be used at Guantanamo. But he did so only
after the Navy's chief lawyer threatened to formally protest the illegal
treatment of prisoners. By then, at least one prisoner, Mohammed al-Qahtani, had
been threatened with military dogs, deprived of sleep for weeks, stripped naked
and made to wear a leash and perform dog tricks. This year, a military tribunal
at Guantanamo dismissed the charges against Mr. Qahtani.

The abuse and torture of prisoners continued at prisons run by the C.I.A. and
specialists from the torture-resistance program remained involved in the
military detention system until 2004. Some of the practices Mr. Rumsfeld left in
place seem illegal, like prolonged sleep deprivation.

These policies have deeply harmed America's image as a nation of laws and may
make it impossible to bring dangerous men to real justice. The report said the
interrogation techniques were ineffective, despite the administration's repeated
claims to the contrary.

Alberto Mora, the former Navy general counsel who protested the abuses, told the
Senate committee that ''there are serving U.S. flag-rank officers who maintain
that the first and second identifiable causes of U.S. combat deaths in Iraq --
as judged by their effectiveness in recruiting insurgent fighters into combat --
are, respectively, the symbols of Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo.''

We can understand that Americans may be eager to put these dark chapters behind
them, but it would be irresponsible for the nation and a new administration to
ignore what has happened -- and may still be happening in secret C.I.A. prisons
that are not covered by the military's current ban on activities like
waterboarding.

A prosecutor should be appointed to consider criminal charges against top
officials at the Pentagon and others involved in planning the abuse.

Given his other problems -- and how far he has moved from the powerful stands he
took on these issues early in the campaign -- we do not hold out real hope that
Barack Obama, as president, will take such a politically fraught step.

At the least, Mr. Obama should, as the organization Human Rights First
suggested, order his attorney general to review more than two dozen
prisoner-abuse cases that reportedly were referred to the Justice Department by
the Pentagon and the C.I.A. -- and declined by Mr. Bush's lawyers.

Mr. Obama should consider proposals from groups like Human Rights Watch and the
Brennan Center for Justice to appoint an independent panel to look into these
and other egregious violations of the law. Like the 9/11 commission, it would
examine in depth the decisions on prisoner treatment, as well as warrantless
wiretapping, that eroded the rule of law and violated Americans' most basic
rights. Unless the nation and its leaders know precisely what went wrong in the
last seven years, it will be impossible to fix it and make sure those terrible
mistakes are not repeated.

We expect Mr. Obama to keep the promise he made over and over in the campaign --
to cheering crowds at campaign rallies and in other places, including our office
in New York. He said one of his first acts as president would be to order a
review of all of Mr. Bush's executive orders and reverse those that eroded civil
liberties and the rule of law.

That job will fall to Eric Holder, a veteran prosecutor who has been chosen as
attorney general, and Gregory Craig, a lawyer with extensive national security
experience who has been selected as Mr. Obama's White House counsel.

A good place for them to start would be to reverse Mr. Bush's disastrous order
of Feb. 7, 2002, declaring that the United States was nolonger legally committed
to comply with the Geneva Conventions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LAWYERS (89%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); LAW OF
WAR (77%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%); ARMIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (73%); WAR ON TERROR
(73%); KOREAN WAR (72%); AIR FORCES (72%); MILITARY TRAINING (72%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (70%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%); ALBERTO GONZALES (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: December 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             491 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 19, 2008 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Senior Rwandan Officer and Two Accomplices Are Found Guilty of 1994 Genocide

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: ACCRA, Ghana


A senior Rwandan military officer charged with being one of the masterminds of
the 1994 genocide in Rwanda was convicted on Thursday by a United Nations court
in Tanzania of genocide and sentenced to life in prison.

Col. Theoneste Bagosora, 67, is the most senior military official to have been
convicted in connection with the genocide, in which bands of Hutu massacred
800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu. He was a leading Hutu extremist and the cabinet
director for Rwanda's Defense Ministry at the start of the slaughter. He and
three other senior army officers had been on trial since 2002 at the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, which is based in Arusha, Tanzania.

In a statement, the United Nations tribunal said it had sentenced Colonel
Bagosora and two other Rwandan military officers who were also on trial, Maj.
Aloys Ntabakuze and Col. Anatole Nsengiyumva, to life imprisonment for
''genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes.'' A fourth co-defendant,
Gen. Gratien Kabiligi, was acquitted of all charges and released by the court.

The court said Colonel Bagosora was ''the highest authority in the Rwandan
Defense Ministry, with authority over the military'' in the days after the death
of President Juvenal Habyarimana  on April 6, 1994.

The president, a Hutu, died when his plane was shot down  in Kigali, the Rwandan
capital. His death sparked the three-month wave of killing.

The fate of that plane remains a topic of great controversy and speculation.
Hutu militants blamed Tutsi rebels for shooting it down and argued that the
killings that followed were the spontaneous rage of average Rwandans.

The Tutsi rebels have argued that the militant Hutu, perhaps with France's help,
may have been involved, hoping to create the pretext for a long-planned
extermination of the Tutsi. Rwanda has threatened senior French officials with
indictments,  while France has responded by seeing to the arrest of a top aide
to Paul Kagame, the Rwandan president, in connection with the crash.

The speed and violence of the genocide was evident in the court's findings.

It ruled that  the day after the plane attack in 1994  Colonel Bagosora was
responsible for the killing of the Rwandan prime minister, Agathe
Uwilingiyimana; the president of the Constitutional Court, Joseph Kavaruganda;
and three top opposition figures: Frederic Nzamurambaho, Landoald Ndasingwa and
Faustin Rucogoza. These events set the stage for the slaughter that was to
follow.

Colonel Bagosora was also found guilty in connection with the killing of 10
Belgian peacekeepers by soldiers at Camp Kigali, and in the organized killings
by soldiers and militiamen  throughout Kigali and Gisenyi, in the west of the
country.

However, the court cleared Colonel Bagosora and the others on trial of
conspiring to commit genocide before April 7, 1994. The trial lasted six years,
during which 242 witnesses were heard.

The charges against General Kabiligi were dismissed after he provided an alibi,
and ''it was also not proven that he had operational authority or that he
targeted civilians,'' the court said.

The exclusion of the conspiracy charge against the men is a blow to Rwandan
officials, said Alison Desforges of Human Rights Watch, because it undercuts
their argument that the genocide was not a one-time event but the inevitable
product of an anti-Tutsi atmosphere dating from the colonial era.

''It brings us back to reality and says this genocide was a discrete historical
event related to a specific set of circumstances,'' Ms. Desforges said.

Human rights officials hailed the conviction of Colonel Bagosora, calling it a
strike against impunity but also a reminder to anyone committing atrocities in
armed conflict. It has particular resonance for the belligerents spawning chaos
in eastern Congo, said Paul van Zyl of the  International Center for
Transitional Justice, a rights group based in New York.

''The conviction should send a signal to all people with ongoing responsibility
for atrocities in Congo,'' he said. ''If they are in effective control of armed
forces, whether they are state troops, a rebel group or guerrillas, they are
potentially criminally liable.''

Given the mounting evidence that Rwanda is playing a role in backing the
renegade Congolese general Laurent Nkunda, that warning could apply to the men
who claim credit for ending the genocide and now govern Rwanda, said Rene
Lemarchand, an Africa scholar who has been writing about the troubled Great
Lakes region for decades.

General Nkunda says he is fighting to protect a Tutsi minority from the Hutu
militiamen who fled Rwanda and remain hidden in Congo's sprawling forests.

''Everybody has dirty hands'' in eastern Congo, Mr. Lemarchand said. ''But I
think it is a good time to take our distance toward Rwanda and recognize there
is still an awful lot of dirty linen to be washed.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: December 20, 2008



CORRECTION: A capsule summary on Friday for an article about the conviction of a
senior Rwandan military officer and two accomplices on genocide charges
misidentified the man in the accompanying picture. The man shown seated is Lt.
Col. Anatole Nsengiyumva, one of the accomplices -- not Col. Theoneste Bagosora,
the senior officer.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Col. Theoneste Bagosora, in Tanzania on Thursday, is the most
senior military official ever convicted in Rwanda's massacre.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TONY
KARUMBA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); ACQUITTAL (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ALIBI (78%); ARMIES (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); PRISONS (77%); SHOOTINGS (71%); PRIME
MINISTERS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%)

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (89%); ACCRA, GHANA (59%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (94%); GHANA (92%); FRANCE
(91%)

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             504 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 11, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Administration Is Rebuffed In a Ruling on Deportation

BYLINE: By NEELA BANERJEE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 607 words


A federal judge in Pennsylvania on Thursday blocked the government's efforts to
deport a Coptic Christian who said he would be tortured if he were returned to
Egypt. The ruling was a rebuff to the Bush administration's practice of relying
on confidential assurances to send people to countries that have been known to
practice torture.

The judge ruled that the government's unwillingness to allow an independent
review of Egypt's assurances denied him due process.

The man, Sameh Khouzam, 38, of Lancaster, Pa., was convicted of murder in
absentia in Egypt. He denies the murder accusation, however, and contends that
he was repeatedly detained and tortured in Egypt because he refused to convert
to Islam. Philip G. Schrag, a professor of law at Georgetown University and an
expert on asylum issues, said the ruling was significant.

''The importance of this case,'' he said, ''lies in its rejection of the Bush
administration's claim that secret diplomatic assurances by a foreign government
that it will not torture a person preclude judicial review.''

The American Civil Liberties Union, which represented Mr. Khouzam, echoed that
view. And Marc D. Falkoff, assistant professor of law at Northern Illinois
University in DeKalb and counsel for 16 Yemenis held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
said the ruling could have sweeping implications for those detained at
Guantanamo.

''It's tremendously important,'' Mr. Falkoff said. ''It's not a binding
precedent outside the jurisdiction of the Third Circuit but the ruling has
persuasive authority in any federal court and, without a doubt, it will be
brought to the attention of any federal judge who has a case pending where a
detainee or prisoner is challenging the government's right to transfer him to a
country where he might be tortured.''

Egypt's government gave diplomatic assurances that Mr. Khouzam, who fled to the
United States almost 10 years ago, would not be tortured upon his return. The
office of Immigration and Customs Enforcement decided last June to deport him.

In June, a spokesman for the immigration and customs agency said the assurances
made by Egypt were confidential.

In his ruling on Thursday, the judge, Thomas I. Vanaskie of the Middle District
of Pennsylvania, said that without an impartial and binding review of those
assurances, the procedures established to give protection under the Convention
Against Torture ''would be a farce.''

Groups like Human Rights Watch and the A.C.L.U. have argued that the use of
torture in Egypt is so routine and well-documented that deporting Mr. Khouzam
would expose him to harsh treatment and would amount to a violation of the
Convention Against Torture.

Kelly Nantel, a spokeswoman for the immigration and customs agency, said that it
was reviewing its appeals options and that it had won a five-day stay on Mr.
Khouzam's release from detention in York, Pa.

The Egyptian government denies that Mr. Khouzam faced persecution for his
Christian faith, and a government spokesman said in June that Mr. Khouzam would
serve a prison term upon his return, based on the murder conviction.

Mr. Khouzam first heard of the murder accusation when he arrived in the United
States in February 1998. He was detained for the next eight years by immigration
authorities. In 2004, a federal appeals court denied Mr. Khouzam asylum, but
allowed him to stay in the United States because he risked being tortured in
Egypt.

In early 2006, Mr. Khouzam was released and has recently worked as the
controller for a real estate developer in Lancaster. He was detained when he
went to immigration authorities for a routine visit on May 29.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sameh Khouzam

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEPORTATION (91%); JUDGES (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM
(78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); MURDER (75%); DUE PROCESS (75%); CORRECTIONS
(75%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (74%); RELIGION (73%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (56%); NORTHERN ILLINOIS UNIVERSITY (55%);
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (55%)

CITY: LANCASTER, PA, USA (79%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EGYPT (95%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: January 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             513 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Closes All Gaza Border Crossings, Citing Palestinian Rocket Attacks

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza
City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel closed all border crossings with the Gaza Strip on Friday, cutting off at
least one aid shipment, and bombed the empty Interior Ministry building of the
Palestinian Authority, which was already a ruin after a previous Israeli
bombing.

Israel said it was acting to halt Palestinian rocket attacks from Gaza into
Israel, while Hamas and other Palestinian militants said they had increased
their rocket fire in retaliation for intensified Israeli raids.

Shrapnel from the bombing of the empty ministry building, in the crowded Al
Rimal neighborhood of western Gaza City, killed one woman, Haniah Abd-el Jawad,
52, and wounded up to 46 others, some of them children, medical officials at Al
Shifa hospital in Gaza said.

Israel has declared Gaza, which is run by Hamas, a ''hostile entity'' and has
tried to persuade its leaders to stop rocket fire by reducing supplies of
gasoline, diesel fuel and electricity, a move that has brought challenges in the
Israeli Supreme Court by Israeli human rights groups.

The Israeli military has operated  in Gaza nearly every day this week, luring
Hamas and allied gunmen into firefights; 35 Palestinians have been killed there
since Monday and 80 people have been wounded, said Dr. Muawiya Hassanein,
director of emergency medical services in Gaza.

Hamas resumed firing Qassam rockets toward the Israeli border town of Sderot,
along with other militant groups like Islamic Jihad and Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades, which is affiliated with Fatah. On Thursday, at least 40 rockets were
launched, half of them landing in Israel, hitting two houses in Sderot and
lightly wounding four Israelis, with a dozen more treated for shock.

On Friday, at least 31 more rockets were fired toward Israel and 16 landed, but
no one was wounded, the Israeli Army said.

One rocket landed within 40 yards of a nursery school, which was open, said
David Baker, an Israeli government spokesman. Since Tuesday, the army said, 130
Qassams have been launched; about half have landed in Israel and the remainder
in Gaza.

The cycle of retaliation and response was described by Yair Lapid, a well-known
Israeli journalist, in the daily Yediot Aharonot.

''The objective of the operation in Gaza is to prevent the Qassam fire,'' he
wrote. ''But the operation in Gaza is causing Qassams to be fired. The Qassam
fire will, in turn, bring about the next operation in Gaza, which will lead to
the next round of Qassam fire.''

Mr. Lapid continued: ''Everyone is playing his role; each side pretends to be
the initiator, while well aware in its heart of hearts that it is just as
trapped as the other side is.''

On Friday, in the Jabaliya refugee camp, north of Gaza City, Israeli rocket fire
killed a member of the Hamas military wing and another man who Israel said were
part of a rocket squad. Israel also bombed a Hamas police facility in central
Gaza.

In the Balata refugee camp, in the West Bank city of Nablus, Israeli commandos
killed Ahmed Muhamad Ibrahim Sanakra, 21, a wanted gunman who was carrying a
rifle, Israel said, and arrested four of his associates.

The Israeli decision to close border crossings was another attempt to put
pressure on Hamas in Gaza, and at least one United Nations aid shipment was not
allowed through on Friday.

The Defense Ministry said that all imports would have to be approved by the
defense minister, Ehud Barak, and that they would be limited to ''humanitarian
supplies'' that are judged to be running low, like milk or cooking oil. Israel
has already sharply restricted imports to Gaza since the Hamas takeover in June.
The closures will probably be reviewed on Sunday in the weekly cabinet meeting.

Christopher Gunness, a spokesman for the United Nations Relief and Works Agency,
which provides aid to Palestinian refugees, said, ''This situation in Gaza is
dire and the continued closures, in the context of closures since June, only
makes the situation of people of Gaza more perilous.''

His agency had been getting in 15 trucks of aid a day until Wednesday, he said,
and while it has two months of stocks in Gaza, aid recipients still need fresh
food to supplement the aid. He said Israel should broaden its definition of
''humanitarian imports'' to include schoolbooks, cement for needed health
projects and chlorine for water purification.

Separately, a study of the psychological impact of the rockets has found a high
incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder in Sderot, said Dr. Rony Berger of
the Natal Trauma Center.

In a survey of more than 500 adults in Sderot and an Israeli town of similar
size, Ofakim, the study found that 28.4 percent of those in Sderot had the
disorder, compared with 5.2 percent in Ofakim. The disorder means ''functional
impairment'' and not just symptoms, Dr. Berger said in a telephone interview.

Some 44.9 percent of Sderot residents reported persistent symptoms of
post-traumatic stress, including an inability to sleep or concentrate,
depression and anxiety, but without functional impairment, compared with 16.3
percent in Ofakim. New immigrants to Sderot have twice the frequency of symptoms
compared with those born in Israel, who have become ''more habituated to this
kind of security pressure,'' he said.

In Sderot, 91.9 percent said that a rocket had fallen on their street or an
adjacent one, 55.8 percent have had their homes hit by a Qassam or by shrapnel,
and 48.4 percent said they knew someone killed by a Qassam. Thirteen Israelis,
including eight from Sderot, have been killed by the rockets since 2001.

Dr. Berger and his colleagues treat families as a whole, he said. ''It's better
to work with families, because those who learn 'active coping' are more
resilient,'' he said. ''If they know what to do between alerts, whether it's
effective protection or not, they are better off than those who panic. It's the
helplessness that damages as much as the fear.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Palestinians surveyed the Interior Ministry building in Gaza
after an Israeli airstrike on Friday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABID KATIB/GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); HAMAS (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); AL FATAH (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(77%); REFUGEES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); GASOLINE (68%); DIESEL
FUEL (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); ARMED FORCES (67%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS
(66%); WRITERS (61%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%); HEZBOLLAH (54%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (54%); AL-AQSA
MARTYRS BRIGADES (54%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths LERMAN, MILES

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1142 words


LERMAN--Miles. The American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors and Their
Descendants mourns the passing of our dear friend, Miles Lerman, Holocaust
survivor and partisan, who spearheaded the creation of the United States
Holocaust Memorial Museum. Through his efforts on behalf of the survivor
community, he made the world a better place.

LERMAN--Miles. To describe Miles Lerman as extraordinary is an understatement.
No words can adequately capture this daring and caring human being who acted
tirelessly on behalf of so many. Miles had the rich instincts to envision the
United States Holocaust Museum in Washington DC, which will forever pay tribute
to those who lived their lives with courage. All of us at The Jewish Theological
Seminary mourn this loss deeply and extend our arms around Chris, Jeanette, Joe,
and the entire Lerman family Arnold Eisen, Chancellor Gershon Kekst, Board
Chairman

LERMAN--Miles. The Jewish Museum notes with deep sorrow the passing of Miles
Lerman, father of the Museum's vice chairman Jeanette Lerman Neubauer. Mr.
Lerman transformed his experiences as a Holocaust survivor and a partisan
fighter into an inspired lifelong mission. The US Holocaust Memorial Museum and
Poland's Belzec Museum and study center are two enduring testaments to his
efforts on behalf of Holocaust education and against human rights abuse
worldwide. We send our sincere sympathy to his wife Rosalie, Jeanette and Joseph
Neubauer, David Lerman and Shelley Wallock, his brother Jona, and his loving
circle of grandchildren and great-grandchildren. Joshua Nash, Chairman Robert A.
Pruzan, President Joan Rosenbaum, Director

LERMAN--Miles. The United States Holocaust Memorial Museum mourns the death of
its Chairman Emeritus Miles Lerman. A Holocaust survivor, partisan fighter in
the forests of Poland, and international leader in the cause of remembrance,
Miles was a founding father of the Museum and instrumental in its creation. He
led the nationwide fundraising campaign to build the institution and negotiated
historic international agreements that helped create the Museum's Permanent
Exhibition and build its world renowned archives. Miles and his wife Chris, also
a survivor, were actively involved in every aspect of the Museum and have been
exceptionally generous supporters. Miles was a member of the Museum's governing
Council for 23 years, having received appointments from Presidents Carter,
Reagan, Bush, and Clinton, and served as the first chairman after the Museum
opened in 1993. Through his initiative, the Museum established the Miles Lerman
Center for the Study of Jewish Resistance to dispel the myth that Jews did not
resist the Nazis and their collaborators. Under his leadership, the Museum began
to serve as a voice of conscience by establishing the Committee on Conscience to
speak out about contemporary genocide. Miles' relentless efforts and
determination to have the world remember those who perished led to the creation
of the memorial at Belzec, Poland, where at least half a million Jews were
murdered, including members of his family. His singular dedication, sheer
determination, and extraordinary vision helped create an institution that will
profoundly impact future generations. As a global force for confronting hatred,
antisemitism, and genocide, the Museum stands as one of Miles Lerman's most
enduring legacies. We extend our heartfelt condolences to Chris, a cherished
friend of the Museum, their children Jeanette and her husband Joe, David and his
wife Shelley, grandchildren, and Miles' brother Jona and sister-in law Anny.
Fred S. Zeidman, Chairman, Joel M. Geiderman, Vice-Chairman, Sara J. Bloomfield,
Director

LERMAN--Miles, The American Jewish Committee is profoundly saddened by the loss
of Miles Lerman, a towering figure in the Jewish community, recognized for his
world wide efforts to memorialize the Holocaust. As a founder of the United
States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Miles drew from his experiences as a partisan
fighter and survivor to create a partnership between AJC and the Polish
government to build a memorial at the Belzec death camp, where his family was
murdered by the Nazis. This memorial, an indelible example of Miles' esteemed
legacy, is home to a museum that will forever recall this tragic era in Jewish
history. In addition, Miles was dedicated to securing Jewish artifacts and
property from governments in Europe long after the Second World War. Despite
many tradegies in his life, Miles sought to bring a spirit of optimism and hope
to the future. We are comforted by the lessons about memory, perseverance, and
tenacity that Miles taught us through his countless deeds. We honored him for
those efforts in 2005 with AJC's Kol Yisrael Areveem Zeh La'zeh Award. He will
be deeply missed by those at AJC who will forever cherish his life's work, and
legacy, as a blessing to the Jewish people, and the world. We extend our
heartfelt condolences to Miles' beloved wife of over six decades, Chris Lerman;
his daughter, Jeanette and her husband, Joseph Neubauer; his son, David and his
wife, Shelley Wallock; his five grandchildren: Brooke, Ted, and Julia Lerman;
Melissa Neubauer Anderson and her husband, Paul; Lawrence Neubauer, a member of
AJC's Board of Governors, and his wife, Jillian; and six great-grandchildren:
Hannah, Jonah, Leah, Ella, Riley and Scarlett; as well as his brother, Jona
Lerman. Richard J. Sideman, President David A. Harris, Executive Director

LERMAN--Miles. The AntiDefamation League mourns the passing of our dear friend
and supporter Miles Lerman. A Holocaust survivor whose commitment to memory and
''Never Again'' was unwavering, he led the effort to establish the U.S.
Holocaust Memorial Museum. He believed teaching the lessons of the Holocaust was
the way to confront anti-Semitism and hatred today. We extend our sincerest
condolences to his wife Chris and the entire family. Glen S. Lewy, National
Chair Abraham H. Foxman, National Director

LERMAN--Miles. The Officers and Staff of State of Israel Bonds mourn with
profound sorrow the passing of its former National Vice Chairman and a great
leader of Holocaust remembrance and education. Miles, who escaped a slave labor
camp in Poland to fight as a partisan during World War II, helped found the U.S.
Holocaust Museum in Washington and served as its Chairman. He was also a
principal founder of Israel Bonds' Elie Wiesel Holocaust Remembrance Dinner. We
extend our sincere condolences to his wife Rosalie Chris, daughter Jeanette
Neubauer, son David and other members of the Lerman family. May they be
comforted among the mourners of Zion and Jerusalem. Joshua Matza, President and
CEO Michael Siegal, Chairman of the Board Burton P. Resnick, Chairman of the
Board Emeritus David Halpern, National Chairman Bobbie Goldstein, Chairman
National Campaign Cabinet

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (94%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); FUNDRAISING (77%); GRANDCHILDREN
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); RELIGION (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN GATHERING OF JEWISH HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS (84%)

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (77%); JOSEPH NEUBAUER (73%); BILL CLINTON (54%); JIMMY
CARTER (50%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); POLAND (90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel's Top Court Backs Cuts in Gaza Supplies

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 419 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The Israeli Supreme Court on Wednesday rejected an appeal to block Israel from
further reducing supplies of fuel and electricity to the Gaza Strip.

The Israeli government had argued that the more limited amount of fuel it
intended to allow through met the basic needs of Gaza's population while
exacting a widely felt price among Gazans for the continual firing of rockets
and mortars into Israel by Palestinian militants.

Israel hopes such a policy will create popular pressure to force the Hamas
rulers of Gaza and other militant groups to stop the rocket fire.

A group of 10 human rights groups had together petitioned the court to prevent
the fuel cuts, arguing that Israel had a legal obligation under international
law to supply the citizens of Gaza. The group contended that the cuts
''deliberately violate the rights of civilians in Gaza'' and constituted
''collective punishment'' in violation of international law by ''deliberately
targeting civilians.''

But the court president, Dorit Beinisch, said in a ruling that ''the Gaza Strip
is controlled by a murderous terror group that operates incessantly to strike
the State of Israel and its citizens, and violates every precept of
international law with its violent actions.''

She described Israel as a state of law that sometimes harms civilians
accidentally.

''In the case of the attacks against Israel, the damage is not accidental, but
rather a result of deliberate and frequent assaults on civilian populations
which are aimed at harming innocent civilians,'' she ruled. ''This is the
difference between Israel -- a democracy fighting for its life within the
confines of the law -- and the terrorist organizations trying to destroy it.''

Sari Bashi, director of an Israeli advocacy group, Gisha, one of the
petitioners, said, ''The court ruling relies on unsubstantiated declarations by
the military and ignores indisputable and well-documented evidence of harm to
civilians caused by the fuel and electricity cuts -- with no legally valid
justification.''

The ruling allows the state to order a reduction in the electricity sold
directly to Gaza by Israel's electric company; to cut supplies of gasoline to
Gaza to 75,400 liters a week, compared with the 400,000 liters a week that were
delivered in October; and to cut supplies of diesel fuel to 800,000 liters a
week, compared with 1.4 million in October.

Prime Minister Ehud Olmert said on Jan. 21  that as far as he was concerned,
Gazans without gasoline for their cars could walk.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); APPEALS (89%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SUPREME COURTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); PETITIONS (78%); GASOLINE (78%); HAMAS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); POPULATION SIZE (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (73%); ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (73%); DIESEL FUEL
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (57%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (78%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             529 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 8, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Chief Doubts Tactic To Interrogate Is Still Legal

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 666 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Gen. Michael V. Hayden, the director of the Central Intelligence Agency, told a
Congressional committee on Thursday that waterboarding may be illegal under
current law, despite assertions this week from the director of national
intelligence and the White House that the harsh interrogation method may be used
in the future.

General Hayden said that while ''all the techniques we've used have been deemed
to be lawful,'' laws have changed since waterboarding was last used nearly five
years ago.

''It is not included in the current program, and in my own view, the view of my
lawyers and the Department of Justice, it is not certain that the technique
would be considered to be lawful under current statute,'' General Hayden said
before the House Intelligence Committee.

A C.I.A. spokesman, Paul Gimigliano, later said that General Hayden was in
agreement with remarks earlier in the week by Mike McConnell, the director of
national intelligence, and Tony Fratto, a White House spokesman, that any
decision to use waterboarding in the future would require approval by the
attorney general and the president.

Mr. Gimigliano said General Hayden was not prejudging the outcome of such a
legal review, which would consider the impact of the Detainee Treatment Act of
2005 and the Military Commissions Act of 2006, which set restrictions on
interrogation methods but do not explicitly bar the use of waterboarding.

He made his remarks as Vice President Dick Cheney defended tough interrogation
tactics on people suspected of having ties to Al Qaeda, and as Attorney General
Michael B. Mukasey rebuffed Democrats' demands for a criminal investigation of
waterboarding, which creates a feeling of drowning and was used on three Qaeda
suspects in 2002 and 2003. Mr. Mukasey said the C.I.A.'s interrogation
techniques, including waterboarding, were approved by the Justice Department.

As a result, he told the House Judiciary Committee, waterboarding by C.I.A.
officers ''cannot possibly be the subject of a Justice Department investigation,
because that would mean that the same department that authorized the program
would now consider prosecuting someone who followed that advice.''

The flurry of public statements about an interrogation technique that has not
been used since mid-2003 showed how the harsh tactics secretly adopted by the
Bush administration after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks have become a
stubborn political burden. The contradictory pronouncements also reflect deep
divisions in the government over whether waterboarding is illegal torture, or
whether it may be legal in extreme cases.

Mr. Cheney told the Conservative Political Action Conference in Washington that
President Bush had made ''tough and courageous'' decisions in the campaign
against terrorism.

''Would I support those same decisions again today? You're damn right I would,''
the vice president said. Mr. Cheney described the C.I.A. detention program for
high-level Qaeda operatives as ''a tougher program, for tougher customers'' that
produced ''information that has saved thousands of lives.''

Despite such defenses, in practice the Bush administration has moved steadily
away from the harshest techniques that the C.I.A. used in the first two years
after the Sept. 11 attacks. General Hayden confirmed publicly for the first time
this week that waterboarding was used on three Qaeda prisoners, Abu Zubaydah,
Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri and Khalid Shaikh Mohammed.

The technique   was explicitly dropped from the C.I.A.'s authorized methods in
2006, General Hayden said. But the Justice Department in 2005 wrote a series of
secret legal opinions justifying waterboarding and other harsh methods, in part
to assuage C.I.A. officers' fears that they might face prosecution.

For human rights advocates, General Hayden's statement was a modest positive
sign. ''It appears to be a long-overdue recognition of what the law is,'' said
Jennifer Daskal, senior counterterrorism counsel at Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (92%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); TERRORISM (86%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); APPROVALS
(78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (71%); TORTURE (70%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); WAR ON
TERROR (69%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); MILITARY COURTS
(66%); AL-QAEDA (64%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (64%); CONSERVATISM (60%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%); AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: MICHAEL HAYDEN (91%); MICHAEL MUKASEY (79%); MIKE MCCONNELL (79%); DICK
CHENEY (77%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             533 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judges Release 5 British Muslim Youths

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 296 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Five British Muslim youths jailed for downloading terrorist propaganda were
freed on Wednesday after a three-judge panel headed by the country's most senior
judge overturned their convictions.

The five, jailed last July after being found guilty of possessing articles for
terrorism purposes, were found by a jury to have  propaganda  from Al Qaeda on
their computers. The three-judge Court of Appeal panel led by Lord Chief Justice
Nicholas Phillips said the jury should have been told the men would  be guilty
of a crime only if it were proved that the material was intended to incite
terrorist acts.

''We do not consider that it was made plain to the jury, whether by the
prosecution or by'' the judge, ''that the case that the appellants had to face
was that they possessed extremist material for use in the future to incite the
commission of terrorist acts,'' Justice Phillips wrote. ''We doubt whether the
evidence supported such a case.''

Abdul Malik, the father of one of the released men, praised the ruling. ''It is
great that the whole nightmare is over,'' he told Channel 4 News. ''It is a
victory for common sense and justice.''

Asked on the same program if he supported Jihadism, his son Usman said he
declined to discuss his personal views in public.

The Islamic Human Rights Commission also welcomed the ruling and said it had
been wrong to penalize people for simply gaining access to material that was
available on the Internet.

Four of the five were students at Bradford University in northern England. One
was an East London schoolboy who briefly ran away from home to meet the others
after making their acquaintance on the Internet.

The schoolboy, Irfan Raja, had left a note for his parents saying he would meet
them in heaven if not in this world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (93%); TERRORISM (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA
(78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
RELIGION (73%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); APPEALS COURTS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (58%)

PERSON: NICHOLAS PHILLIPS (73%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (73%)

COUNTRY: ENGLAND (58%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             534 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blast at House in Gaza Kills Militant and 5 Others

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 303 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


A senior military commander of the radical Islamic Jihad movement was killed
Friday night along with at least five others as a powerful explosion destroyed
his house in Gaza, but the Israeli military denied having anything to do with
the blast.

The three-story house of Ayman Atallah Fayed was destroyed and six nearby homes
damaged in the crowded Bureij refugee camp, Palestinian witnesses said. As many
as 40 people were wounded, 9 of them critically, according to a Gazan Health
Ministry official, Dr. Moawiya Hassanain, and more casualties were being
evacuated. Some reports put the number of dead at eight.

Islamic Jihad's spokesman, Abu Ahmed, accused Israel of carrying out an
airstrike that caused a ''Zionist massacre,''  but a spokeswoman for the Israeli
Defense Forces flatly denied that Israel was responsible for the explosion.
''There was no attack in the Gaza Strip,'' the spokeswoman said. ''The I.D.F.
did not attack tonight in the Gaza Strip,'' she said.

Local Hamas police officers told The Associated Press that the cause of the
blast was not clear. Islamic Jihad is among the groups that launch crudely made
rockets at Israel from Gaza, and Palestinians speculated that an arms cache
might have exploded.

Separately, just before dawn on Friday, masked gunmen attacked the Gaza City
premises of the Y.M.C.A. and blew up its 8,000-volume library, according to
Eissa Saba, the center's director. A second bomb was defused. A dozen gunmen
overpowered two security guards and brought them to northern Gaza, where they
were later released.

It was the latest attack on institutions associated with Christianity, attacks
condemned by Hamas, Fatah and local nongovernmental organizations like the
Palestinian Center for Human Rights. Some 3,500 Christians, mostly Greek
Orthodox, live in the Gaza Strip.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The wreckage of a house in Gaza destroyed Friday by an explosion
that killed a senior commander of the Islamic Jihad movement.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
MOHAMMED SABER/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%);
HAMAS (89%); SHOOTINGS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); AL FATAH (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); EYEWITNESSES (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); REFUGEES (72%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); HEALTH
DEPARTMENTS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (94%); HAMAS (55%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             536 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

For Israel, Gaza Offers A Range of Risky Choices

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel hoped that by pulling its settlers and troops from Gaza in 2005, it would
also leave behind responsibility for the Gazans. With help from the West and
some Arab nations, Israelis thought, the Palestinian Authority could begin to
create a prosperous state, as if the continuing Israeli occupation of the West
Bank were somehow irrelevant.

It was a case of wishful thinking. As rockets continue to fall on Israeli towns
and Israeli politicians call for harsh retaliation, the country faces an acute
quandary in Gaza. Israel is trying to contain a new form of polity: a
nonsovereign, semioccupied semistate controlled by Hamas, which is considered a
terrorist group by the United States and the European Union and is officially
committed to the destruction of the country obligated to provide it with fuel,
electricity, water and food.

Israeli politicians are demanding the assassination of Hamas leaders and a major
military incursion to stop the rockets. Yet Defense Minister Ehud Barak and
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert have been preaching patience.

But now, with the Winograd report into the failures of Mr. Olmert's war against
Hezbollah safely behind him, a government information campaign is trying to
justify a major military operation in Gaza. Israeli officials argue that Hamas
is becoming Hezbollah, a sophisticated military organization threatening
regional stability.

Since June, when Hamas forces routed Fatah in Gaza, the territory has become
''Hamastan,'' said Haim Ramon, a vice prime minister and a close ally of Mr.
Olmert.

''This is not a terrorist group hiding in a state,'' Mr. Ramon said. ''They are
the state, and they are a terrorist organization that refuses to recognize
Israel's right to exist.''

Gaza, however, is not a state, but part of an occupied Palestinian entity, which
is Israel's problem.

Mr. Ramon supports peace talks with the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas,
and a simultaneous ''war against Hamastan,'' as he put it. ''No society in the
world provides fuel and electricity to a country rocketing it,'' he said,
although Israeli cuts in supplies to Gaza have already brought fierce criticism
from the United Nations and human rights groups about ''collective punishment''
of civilians and even cautions from Washington.

The foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, took diplomats to the Gaza border on
Wednesday and warned them that ''the situation in the region is unbearable, and
the threat of terror from Gaza is growing larger from year to year.'' The
problem is not simply the rockets, she said, ''but also the strengthening of the
terror organizations.'' She added, ''Israel must act to reduce these threats.''

Fine, but how, exactly? Shlomo Brom, a retired general at the Institute for
National Security Studies, says that none of the military options are especially
attractive. To stop rockets, as the army learned in Lebanon, Israel must occupy
the launching zones.

But the range of the rockets is improving. ''That means seizing most of Gaza,''
Mr. Brom said, ''and no one in Israel other than the fringe right has the
appetite to reoccupy the Gaza Strip.'' The Israeli Army would win easily, Mr.
Brom said, ''but it takes a long time, and for what? To regain rule over 1.5
million Palestinians? What's the exit strategy?''

Such an operation could make it impossible for Mr. Abbas, of Fatah, to continue
peace talks with Israel, no matter how much he would like to see Hamas weakened
or removed from power in Gaza.

Other military options include intensifying current operations against Hamas,
but that would not stop the rockets. Ground operations with limited goals --
making sure Ashkelon is out of range, for example -- could mean retaking
northern Gaza and a wide swath next to the Gaza-Egypt border to diminish weapons
smuggling.

Killing Hamas leaders could also deter attacks, but might have unexpected
consequences, like a new campaign of suicide bombings.

Amos Oz, Israel's most famous writer, warned, ''Israel must not fall into the
trap that Hamas is laying for us and march into Gaza.'' He added: ''The
occupying force will not have a single quiet day. Nor will Sderot,'' an Israeli
town that is often the target of Palestinian rockets.

There is another option, he noted, which would be to negotiate the cease-fire
with Hamas that its leaders have been proposing. Diplomats say that Egypt, stung
by the border crisis, is working on an ambitious package -- an exchange of
prisoners, including Cpl. Gilad Shalit, an Israeli soldier captured in Gaza in
June 2006, and possibly the jailed Fatah leader Marwan Barghouti; a long-term
cease-fire in Gaza; and reopening the Gaza-Egypt border.

Israel is likely to be cautious. Completing a deal with Hamas would further
undermine Mr. Abbas, when Israeli and Western policy is to strengthen him and
weaken Hamas.

A long-term cease-fire might bring quiet to Sderot, but it would also allow
Hamas to regroup, rearm, continue to improve its military capacities and
strengthen its political and security hold over Gaza.

Still, as Bernard Avishai, author of ''The Hebrew Republic,'' points out, Israel
has a cease-fire with Hezbollah, just as rejectionist as Hamas, coupled with a
disengagement of forces. ''You have to stop the cycle of violence,'' he said.
''Israel can't win a war in Gaza, but it can't lose a Gazan peace.''

A former national security adviser, Giora Eiland, wants to use the threat of
harsh military and economic sanctions not to defeat Hamas, but to persuade it to
stop the rocket fire -- or else. Mr. Eiland proposes a deal: cease-fire,
prisoner exchange, normal fuel and electricity supplies, and a reopened,
monitored Egyptian border.

If Hamas refuses, he proposes a very hard stick: the bombing of Gaza's
ministries, police stations and infrastructure; a halt in the supply of goods,
fuel and electricity; and the economic separation of Gaza from the West Bank.

It is an unlikely solution, given the international outcry that would follow. A
better answer might be a rapid peace treaty creating a Palestinian state,
supported by the Arab League and isolating Hamas, with international troops
helping to patrol the borders.

But because Israel and Hamas have little interest in a final settlement now,
that seems like more wishful thinking.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 19, 2008



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on Sunday about
Israel's quandary in deciding what to do about the control of Gaza by the
militant Islamic group Hamas misidentified the location where an Israeli
soldier, Cpl. Gilad Shalit, was captured in June 2006. It was in Israel, not
Gaza. (He was later taken to Gaza.)

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A mother comforted her son in Kibbutz Beeri, Israel, left,
after a rocket attack from Gaza. Israel has responded to attacks by cutting fuel
and electricity for Gaza. Above, the Hamid family in Gaza in their wood shop go
without power most of the time. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATE BROOKS FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES
 RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (91%); HEZBOLLAH (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); AL FATAH (79%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (79%); ARMIES (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); ASSASSINATION (75%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); EUROPEAN UNION
(69%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (67%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (62%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (85%); HEZBOLLAH (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (79%); EHUD BARAK (74%); TZIPORA LIVNI (59%); MAHMOUD ABBAS
(59%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); UNITED STATES
(92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (56%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             537 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clashes With Israeli Troops Kill 4 Militants in Gaza

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 897 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Four Palestinian militants were killed in clashes with the Israeli Army in
southern Gaza early Sunday, and an Israeli soldier was seriously wounded in an
exchange of fire.

An Israeli Army spokeswoman said  the Israeli forces had been ''operating
against terrorist infrastructures'' inside Gaza, near the city of Rafah. About
80 Palestinians from the area were detained and brought back to Israel for
questioning.

Palestinian hospital officials said that three of the four gunmen killed
belonged to the military wing of Hamas, the Islamic group that controls Gaza,
and that the fourth belonged to the Popular Resistance Committees, a smaller
militant group. More than 20 Palestinians, including some civilians, were
wounded during the army incursion, the hospital officials said. The incursion
ended early Sunday afternoon.

The wounded Israeli soldier belongs to an elite army unit and was evacuated to
Israel for treatment, Israeli military officials said, adding that Palestinian
militants had fired antitank missiles and small arms at the Israeli troops.

Israel withdrew  from the Gaza Strip unilaterally  in 2005 but has frequently
sent in forces in the past few months to try to reduce the quantity of rockets
and mortar shells fired at Israel by militants there. Several rockets landed in
Israeli territory later on Sunday, mostly in open areas. One crashed into a
residential neighborhood in the border town of Sderot but caused no casualties.
More than 700 rockets and mortar shells have been launched against Israel since
the beginning of the year, according to Israeli military officials.

John Holmes, the United Nations under secretary general for humanitarian
affairs, said Sunday that the indiscriminate rocket fire from Gaza ''has
absolutely no justification and should be stopped.'' But he said the people in
Sderot were in a generally better situation than the population of Gaza, whom he
described as living in ''grim and miserable'' conditions, and he questioned
whether some of the Israeli measures against Gaza were justified.

Mr. Holmes was speaking to a group of reporters in Jerusalem after visiting
Sderot. He toured Gaza on Friday and called for the reopening of border
crossings. Israel has imposed restrictions on the movement of people and goods
in and out of Gaza since Hamas seized control of the area last June. The embargo
was tightened last month in response to increased rocket fire against Israel,
limiting imports almost entirely to basic supplies brought in by  international
aid organizations.

Mr. Holmes said he had wanted to meet with Israel's foreign and defense
ministers, but had been told that they were not available.

Arye Mekel, a spokesman for Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, reacted coolly to Mr.
Holmes's visit. He said that Mr. Holmes had come to the area of his own
initiative and that from Israel's perspective, Sderot ''is not a humanitarian
problem but a security problem.'' Once the attacks from Gaza stop, Mr. Mekel
said, there should be no reason for humanitarian problems there.

Bernard Kouchner, France's foreign minister, met Sunday with President Shimon
Peres in Jerusalem. Mr. Kouchner met Saturday with the Western-backed
Palestinian leadership in the West Bank.

A statement from Mr. Peres's office said that Mr. Kouchner had said at his
meeting with Mr. Peres that the European Union and France condemned all violence
on the part of Hamas, but that Israel should understand that only an independent
Palestinian state would ensure Israel's security.

But Mr. Kouchner described the Palestinian mood as one of despair, frustration
and lack of hope regarding the establishment of a Palestinian state, the
statement from the president's office said. The minister attributed that mood,
it said, to a lack of real progress in the peace negotiations or in the
development of economic projects on the ground since the American-sponsored
peace conference in Annapolis, Md., last November and an international donors'
conference in Paris in December.

But after a meeting with Ms. Livni, who heads the Israeli negotiating team, Mr.
Kouchner said he could see progress in negotiations, news reports said.

Human Rights Watch, based in New York, on Sunday released a long-expected report
on Israel's use of cluster bombs during the 2006 war against the Hezbollah
militia in Lebanon. The report stated that Israel had violated international
humanitarian law because its use of cluster munitions during the war was
''indiscriminate and disproportionate.''

While the use of cluster munitions is not explicitly prohibited in warfare, it
is broadly criticized because the munitions spread over a wide area large
numbers of ''bomblets,'' which can explode long after the fighting is over.

Israel's government-appointed Winograd Commission, which investigated the
conduct of the Israeli leadership  during the 2006 war, pointed to a lack of
clarity regarding the terms of cluster bomb use by the army, particularly
against military targets in areas where residents had fled but were likely to
return.

The Winograd report called for an internal review of the rules for the use of
the munitions. Human Rights Watch is supporting an effort by more than 100
countries to formulate the text of a treaty ''to ban the production,
stockpiling, transfer and use of cluster munitions that cause unacceptable harm
to civilians.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HAMAS (89%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); HOSPITALS (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (76%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (69%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (69%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); RELIGION (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (57%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             538 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Memorial to Rwanda Victims, Bush Laments Darfur

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1046 words

DATELINE: KIGALI, Rwanda


Skeletons are still being discovered and buried in mass graves on a terraced
hillside in this lush, verdant city, the legacy of the gruesome genocide in
which 800,000 Rwandans, many of them children, were slaughtered over 100 days in
1994.

So when President Bush paid his respects to the dead on Tuesday, laying a wreath
and touring a museum where the skulls of victims are laid out under glass in
haunting, neat white rows, the subject of another conflict that Mr. Bush has
called a genocide -- in Darfur -- was bound to come up.

At a news conference with President Paul Kagame of Rwanda, Mr. Bush spoke in
unusually personal terms about the frustrations, and hard choices, he had faced
in grappling with the situation in Darfur, the Sudanese region where 200,000
people have died and 2.5 million have been displaced in a raging crisis with
ethnic undercurrents.

The United Nations and African Union have been trying to establish a joint
peacekeeping presence in Darfur, but progress has been achingly slow.

Mr. Bush, who has faced criticism from human rights advocates for not being
aggressive enough with the Sudanese government, talked about the difficulty of
deciding not to send American troops to Darfur -- and having to live with the
knowledge that, by relying on an international force, he could not control the
outcome while the killing has gone on far longer than he had anticipated.

''I still believe it was the right decision'' Mr. Bush said. ''But, having done
that, if you're a problem solver, you put yourself at the mercy of the decisions
of others, in this case the United Nations. And I'm well known to have spoken
out by  the slowness of the United Nations. It is -- seems very bureaucratic to
me, particularly with people suffering.''

Mr. Bush also said he was worried -- a word he rarely uses -- that the rest of
the world was not moving ''expeditiously, quickly'' enough to join the
peacekeeping effort.

He appealed to other nations to step up ''once and for all'' to end the conflict
in Sudan and said that, as an incentive, he would free $100 million from his
foreign aid budget to assist African countries willing to send peacekeeping
troops to Darfur.

Rwanda, the first nation to send peacekeeping troops to Darfur, will get $12
million. It will be used to train 2,400 troops, to add to the 7,000 Rwandan
troops the United States has already trained.

''My message to other nations is, join with the president and help us get this
problem solved once and for all,'' Mr. Bush said. ''And we will help.''

Human rights advocates called on Mr. Bush to back up the money with a more
aggressive diplomatic effort to put the peacekeepers in place.

''We are approaching the fifth year of this crisis, and Khartoum continues their
same games -- pledging full cooperation with one hand, while bombing civilian
villages with the other,'' said Jerry Fowler, president of the Save Darfur
Coalition, referring to the capital of Sudan. ''How can anyone have a clear
conscience about what's going on in Darfur?''

Rwanda, in central Africa, is the third stop on Mr. Bush's five-country tour of
Africa, which he is using to promote American foreign aid and what he calls
''success stories'' like his programs to combat AIDS and malaria. While here, he
signed a treaty intended to promote American investment in Rwanda, and announced
that the Peace Corps, which left Rwanda in 1993, would return.

But the tone of the trip took a decidedly somber turn, when Mr. Bush and his
wife, Laura, made their emotional visit to the Kigali Memorial Center, the
museum and memorial where some 250,000 genocide victims are buried in the red
clay earth, in mass graves covered by stark, unmarked stone slabs.

Mrs. Bush visited in 2005 with their daughter Jenna, but it was the president's
first time at the center. He looked grim as they wandered through its darkened
rooms, past glass cases holding the tattered clothes of the victims and
countless pictures of the dead, including life-size images of children
accompanied by facts like, ''Favorite sport: swimming,'' ''Favorite food: eggs
and chips'' and ''Cause of death: hacked by machete.''

The museum manager, Freddy Mutanguha, recounted the grisly story of the
slaughter, which began when a plane carrying the presidents of Rwanda and
Burundi, both members of the ethnic Hutu majority, was shot down in 1994. The
Tutsi, the country's ethnic minority, were systematically clubbed, shot and
hacked to death by extremist militias and government troops, as were politically
moderate Hutu.

''The U.N. knew about what was going on in our country,'' Mr. Mutanguha said.

Mr. Bush, who said little throughout, was silent.

Mr. Kagame, the Rwandan president, is credited with helping to end the genocide
as the leader of the rebel Rwandan Patriotic Front. A Spanish court, however,
recently indicted 40 members of his army, saying it had found evidence that they
had committed atrocities under his leadership in the aftermath of the genocide.
That topic did not come up, at least not publicly, during Mr. Bush's visit.

In 2003, Mr. Kagame won Rwanda's first presidential election since the genocide,
a fact that endears him to Mr. Bush, who called him ''a respected leader.''

At the news conference, the Rwandan president said he thought the approach Mr.
Bush had taken in Darfur was the correct one. The United States could help, he
said, but in the end Africans had to solve their own problems.

''Walking together with the rest of the international community is perhaps more
important than just blaming the United States, saying, 'Why didn't you go in and
solve the problem?' '' he said.

In some ways, Mr. Bush's appearance here evoked reminders of his predecessor,
Bill Clinton, who has apologized repeatedly to Mr. Kagame for his
administration's failure to intervene in 1994. During a visit here two years
ago, Mr. Clinton expressed his regret in stark terms.

''The United States just blew it in Rwanda,'' Mr. Clinton said then.

But Mr. Bush is not one to second-guess himself, and despite his public
ruminations on Tuesday, he said he did not worry that he, too, would have
regrets.

''I'm comfortable with the decision I made,'' he said. ''I'm not comfortable
with how quickly the response has been.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Bush and his wife, Laura, paid respects on Tuesday to
genocide victims in Rwanda after laying a memorial wreath. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JASON
REED/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
PEACEKEEPING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(73%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (71%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%); BUDGETS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             539 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2008 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

A Change to Believe In

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg.

LENGTH: 839 words


Fidel Castro has quit after a half-century in power. An African-American has
become a serious contender for the U.S. presidency, winning a 10th consecutive
victory over his rival for the Democratic nomination. A new European state,
Kosovo, has been born.

And that's just in the last week.

Communist dictators don't quit. Blacks don't have broad U.S. electoral appeal.
European borders don't shift without bloodshed. History has been upended.
Change, as Barack Obama would put it, is something you can believe in.

After the cold war's end, and close to one million dead in the genocides of
Bosnia (1992) and Rwanda (1994), and the digitally-induced dissolution of
barriers and distances and hierarchies, some governments thought everything
could remain the same.

They thought wrong, and not just in Havana and Pyongyang. They believed that in
the age of globalization the principles of the Treaties of Westphalia, dating
back to 1648, would be enough. In places like Moscow and Beijing and Belgrade,
they clung to the idea that state sovereignty -- the unfettered power of a state
within its own jurisdiction -- was the inviolable basis of international law.

Boris Tadic, the Serbian president, took this line at the United Nations this
week, insisting that Kosovo's independence ''annuls international law, tramples
upon justice and enthrones injustice.''

He's wrong. Let's set aside the fact that Kosovo held one of the eight seats in
the rotating presidency of a defunct state, Yugoslavia, and other holders of
those federal seats from Slovenia to Bosnia to Macedonia all become independent.

At a deeper level, the story of little Kosovo is the story of changing notions
of sovereignty and international law.

After the above-mentioned genocides, one perpetrated by the late Slobodan
Milosevic of Serbia, both revealing a U.N. Security Council too divided to stop
mass slaughter, NATO circumvented the council in 1999. It waged war for the
first time to prevent Milosevic doing his worst again in Kosovo.

The war, in the words of Thomas Weiss, a political scientist at the City
University of New York, ''had legitimacy even if its legality was questioned.''
This legitimacy stemmed from an evolving consensus that, as Tony Blair once put
it, ''acts of genocide can never be a purely internal matter.''

Sovereignty, after Bosnia, after Rwanda, in a globalized world, was more than
authority over territory and people. It was also responsibility.

When that responsibility to protect was flouted, when a government abused the
basic rights of its citizens through slaughter or ethnic cleansing, sovereignty
could in effect be suspended. As Kofi Annan, the former U.N. secretary general,
put it: ''State sovereignty, in its most basic sense, is being redefined.'' For
Annan, as Weiss has noted, ''Human rights transcended narrow claims of state
sovereignty.''

Which brings us to ''R2P.'' That's not a rock band or a chemical compound.

In 2005, the World Summit adopted the ''responsibility to protect,'' known by
that acronym. R2P formalized the notion that when a state proves unable or
unwilling to protect its people, and crimes against humanity are perpetrated,
the international community has an obligation to intervene -- if necessary, and
as a last resort, with military force.

Member states declared that, with Security Council approval, they were prepared
''to take collective action in a timely and decisive manner'' when ''national
authorities manifestly fail to protect their populations from genocide, war
crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity.''

An independent Kosovo, recognized by major Western powers, is in effect the
first major fruit of the ideas behind R2P. It could not have happened if the
rights of human beings were not catching up at last with the rights of states.

Appropriately, Kosovo's emergence coincided with the establishment in New York
of the Global Center for the Responsibility to Protect, directed by Weiss.
Backed by the Canadian, British and Dutch governments, among others, and with
support from Ban Ki Moon, Annan's successor, the organization's mission is the
spread of R2P principles.

They need bolstering. The Iraq war has revived a 21st century sovereignty fetish
exploited by Sudan to stall U.N. efforts to stop genocide in Darfur, where the
government has failed utterly in its ''responsibility to protect'' without
provoking ''timely and decisive'' international action.

Interventionism is increasingly seen in the Middle East and Africa as a
camouflage for Western interests.

But I believe the tide will eventually turn. R2P will be a reference. It is part
of what Lawrence Weschler has called ''the decades-long, at times maddeningly
halting, vexed, and compromised effort to expand the territory of law itself.''

The ''territory of law'' is now also the universal territory on which human life
is protected. Westphalian principles meet R2P. An R2P generation is coming. The
prizing open of the world is slow work, but from Kosovo to Cuba it continues.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); GLOBALIZATION (88%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%); COLD WAR (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); GENOCIDE (71%);
POLITICAL SCIENCE (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); FIDEL CASTRO (74%); TONY BLAIR (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(93%); RWANDA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SLOVENIA (79%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC
OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             541 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Waterboarding Focus of Inquiry By Justice Dept.

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1353 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Justice Department revealed Friday that its internal ethics office was
investigating the department's legal approval for waterboarding of Qaeda
suspects by the Central Intelligence Agency and was likely to make public an
unclassified version of its report.

The disclosure by H. Marshall Jarrett, the head of the department's Office of
Professional Responsibility, was the first official acknowledgment of an
internal review of the legal memorandums the department has issued since 2002
that authorized waterboarding and other harsh interrogation methods.

Mr. Jarrett's report could become the first public accounting for legal advice
that endorsed methods widely denounced as torture by human rights groups and
legal authorities. His office can refer matters for criminal prosecution; legal
experts said the most likely outcome was a public critique of the legal opinions
on interrogation, noting that Mr. Jarrett had the power to reprimand or to seek
the disbarment of current or former Justice Department lawyers.

The cloak of secrecy that long concealed the C.I.A.'s secret interrogation
program and its legal underpinnings has gradually broken down.

The C.I.A. director, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, publicly admitted for the first
time two weeks ago that the agency used waterboarding in 2002 and 2003 in the
interrogation of three Qaeda suspects but said that the technique was no longer
used, and its legality under current law is uncertain. The technique, which has
been used since the Spanish Inquisition and has been found illegal in the past
by American courts, involves water poured into the nose and mouth to create a
feeling of drowning.

After General Hayden's acknowledgment, Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey
rebuffed demands for a criminal investigation of interrogators who used
waterboarding or of their superiors, saying C.I.A. officers could not be
prosecuted for actions the Justice Department had advised them were legal. Mr.
Jarrett's review focuses on the government lawyers who gave that advice.

Mr. Jarrett's disclosure came as prosecutors and F.B.I. agents conduct a
criminal investigation of the C.I.A.'s destruction in 2005 of videotapes of
harsh interrogations and a week after Congress passed a ban on coercive
interrogations, which President Bush has said he will veto.

Mr. Jarrett did not say when his investigation might conclude. He did not
respond to a request on Friday for an interview.

In a letter to two Democratic senators, Richard J. Durbin of Illinois and
Sheldon Whitehouse of Rhode Island, Mr. Jarrett wrote that the legal advice
approving waterboarding was one subject of an investigation into ''the
circumstances surrounding the drafting'' of a Justice legal memorandum dated
Aug. 1, 2002.

The document declared that interrogation methods were not torture unless they
produced pain equivalent to that produced by organ failure or death. The
memorandum, drafted by a Justice Department lawyer, John Yoo, and signed by Jay
S. Bybee, then head of the department's Office of Legal Counsel, was withdrawn
in 2004.

Mr. Jarrett said the investigation was also covering ''related'' legal
memorandums prepared by the Office of Legal Counsel since 2002. That suggested
the investigation would address still-secret legal opinions written in 2005 by
Steven G. Bradbury, then and now the acting head of the Office of Legal Counsel,
that gave legal approval for waterboarding and other tough methods, even when
used in combination.

Mr. Jarrett said his office was ''examining whether the legal advice in these
memoranda was consistent with the professional standards that apply to
Department of Justice attorneys.''

''Because of the significant public interest in this matter, O.P.R. will
consider releasing to Congress and the public a nonclassified summary of our
final report,'' Mr. Jarrett wrote, using the initials for the Office of
Professional Responsibility.

Justice Department officials said that the O.P.R. inquiry began more than three
years ago and noted that it was mentioned in a Newsweek article in December
2004. It has since been expanded, the officials said, to cover more recent legal
opinions on interrogation.

Mr. Jarrett's letter, dated Monday, came in reply to a Feb. 12 letter from Mr.
Durbin and Mr. Whitehouse to him and the Justice Department's inspector general,
Glenn A. Fine, seeking an investigation into the department's legal approval of
waterboarding.

''Despite the virtually unanimous consensus of legal scholars and the
overwhelming weight of legal precedent that waterboarding is illegal,'' the
senators wrote, ''certain Justice Department officials, operating behind a veil
of secrecy, concluded that the use of waterboarding is lawful. We believe it is
appropriate for you to investigate the conduct of these Justice Department
officials.''

Mr. Fine replied in a letter this week that the law gave Mr. Jarrett's office
responsibility for reviewing the actions of department lawyers providing legal
advice. Mr. Jarrett confirmed that his office was investigating.

Mr. Jarrett reports to the attorney general and oversees only the professional
conduct of Justice Department attorneys. He does not enjoy the independence or
authority of Mr. Fine, who covers all aspects of Justice operations and also
reports to Congress.

In 2006, when Mr. Jarrett tried to look into the Justice Department's role in
approving the National Security Agency's domestic surveillance program, Mr. Bush
blocked the investigation by denying Mr. Jarrett's investigators the necessary
security clearances. Mr. Fine's office subsequently obtained the necessary
clearances and began such an investigation.

Last November, days after Mr. Mukasey was confirmed as attorney general, Mr.
Bush reversed course and granted clearances to Mr. Jarrett's staffers, who began
a delayed review of the legal authorization for the N.S.A. program.

Mr. Durbin and Mr. Whitehouse have been among the most outspoken critics in
Congress of harsh interrogation methods. They have called on Mr. Bush to
withdraw the nomination of Mr. Bradbury, author of the 2005 interrogation
memorandums, as chief of the Office of Legal Counsel; he has filled the job on
an acting basis since 2005.

In 2004, Mr. Durbin first proposed a ban on cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment that Congress passed in 2005, when it was sponsored by Senator John
McCain, Republican of Arizona.

Mr. Whitehouse, a former United States attorney, said in an interview that he
believed the August 2002 memo on torture, as well as classified opinions he had
reviewed, fell far short of the Justice Department's standards for scholarship.
He said that in approving waterboarding, the opinions ignored both American
military prosecutors' cases against Japanese officers for waterboarding American
prisoners during World War II and a federal appeals court's decision that upheld
the 1983 conviction of a Texas sheriff for using ''water torture'' on jail
inmates.

''I'm very, very pleased that the Office of Professional Responsibility is
looking into this,'' Mr. Whitehouse said.

Jose Padilla, the American sympathizer of Al Qaeda serving a 17-year sentence
for conspiring to help violent Muslim extremists abroad, filed a lawsuit in
January against Mr. Yoo, who left Justice in 2003 to return to his job as a law
professor at the University of California, Berkeley. The lawsuit claims Mr.
Yoo's legal opinions permitted the designation of Mr. Padilla as an enemy
combatant and his interrogation using methods that amounted to torture.

Mr. Yoo, who asserted that a president during wartime has extraordinarily broad
powers, was a highly influential figure in the Justice Department in the first
year after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. His views found favor with
Vice President Dick Cheney and his legal adviser, David S. Addington, who shared
his views of presidential power.

But some of Mr. Yoo's opinions, including the August 2002 memo on torture, were
withdrawn in 2004 after Jack L. Goldsmith took over as head of the Office of
Legal Counsel. Mr. Yoo could not be reached for comment Friday.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Steven G. Bradbury, right, who runs the Justice Department
office that gave legal approval for waterboarding, at a 2007 ceremony for the
departure of Alberto R. Gonzales as attorney general. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL
TEMCHINE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); ETHICS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); APPROVALS (89%); TORTURE (89%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); LEGAL ETHICS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
DISBARMENT (73%); ACCOUNTING (72%); VETO (70%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (69%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (67%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (95%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%)

PERSON: MICHAEL HAYDEN (89%); MICHAEL MUKASEY (78%); ALBERTO GONZALES (58%);
GEORGE W BUSH (58%); RICHARD DURBIN (55%); SHELDON WHITEHOUSE (51%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             542 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 25, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Adds Border Forces Ahead of Protest in Gaza

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 744 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The Israeli Army bolstered its forces on the Israeli side of the border fence
with the Gaza Strip on Sunday after Palestinian advocates there called on
residents to form a human chain on Monday along the Gaza side, from Rafah in the
south to Beit Hanun in the north.

The advocates are protesting the embargo imposed by Israel since the Islamic
militant group Hamas took over Gaza last June. Israel recently tightened the
blockade in response to intensified rocket fire from the strip.

There are concerns in Israel that a large number of Gaza residents may try to
break through the border, as they breached the border with Egypt last month.
Hamas militants blew up sections of a wall along the Gaza-Egypt border, and
residents poured into the Egyptian Sinai to shop. The border remained open for
11 days.

''The army has made the appropriate preparations in accordance with the
Palestinian reports,'' an Israeli Army spokeswoman said, speaking on the
condition of anonymity under army rules.

The Israeli Channel 2 television reported that the army had increased its
artillery units along the border.

Jamal el Khoudary, an organizer of the demonstration in Gaza, is an independent
lawmaker leading a popular campaign against the blockade. He said Sunday night
that the demonstration was meant to be peaceful and that there was ''no
intention of turning to violence.''

Faced with the prospect of continuing rocket fire by militants from Gaza, the
Israeli cabinet also approved a plan on Sunday to build fortified rooms in
thousands of Israeli homes within about three miles of the Gaza border.

More than $90 million has been allocated for the first stage of the project, a
cabinet statement said. That will cover about 3,600 of the 8,000 homes within
the designated range needing fortification, Israel Radio said. Legislation
requires homes built since 1992 to include protected spaces.

Homes beyond the three-mile range are to be protected by a new $225-million
antimissile defense system, to become operational sometime in 2010, the cabinet
said.

According to the Israeli police, 13 civilians have been killed by the rockets
since 2001, including two Israeli youths who were handling an unexploded rocket.

Prime Minister Ehud Olmert described the overall plan for countering the rocket
threat from Gaza as ''a combination of several systems,'' including military
action.

Mr. Olmert said recently that the army had killed more than 200 Palestinian
combatants in Gaza in recent months. According to B'Tselem, an Israeli human
rights organization, Israeli forces killed 290 Palestinians in Gaza in 2007,
about a third of them civilians not taking part in hostilities when they were
killed.

An Israeli missile strike in the northern Gaza Strip on Monday killed at least
one militant and wounded two others, Reuters reported. An earlier airstrike
killed two Hamas militants near the border.

Relatives of three Palestinian men killed by an Israeli Army missile in northern
Gaza on Saturday insisted Sunday that the men were not involved in any armed
activity. Army officials had said  Saturday that the men were armed and on their
way to fire mortar shells at Israel.

Palestinians identified the three as Muhammad Zaanin, 22, a student at the
Islamic University and a member of the Popular Front for the Liberation of
Palestine, a militant leftist group; Ibrahim Abu Jarad, 23, an employee of the
Palestinian Authority and a supporter of the mainstream Fatah faction; and
Muhammad Hasanin, 23, an employee of the Bank of Jordan and also a Fatah
supporter.

Sabir Zaanin, a cousin of the student, said  Sunday that the three had been
sitting in an onion field, making tea and preparing a picnic. ''I kept searching
for any evidence that can justify Israel's action but didn't find any,'' Mr.
Zaanin said.

Israel has continued to hold peace talks with the Western-backed Palestinian
Authority, led by President Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah. Israeli officials announced
Sunday that the scope of the peace talks was being broadened to include
practical issues regarding the establishment of a Palestinian state.

The leaders of the negotiating teams, Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni of Israel,
and Ahmed Qurei, a former Palestinian prime minister, held a meeting here on
Sunday of 10 experts from each side. The experts will meet regularly  to discuss
civil, economic and judicial issues, like water and the environment, Arye Mekel,
a spokesman for Ms. Livni said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The Israeli Army reinforced security near Gaza in preparation
for a protest in which Palestinians plan to form a human chain. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (91%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HAMAS (90%);
MISSILE SYSTEMS (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE
(71%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
RESIDENTIAL CONSTRUCTION (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); PRIME MINISTERS (64%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (64%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (61%); RELIGION (56%);
APPROVALS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); EGYPT (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             549 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka's Wild East Plans First Vote in Over 10 Years

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1082 words

DATELINE: VAVUNATHIVU, Sri Lanka


Lawless, contested, notorious for a string of abductions and unsolved killings,
this region has long been known as the Wild East of Sri Lanka.

For years, the guerrilla army known as the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam had
the run of the place, only to be driven out last summer by the military, with
help from a breakaway Tamil rebel faction. The houses here are still battered
from the fighting. Its people are still rattled from having to run.

On Monday, voters here and across the region will go to the polls in the first
local elections in a dozen years. Beyond deciding who will serve in local posts,
the vote stands to demonstrate whether, after 25 years of civil war, the
government can restore a semblance of normality for the area's ethnic Tamil
majority.

Questions remain as to whether the election will be free and fair, or simply a
means for the government of President Mahinda Rajapaksa to consolidate its hold
on the region through its ally, the breakaway faction that helped push the Tamil
Tigers out. That faction has now reinvented itself as a political party, the
Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal Party, or T.M.V.P., and has been endorsed by the
government.

Until recently, T.M.V.P. gunmen openly patrolled the East. The group is accused
by human rights organizations, as well as United Nations officials, of
recruiting child soldiers. Many people are fearful, and critics worry that the
party will browbeat or ballot-stuff its way to an election victory.

Some opposition politicians have refused to run, fearing retribution. Amnesty
International reported last week that a man had been abducted after having
refused to run on a T.M.V.P. ticket.

Today, the T.M.V.P.'s heavily barricaded political offices are festooned with
their party symbol, a boat, along with garish murals dedicated to their slain
fighters. ''Vote for the Boat,'' goes one slogan. ''It will ferry the wounded
Tamils to the shore.''

Oddly enough, the faction's leader, the former Tamil Tiger commander known as
Karuna, is not on these shores. He was detained in Britain last year on charges
of traveling with a forged passport.

The T.M.V.P. itself is hardly safe from violence. On a Sunday morning in
February, a suicide bomber attacked a village not far from here, killing two
T.M.V.P. workers who had tried to frisk him for weapons near the site of an
election meeting. The government swiftly blamed the Tamil Tigers.

Neither the T.M.V.P. nor other Tamil parties that oppose the Tigers have laid
down their arms. The pro-Tiger party is not fielding candidates in these
elections, saying they would not be not safe.

Paffrel, an independent monitoring group, has called on all political parties to
disarm. In February, it issued a report saying that while law and order had
improved in the weeks leading up to the elections, several political parties and
community leaders had told its observers that the presence of armed men was ''an
obstacle to free and fair elections.'' Its observers found little enthusiasm for
voting for particular candidates.

Likewise, a pre-election assessment by the Center for Policy Alternatives, a
nonpartisan research organization in the capital, Colombo, found a climate of
fear and cynicism among civilians.

''Many felt that the elections will not drastically change the ground
situation,'' said its report, released in mid-February. ''The only change
envisaged is that the T.M.V.P. and other armed actors will be elected into
office and claim legitimacy for their role and activities in the area.''

Several accusations of coercion and violence have been made in recent weeks.
Last week, two men on a motorcycle told women leaving a political meeting of the
Eelam People's Revolutionary Liberation Front, a rival of the T.M.V.P., that
their husbands would not live if they voted for the Liberation Front, according
to the party's leader, Erasaiyah Thurairatnam.

Elsewhere, Mr. Thurairatnam said, armed cadres entered a party office and
verbally threatened its workers. A member of another party, he said, was roughed
up near a T.M.V.P. office a few days earlier.

''People are not in a mood to vote,'' Mr. Thurairatnam said. He said he feared
that the results would be rigged.

His party was hardly sitting idle. On a recent day, a large group of women
bearing parasols in the midday sun marched through the narrow roads of nearby
Batticaloa, stumping for their candidate. A woman with a bullhorn brought up the
rear. ''We think this election has been imposed on us,'' she announced, and went
on to urge people to vote.

The candidate, Sellapillai Asirvithan, in a crisp white shirt and traditional
wraparound loongi, knocked on doors and handed out leaflets. ''Exercise your
democratic right,'' a supporter bellowed through the bullhorn. ''You have the
right to vote for the candidate of your choice.''

Atanidas Arulanatham, poring over one of the leaflets, said he and his wife
planned to vote. Asked whether people would be able to choose freely, he
laughed.

''Not sure,'' was all he would say. ''We hope those who win will bring peace.''

Here in Vavunathivu, a T.M.V.P. candidate named Jegannathan Jeyaraj sat under a
wide-armed tree in the courtyard of a Hindu temple, making his case. Once a
child soldier, he later studied computers in India and is now trying to make it
as a politician.

He told his audience that his party had given up hope for an independent ethnic
Tamil homeland and had renounced armed struggle (though not yet their weapons,
for fear of attacks by their rivals). He pledged economic development for the
area. And he branded as terrorists his former masters, the Tamil Tigers, whom he
had joined at age 7.

The audience kept quiet, except for a very old woman. ''I cultivated three acres
and got nothing because of the war,'' she told him.

''The past is past,'' he replied. ''The T.M.V.P. will pave a new way.''

Undeterred, the woman wagged a finger. ''You admit you broke away from the
L.T.T.E.,'' she said. ''Why are you blaming them now?'' Then, finally, she said
the unspeakable: ''Why don't you ask the government to give us a separate
state?''

Sri Lankan soldiers stood at the edge of the meeting, machine guns at the ready.
Clumps of young men wearing T.M.V.P. jerseys stood in the shade.

Asked if she planned to vote, a woman sitting in the crowd nodded.

Asked if she felt free to vote her conscience, she shook her head and quietly
said, ''No.'' She smiled and looked down at the ground, refusing to say more.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: In Batticaloa, Sri Lanka, village women walked past a party
office of the Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal Party last month. Eastern Sri
Lanka is holding elections in the hope of achieving some stability after a
quarter century of civil war between government forces and the rebel Tamil
Tigers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PABLO BARTHOLOMEW FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) MAP: Candidates
are running in Vavunathivu and other places.   Map of Vavunathivu, Sri Lanka.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (89%); POLITICS (89%); CIVIL WAR (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); CHILD SOLDIERS (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(68%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (64%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (63%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(60%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (93%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             550 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

China Says Plane and Olympic Plots Halted

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY and JAKE HOOKER; Zhang Jing contributed research.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


A Chinese passenger jet that departed Friday morning from the heavily Muslim
region of Xinjiang was forced to make an emergency landing after crew members
apprehended at least two passengers who the authorities said intended to
sabotage the airplane, the state news media reported Sunday.

Also on Sunday, a senior Chinese official said a police raid last January
against a group in Xinjiang, which had been suspected of planning terrorist
acts, uncovered proof that the group was plotting an attack on the Olympic Games
in Beijing this summer.

Terrorism is usually not a significant threat in China, where the authoritarian
government takes an unflinching approach to maintaining social stability. But
Chinese security officials are concerned that terrorism poses a serious risk as
Beijing prepares for the Games.

The airplane episode came in the same week that a man armed with explosives
hijacked a private bus filled with Australian tour operators who were
sightseeing in the city of Xi'an. A police sniper later killed the man, and few
details have been released about him or his motives. None of the hostages were
wounded.

The authorities offered no evidence that the three events were related. But On
Sunday, Wang Lequan, the Communist Party chief in Xinjiang, took a hard stance,
saying   China would strike the ''three evil forces'' of terrorists, separatists
and extremists.

''We are prepared to strike them when the evil forces are planning their
activities,'' Mr. Wang said, according to Xinhua, the country's state-run news
agency.

Xinjiang is a vast northwestern region that is home to 8.3 million Uighurs, a
Turkic Muslim group with linguistic and cultural ties to neighboring Central
Asia. Tensions have simmered in the region because of cultural aspirations among
some Uighurs for an independent state.

In the past, China has blamed Uighur separatists for terrorist activity. Human
rights groups have accused China of overstating any terrorist threat as a
pretext for cracking down on the Uighurs.

In January, the Chinese police attacked what the authorities said was a
terrorist gang in Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang. Two people  were killed and
15 were arrested. Initially, few details were released about the raid.

On Sunday, Mr. Wang said investigators had found knives, axes and books about
terrorism in the raid. He said other materials suggested that the group had been
planning an attack on the Olympics, though no specifics were provided.

''Obviously, the gang had planned an attack targeting the Olympics,'' Mr. Wang
told Xinhua in an interview conducted during a meeting of the National People's
Congress, the country's Communist Party-controlled legislature.

Mr. Wang said the gang had ties to the East Turkestan Islamic Movement,  a
separatist group designated a terrorist organization by the United States and
the United Nations.

The thwarted airplane attack was also reported Sunday. Nur Bekri, chairman of
the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region government, told the state media that
''some people were attempting to create an air disaster.''

The event occurred on a China Southern Airlines flight that departed Urumqi on
Friday morning at 10:35, heading for Beijing. But the plane was diverted to the
city of Lanzhou after a disturbance on board.

The state media provided only a few details, noting that ''the attackers were
stopped in time by the air police, and all the passengers and crew members are
safe.''

Mr. Bekri suggested that more than one person had been involved but declined to
provide specifics, telling Xinhua that the authorities were investigating ''who
the attackers are, where they are from and what's their background.''

''But we can be sure that this was a case intending to create an air crash,'' he
said.

A China Southern employee at the Lanzhou airport confirmed that the airplane had
been diverted there and that the episode had been handled by public security
officers. The diversion was initially described as necessary because of
''traffic control,'' the employee said.

One person with information about the episode said a Uighur woman apparently
smuggled three containers of gasoline onto the airplane. The person said the
Uighur woman took the containers into the bathroom and was later apprehended by
members of the flight crew.

That account seemed consistent with a posting Friday on a Chinese Internet chat
room. The messages discussed a landing in Lanzhou and said that it had been
discovered in midflight that people had brought gasoline on board and that four
Uighurs had been led away after the plane landed.

The messages appeared to be a firsthand account by a passenger using a hand-held
device from the airport in Lanzhou, but that could not be confirmed. Nor could
the identity of the person sending the messages.

''Real bad luck,'' one of the messages said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Wang Lequan, left, the Communist Party chief in Xinjiang, and
Nur Bekri, the region's governor, in Beijing on Sunday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CLARO
CORTES IV/REUTERS) MAP: A Chinese jet bound for Beijing was diverted to Lanzhou.
Map showing Xinjiang in China.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); OLYMPICS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); COMMERCIAL &
GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (89%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HIJACKING (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CHARTER BUS INDUSTRY (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); SIGHTSEEING TRANSPORTATION SERVICES (76%);
EVIDENCE (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); RELIGION (73%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES
(73%); ARRESTS (71%); HOSTAGE TAKING (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (99%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); XINJIANG, CHINA (91%);
SHAANXI, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); TURKEY (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); TIBET (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             551 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 11, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arms Ruling Overturned By Dutch

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 362 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A Dutch appeals court on Monday overturned the conviction of a lumber trader who
had been found guilty of breaking a United Nations embargo and smuggling weapons
for Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, during that country's civil
war.

Guus Kouwenhoven, 65, a Dutch trader and a business partner of Mr. Taylor, had
been sentenced in 2006 to eight years in prison for selling Liberian lumber on
the world market and bringing back weapons and ammunition aboard his company's
ships between 2001 and 2003.

But the Dutch appeals court in The Hague said the evidence against him was
frequently ''contradictory'' and not sufficiently credible. Depositions taken
from witnesses in Liberia had been unclear and unreliable, it said, adding that
a conviction based on such evidence would be ''built on quicksand.''

The trial had received much attention because it was held under a new mix of
national and international law at a Dutch court. It was novel in that
prosecutors had also linked the businessman to human rights abuses committed on
another continent.

The ruling was a setback for prosecutors, who had filed the appeal in pursuit of
an even stiffer sentence and a fine of close to  $700,000 because of the profits
they said Mr. Kouwenhoven had made from illegal arms sales.

As part of the appeal, prosecutors also wanted him convicted of war crimes. They
argued that he had supplied workers from his lumber companies to join Mr.
Taylor's notoriously violent militia fighters, and was therefore accountable for
atrocities committed by his employees.

The lower court had already thrown out the war crimes charge in 2006, and on
Monday the appeals court agreed.

Mr. Taylor is standing trial at the United Nations-backed Special Court for
Sierra Leone, which has an outpost in The Hague. He faces charges of war crimes
and crimes against humanity committed on a large scale by rebel forces he armed
and directed from Liberia.

The former Liberian president was briefly questioned about his relations with
the Dutch trader, with whom he jointly owned at least one lumber company. But
lawyers said he had declined to answer questions during the closed hearing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); SMUGGLING (90%); COMMODITIES BROKERS (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS
COURTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DEPOSITIONS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LUMBER & PLYWOOD
MARKETS (78%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%);
CRIMINAL FINES (78%); ARMS EMBARGOES (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); ARMS TRADE (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (73%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (88%); SIERRA LEONE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             553 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Breakaway Rebel Faction Wins Stormy Election in Sri Lanka City

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: BATTICALOA, Sri Lanka


A pro-government militia composed of former Tamil Tiger rebels won a local
election in a turbulent eastern city despite allegations that it had used child
soldiers, extorted businessmen and carried out killings, state television
reported Tuesday.

The militia, the Tamil Makkal Viduthalai Pulikal Party, or T.M.V.P., took 53
percent of the final vote in Batticaloa, giving it 11 of the 19 seats on the
municipal council, Rupavahini Television announced, citing the country's
elections commissioner.

The government had billed the vote, the first here in more than a decade, as a
first step toward restoring order in a region long dominated by the insurgents.
But human rights groups and opposition politicians said a climate of violence
and chaos had tainted the election.

Residents said they were desperate for order to be restored.

''We don't expect the leaders to give us anything other than a chance to live in
peace,'' said Sinnakutty Nagalingam, 36, a father of three who works as a mason.
''If there is peace, we can work and take care of ourselves. With this
situation, if we go out to work, there is no certainty that we will return
home.''

A high turnout was crucial to justifying the government's decision to hold the
vote, and it was estimated at 50 percent, said Sritharan Sabanayagam of People's
Action for Free and Fair Elections, an independent monitoring group.

Rasiah Thurairatnan, who ran as an independent candidate in Batticaloa and
appeared to have won a seat on the council, said people had voted out of fear of
the T.M.V.P., and he suggested serious irregularities by its supporters at many
polling stations.

''This is a victory for violence and it'll elicit serious repercussions from the
people,'' he said. ''I see this as a license for extortion and child
abduction.''

The vote was the first election here in 13 years, and President Mahinda
Rajapaksa said it was  crucial  in the effort to restore normalcy here.

The T.M.V.P., also known as the Karuna Group, is a breakaway faction of the
Tamil Tigers that helped the government drive the Tigers from the region last
July after months of fighting had displaced tens of thousands of people.
Violence, much of it blamed on armed groups, has plagued the area since then.

The T.M.V.P. has reinvented itself as a political party, although it has refused
to disarm, and was endorsed by the government.

The Tamil Tigers maintain a de facto state in the north of Sri Lanka. They have
been fighting since 1983 for an independent state in the country's north and
east for the minority ethnic Tamils, who had been marginalized for decades by
governments dominated by the Sinhalese majority.

The T.M.V.P.'s mayoral candidate, Edwin Krishnanandaraja, who is expected to
become the new mayor, said his group  hoped to disarm ''gradually.''

He dismissed allegations that the group had forcibly recruited children into its
militia, extorted money from businessmen and was behind rampant violence,
including killings.

The country's main opposition party, the United National Party, and the main
regional party, the Tamil National Alliance, boycotted the election, saying they
would not run against armed groups.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
CHILD SOLDIERS (89%); EXTORTION (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); VOTERS &
VOTING (89%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (89%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MAYORS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); POLITICS (78%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (62%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             559 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 27, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Law Enacted To Protect Tenants Using Vouchers

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 478 words


The City Council overrode on Wednesday the mayor's veto of a bill to prohibit
landlords from discriminating against tenants who intend to pay their rent with
federal rent-subsidy vouchers or any other form of government assistance.

The law takes effect immediately.

Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg vetoed the bill last month, describing it in a
statement as well-intentioned but flawed, in part because it forced private
landlords to participate in a voluntary public program.

Tenants who receive the rent subsidies, known as Section 8 vouchers, pay about
30 percent of their income toward rent, and the vouchers cover the rest.

Many Section 8 tenants are low-income residents, and supporters of the bill
argued that landlords were frequently turning away voucher holders to keep poor
tenants out and were thus cutting off a much-needed form of housing for them.

New York City is home to the largest Section 8 program in the country, with more
than 85,000 vouchers subsidizing apartments for  about 270,000 New Yorkers.

''We understand there is an affordability crisis, and this is one of the ways to
respond to it,'' said Councilman Bill de Blasio, a Brooklyn Democrat, who
introduced the bill. The votes of two-thirds of the 51 council members, or 34
votes, are needed to override a veto. The vote to override was 44 to 7.

The new law applies to buildings with six or more units. Owners of five or fewer
units, with some exceptions, are excluded. The law allows Section 8 tenants who
feel that they have been discriminated against to file a complaint in State
Supreme Court or with the city's Commission on Human Rights.

The commission opposed the legislation, saying that it would require additional
resources and staff to enforce, but Mr. de Blasio said the administrative cost
of enforcing the law would be minimal compared with the public benefit.

''If this stops a form of discrimination, and if this helps people get
affordable housing, it seems to me that a small price to pay is to hire a few
more lawyers at the human rights commission,'' he said.

The Rent Stabilization Association, a trade group that represents New York City
landlords, said proponents of the bill had failed to provide concrete evidence
that Section 8 discrimination was a widespread problem.

''I think the mayor said it best in his veto statement, '' said Mitchell
Posilkin, the association's general counsel. ''The mayor said that this
legislation is a solution in search of a problem.'' But supporters of the bill
said hundreds of voucher holders were unable to find willing landlords each
year.

New York Acorn, a community organizing group, released a survey last year that
found that of 122 available studio and one-bedroom apartments advertised on
Craigslist and in The Daily News and The New York Times, representatives for
only 16 were willing to accept vouchers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CITY GOVERNMENT (91%); VETO (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); RENTAL
PROPERTY (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); MAYORS (90%); LANDLORD & TENANT LAW
(90%); CITIES (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); PUBLIC HOUSING (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (78%); RENT
CONTROL (78%); LAWYERS (77%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (77%); POOR POPULATION (77%);
LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (73%); CORPORATE COUNSEL
(72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (71%); MULTIFAMILY REAL ESTATE
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); SUPREME COURTS (63%)

COMPANY: CRAIGSLIST INC (50%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (50%)

PERSON: BILL DE BLASIO (79%); MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (58%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             564 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo Detainee, Indicted in '98, Now Faces War Crimes Charges

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 710 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Military prosecutors filed war crimes charges on Monday against a Guantanamo
detainee accused of helping plan the 1998 bombing of the United States embassy
in Tanzania, an attack for which he was indicted 10 years ago by federal
prosecutors in New York.

The military charges seek the death penalty for the role they say the detainee,
Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani, played as a coordinator and planner of the truck-bomb
attack, which killed 11 people and injured scores of others. That bombing, and
another embassy attack in Kenya, were the subject of a 2001 trial in federal
court in Manhattan that led to convictions of four men, all of whom are serving
life terms.

Mr. Ghailani, accused of being an operative of Al Qaeda, was a fugitive at the
time of the New York trial. After his capture in 2004, he was held in the
Central Intelligence Agency's secret prisons before President Bush had him
transferred to the naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, in 2006.

The new charges, which would be tried in the military commission tribunals, were
announced at the Pentagon by an official of the Bush administration's military
commissions, Brig. Gen. Thomas W. Hartmann, who has been pressing to move the
problem-plagued war crimes system more quickly.

But the charges quickly drew new attention to the tribunals, which critics say
provide detainees with fewer protections than civilian courts and have helped
crystallize international criticism of Guantanamo.

In an interview, General Hartmann said officials were aware of the 1998 civilian
indictment, but were proceeding with a military case at Guantanamo. ''That's the
avenue the president, the Congress and the Department of Defense'' established,
he said, ''to deal with alleged war crimes in connection with the global war on
terror.''

Administration officials have said since shortly after the terrorist attacks of
2001 that civilian courts were not able to handle many terrorism prosecutions
and have argued for the more truncated procedures of the war-crimes tribunals at
Guantanamo.

But some critics said Monday that war crimes charges against a terrorism suspect
who had already been charged by civilian prosecutors raised new concerns.

''This seems like an attempt to subvert and do an end run around the existing
criminal justice system,'' said Jennifer Daskal, the senior counterterrorism
counsel at Human Rights Watch. Critics of the Guantanamo system often cite the
New York terrorism prosecutions as evidence that the civilian system can handle
such cases.

Jumana Musa, an advocacy director at Amnesty International who has been an
observer at Guantanamo, said the Bush administration appeared to be relying on
the military commissions partly out of a concern that descriptions of detainees'
treatment would be more likely to become public if they were tried in civilian
courts.

''The purpose of the commissions is to convict people on evidence they obtained
through torture and keep the evidence of torture out of the courtroom,'' Ms.
Musa said.

Told of the criticism, General Hartmann said, ''There's no effort to subvert
anything'' at Guantanamo. ''Everything there is done to achieve fairness,
openness, transparency and justice.'' He cited what he called the extraordinary
rights of detainees, like the right to a lawyer, the right to confront witnesses
and an automatic right of appeal.

Justice Department officials declined to comment on the Pentagon's announcement.

Mr. Ghailani, a Tanzanian believed to be about 34, was once listed by the United
States as one of the most sought-after terrorists in the world. He was caught
after a gun battle with Pakistani forces in 2004.

The charges released Monday say he gathered explosives and helped obtain a truck
for the embassy suicide attack, assisted with logistics and helped scout the
embassy building, in Dar es Salaam.

The charges also say that he remained an operative of Al Qaeda after the
bombing, working as a forger and a bodyguard for Osama bin Laden.

The military prosecutors filed the charges with a Pentagon official, Susan J.
Crawford, a former military judge who has broad powers over the military
commission system. Ms. Crawford has the authority to decide whether a case can
proceed as a death penalty prosecution.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ahmed Khalfan Ghailani (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE --
GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); TORTURE (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (79%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); CAPITAL CRIMES (78%); PRISONS (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); NAVIES (74%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); AL-QAEDA (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(68%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (56%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); CUBA (91%);
KENYA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             566 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Leader of Kosovo Rebels Is Acquitted of War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Marlise Simons reported from Paris. Graham Bowley
reported from New York. Nicholas Wood contributed to this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 723 words

DATELINE: PARIS


The United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague on Thursday acquitted a
former commander of the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army of all charges of war
crimes in a decision that could inflame anti-Kosovo sentiment in Serbia just
weeks after Kosovo unilaterally declared independence.

The commander, Ramush Haradinaj, who also briefly served as prime minister of
Kosovo three years ago, was found not guilty of murder, persecution, rape and
torture of Kosovo Serb civilians. The crimes were said to have been carried out
by men under his command in 1998, when the rebels fought to free their largely
ethnic Albanian region from Serbian rule.

Another rebel commander, Idriz Balaj, was also acquitted, while a third
defendant, Lahi Brahimaj, was sentenced to six years in prison for torture and
cruel treatment of prisoners.

The men who were acquitted may return home as early as Friday, and they are
expected to be given a hero's welcome. But in court, in summarizing their
verdict, the judges said that the case presented had many flaws. They cited
vague evidence and widespread fear among witnesses, suggesting that the full
version of events had not been told.

The complete text of the judgment was not available, but in their summary, the
judges gave much weight to the fear and the evident intimidation of witnesses.
Lawyers said that in no other case before the tribunal had witness intimidation
been so widespread.

The judges said that they had serious difficulties in getting many of almost 100
witnesses to testify freely. They said that they had to permit 34 witnesses to
hide their identities from the public, that 18 were subpoenaed because they
refused to testify and that others said they dared not talk once they were in
court.

The case against Mr. Haradinaj was fraught with difficulties from the start.
Western diplomats tried to dissuade Carla Del Ponte, who was the chief
prosecutor, from indicting Mr. Haradinaj, arguing that he was a respected
political leader who played an important role in stabilizing Kosovo.

Within the prosecutor's office, some lawyers also had warned that the case
against Mr. Haradinaj was weak because it would be hard to link him to the
crimes.

Prosecutors complained repeatedly about pressure on the witnesses, saying that
those most afraid were former rebel fighters who had been expected to testify as
insiders. At least three designated witnesses were killed before the trial,
prosecutors said.

In November, the trial ground to a halt when the defense lawyers for all three
accused unexpectedly announced that they would not call any witnesses  because
they considered the prosecution case so weak.

For Serbs, the acquittal of two of the former rebel commanders, whose forces
were backed and supported by the West, was likely to be viewed as one more
insult.

Kosovo has long been portrayed as a victim of Serbia. Only one other case at the
tribunal has focused on the abuses and killings by fighters of the Kosovo
Liberation Army. Human rights groups have documented numerous killings and
instances of mistreatment of those not siding with the rebels.

Oliver Ivanovic, who represents Kosovo Serbs, told the FoNet news agency in
Belgrade that the acquittals would make it even more difficult to demand that
the Serbian government arrest Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, wartime Bosnian
Serb leaders who remain fugitives.

Serbs will now see the tribunal as even more of a political, rather than a
legal, institution, Mr. Ivanovic said. He added, ''It will be now very difficult
to convince any Serb that this is not an anti-Serb tribunal.''

In Thursday's ruling, Mr.  Brahimaj was sentenced to six years for the abuse of
prisoners detained in a camp where he was in charge. It said that he had
personally participated in beatings and torture.

Mr. Brahimaj, who has already served three years, is likely to be freed in a
year if he gets the usual reduction for good behavior that is common in European
countries where he may serve his time.

After Mr. Haradinaj surrendered to the court, in 2005, he was allowed to return
to Kosovo to await his trial. Much to the frustration of Ms. Del Ponte, he was
treated favorably when the court permitted him to play a limited political role
at home, a privilege granted to no other detainee.

It was not clear if prosecutors would appeal.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ramush Haradinaj, a former rebel commander, at the war crimes
tribunal in The Hague.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL PHOTO BY FRED ERNST)(A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%); WAR CRIMES (93%); ACQUITTAL (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WITNESSES (90%); VERDICTS (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); TORTURE (90%); SUBPOENAS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING
(78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); PRISONS (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (73%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); NETHERLANDS
(91%); ALBANIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             567 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Another Test for Habeas Corpus

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 435 words


One of the dismal hallmarks of the Bush administration's conduct of the war on
terror has been its obsession with avoiding outside scrutiny of its actions,
including by the federal courts. In particular, it has attacked habeas corpus,
the guarantee that prisoners can challenge their confinement before a judge. The
administration is doing so again in an important Supreme Court case concerning
the habeas rights of American citizens held abroad. The justices should rule
that the detainees have a right to review by a United States court.

The two plaintiffs in the case, which was argued in March, are American
civilians in Iraq. Shawqi Ahmad Omar and Mohammad Munaf are being held at an
Army-run detention center in Baghdad, for transfer to the Iraqis on criminal
charges. Mr. Munaf's conviction on kidnapping charges was overturned, but he may
face further charges. Mr. Omar was captured by the American military at his home
in Baghdad, and was accused of harboring insurgent fighters. Both men claim to
be innocent. Human rights groups warn that they could face torture if they are
transferred to Iraqi custody.

Mr. Omar and Mr. Munaf are asking a federal court to review their confinement.
Just four years ago, the Supreme Court upheld the habeas rights of an American
citizen, Yaser Hamdi, who was captured by the Northern Alliance in Afghanistan
in 2001, and then imprisoned in Navy brigs in the United States.

The Hamdi decision should settle this case. To get around this recent precedent,
the administration claims that the men are beyond the reach of American courts
because the troops holding them are part of a multinational force authorized by
the United Nations. The administration is relying on a Supreme Court ruling from
1948, Hirota v. MacArthur, that rejected habeas corpus petitions from Japanese
prisoners who were being held in Japan under the authority of the Allied Supreme
Commander there, Gen. Douglas MacArthur.

The Hirota case is inapplicable because it involved Japanese soldiers, not
American citizens. Even if that were not so, the chain of command of the
military in Iraq runs to the president. The administration cannot pretend the
United States military in Iraq is not an American force in order to evade
American law.

The administration is no doubt hoping that the changes in the makeup of the
court since Hamdi was decided will produce a different result. For the sake of
civil liberties and the court's own integrity, it should not. At the oral
argument, Justice David Souter called the administration's reasoning ''a little
scary.'' Extremely scary is more like it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HABEAS CORPUS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); TERRORISM (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
APPEALS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); ARMIES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); TORTURE (77%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%); JUDGES (72%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (72%); PETITIONS (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); JUDICIAL REVIEW
(57%)

PERSON: DAVID SOUTER (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); JAPAN (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             578 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 17, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Incentive in Sudan Talks: Normalized Ties With U.S.

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Bush administration could remove Sudan from an American list of state
supporters of terrorism and normalize relations if the Sudanese government
agreed, among other steps, to allow Thai and Nepalese peacekeepers in its Darfur
region, says a document outlining the American negotiating position for talks
with Sudan that began Wednesday.

The document was part of a series of negotiating papers exchanged between the
governments in preparation for talks in Rome. They were provided to The New York
Times by an American government official critical of the administration's
position.

Sudan has already promised to let United Nations peacekeepers operate within its
borders, and human rights advocates and others say it would be a mistake for the
United States to offer any new incentives until Sudan carries out that and other
pledges.

''Given the fact that Khartoum has been involved in negotiations repeatedly over
the years regarding Darfur and the comprehensive peace agreements and has signed
documents and consistently failed to implement what they've signed, why are we
discussing normalization with them?'' said Roger Winter, a former Sudan
negotiator at the State Department. Richard Williamson, the United States envoy
to Sudan, is in Rome for the talks with Sudanese officials. The broad thrust of
the American position has been known, but the negotiating papers provide new
details about the positions staked out by each side as they try to resolve
differences over Darfur.

At least 200,000 people have been killed there since the Arab-dominated
government of Sudan unleashed tribal militias known as the janjaweed on non-Arab
rebel groups and civilians.

The papers show that the United States is demanding that Sudan speed up visas
for humanitarian workers and allow private aid organizations to work in Darfur.

Sudan wants an end to economic sanctions imposed by the United States since
1997. Sudan complained in the negotiating papers that sanctions had continued
''despite the many positive achievements'' by its government in Khartoum.

In addition, Sudan wants United States backing for its membership in the World
Trade Organization, American support for the cancellation of Sudan's foreign
debts and ''the immediate release of the Sudanese detainees at Guantanamo.''

Sudan is further seeking a formal apology for the Clinton administration-era
strike on the Shifa pharmaceutical plant in Khartoum. It was destroyed by
American cruise missiles in 1998 in the days after the terrorist attacks on the
American Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania.

American officials have acknowledged over the years that the evidence that
prompted President Clinton to order the missile strike was not as solid as first
portrayed, and have said that there was no proof that the plant had been linked
to Osama bin Laden, a resident of Khartoum in the 1980s. But the United States
has not ruled out the possibility that the plant did have some link to chemical
weapons production.

Bush administration officials have acknowledged in the past that they have
offered to restore full diplomatic ties, lift economic sanctions and remove
Sudan from the American list of state sponsors of terrorism in exchange for
concessions on Darfur.

The Sudanese government says the death toll in Darfur has been exaggerated, and
has denied an accusation from President Bush that the killing there amounts to
genocide.

The Sudanese government has signed several peace agreements relating to Darfur
or another internal conflict, in the non-Arab southern part of Sudan. But
international aid organizations and American officials say that Sudan has failed
to carry through on the promises it made in those agreements.

Sudanese Army bombs and new attacks by Arab militias in the ravaged western
region of Darfur have driven thousands of refugees into neighboring Chad,
according to the United Nations. In the oil-rich region of Abyei, which is
claimed by both the government of Sudan and the semiautonomous government of
South Sudan, several hundred people have died in recent clashes between a large
group of Arab nomads, the Misseriya, and South Sudan's armed forces. Like the
janjaweed militias, the Misseriya are armed by Sudan's government.

Sudan, pressed by the Bush administration, signed a comprehensive peace
agreement with the South in 2005, but President Omar Hassan al-Bashir has balked
at carrying out major parts of the deal.

''We see this process of potential improvement in the United States/Sudan
relationship as a holistic one, covering the entirety of Sudan,'' said the text
of the American negotiating document.

Sudanese officials, meanwhile, adopted a besieged air in their negotiating
paper, complaining that the Darfur government had ''suffered the brunt of many
punitive measures which were either totally unjustified and/or politically
motivated.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A Senegalese peacekeeper did his morning salute this month at a
base in Geneina, West Darfur. (PHOTOGRAPH BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); PUBLIC DEBT (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (77%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (75%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (68%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(63%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (60%); MILITARY WEAPONS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(53%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (73%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); KENYA (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED
REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             581 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2269 words


INTERNATIONAL

ALBANIANS LOOK FOR ANSWERS

Behind a Deadly Explosion

The description seems to suggest an accident that was waiting to happen, and it
was: a factory in which inexperienced villagers pried apart artillery shells
using metal rods and their bare hands exploded last month, killing 26 people.
Albanians are now asking how the country could have allowed such a hazardous
situation to exist. PAGE A5

PUTIN SAYS NO NEW MRS. PUTIN

He has no doubt heard the whispers before, the rumors about his wandering eye.
But when President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia was asked about a newspaper
article that said he was about to leave his wife for a 24-year-old gymnast less
than half his age, he said there was no truth to it, despite his great affection
for all Russian women. And Italian.  PAGE A5

TOUGHER TERRORISM LAWS SOUGHT

European Union justice ministers agreed to toughen laws to punish those who
promote violence and recruit people for terrorist attacks across the 27-nation
bloc, including through use of the Internet. Countries that already have strong
antiterrorism laws, like Spain and Britain, will not need to make significant
changes. But countries with more lenient rules, like Sweden and Denmark, may
need to adopt new and tougher legislation.  PAGE A8

IN MEXICO, A GOVERNMENT STYMIED

For eight days, leftist lawmakers in Mexico have paralyzed business in both
houses of Congress with a sit-in to stop President Felipe Calderon's bill to
revamp the oil monopoly and allow it greater freedoms. The efforts, led by a
populist leader who has refused to concede his defeat in the 2006 presidential
election, come with a political price and have rattled the nation.  PAGE A7

Arrests of Tibetan Protesters  A9

Premier Urges British-U.S. Efforts  A5

Carter Meets Hamas Leader  A6

NATIONAL

PLAN TO EXPAND DNA SAMPLING

Faces Problem of Backlogs

The Bush administration moved forward with a program to greatly expand the
collection of DNA samples from people in federal custody, proposing regulations
that would essentially mirror the practice of collecting fingerprints. But it
was unclear how federal laboratories, already backlogged with previous samples,
would be able to handle the additional work.   PAGE A11

THE WINDY CITY SHAKES

Chicago is known for many things, including cold weather, deep-dish pizza and a
long-suffering baseball team and its fans. But earthquakes generally are not
among them, and so the one that shook the city -- along with some 120,000 square
miles from northern Michigan south to Memphis, and from Kansas City, Mo., east
to Nashville -- was definitely the talk of the town. PAGE A10

GEARING UP FOR TOSSUPS

Senator John McCain's political advisers say his potential appeal to
independents could make him competitive in up to two dozen tossup states, twice
as many as Republicans seriously contested in the 2004 presidential race. So the
campaign, after securing the nomination on a shoestring budget, is gearing up
for a more extensive effort.  PAGE A12

MCCAIN'S INCOME LOWEST IN RACE

Mr. McCain's income tax returns for the past two years showed that he had
taxable income of about $474,100 but revealed little of the sizable wealth of
his wife, who files a separate return. The campaign said it would not release
Mrs. McCain's return in ''the interest of protecting the privacy'' of their
children.  PAGE A12

SECT'S CHILDREN TO STAY IN CUSTODY

After hearing two days of testimony, Judge Barbara Walther, above, ordered that
all 416 children seized in the raid of a polygamist religious sect be held in
protective custody by Texas officials pending further investigation into whether
they were abused, or at risk of abuse in their community. She also ordered
maternal and paternal testing on all the children.  PAGE A11

On Religion  A15

Fourth Graders Debate Campaign  A10

NEW YORK REPORT

POPE CALLS HUMAN RIGHTS

Essential for Security

Pope Benedict XVI arrived in New York and addressed the United Nations, saying
that the promotion of human rights is central to the world's security. ''Indeed,
the victims of hardship and despair, whose human dignity is violated with
impunity, become easy prey to the call to violence, and they can then become
violators of peace,'' he said.   PAGE B1

A VISIT TO A CHANGED ENCLAVE

The German-born pope visited Yorkville, home to a German enclave that existed
around St. Joseph's Roman Catholic Church on East 87th Street from the late
1800s through the mid-20th century. But things are not the same in Yorkville
anymore, and other former German areas of the city have likewise changed.   PAGE
B1

THE NAKED LAPELS

The Democratic debate Wednesday night had four people on stage, tallying among
them eight lapels, and nary an American flag pin on any of them. But only one
person had to answer for it. Of course if the debate were in North Korea, no one
would have dared go pinless. Jim Dwyer, About New York.   PAGE B1

BUSINESS

CITIGROUP WRITE-OFFS LEAD

To Record $5.1 Billion Loss

Vikram S. Pandit may have passed his first test with Citigroup investors:
cleaning up the financial carnage with the announcement of a company-record $5.1
billion loss after writing off billions of dollars of troubled debts. Now comes
the hard part, including proving that earnings can grow at a time when Citi will
face billions of dollars of consumer loan losses.  PAGE C1

HELLO? HELLO? CAN YOU HEAR ME?

Airlines in the United States have shunned the use of cellphones in flight
(train commuters can only dream) but some European and Mideast carriers are
preparing to offer the service as early as this summer. Air France already has a
test program. But technological hurdles exist -- and oh, those roaming charges.
PAGE C1

A RIFT OVER DRUG PROMOTIONS

The Food and Drug Administration has been considering a proposal to let drug
makers use reprints of journal articles in promoting drugs for uses the F.D.A.
itself has not approved. But a report indicating that Merck used ghostwriters to
produce medical journal articles in support of its subsequently discredited drug
Vioxx has galvanized opponents to the proposal. PAGE C3

PUTTING A VALUE ON COLLEGE

The decisions aren't easy in the best of times. But in these tumultuous
financial times, they are even more difficult as parents and high school seniors
weigh the options: Should they choose the most affordable college? Or should
they pick the one with more prestige, even if it's a financial stretch, even if
it means going deep into debt?  PAGE C1

S. KOREA TO RESUME BEEF IMPORTS

South Korea agreed to resume beef imports from the United States that were
halted in 2003 by concerns over mad cow disease. The decision removed a major
dispute and shows how eager South Korea's new president, Lee Myung-bak, is to
mend ties with Washington.  PAGE B3

Move Toward Ban on Plastics  C2

Fannie Mae Scandal Settlement  C6

ARTS

DRESSING UP THE BOWERY

Loud guitars blared. A capacity crowd filled every nook and cranny, and tattered
rock 'n' roll posters looked down from the dark walls. It might have been any
big night at CBGB, but no, this was a party and concert for an upscale boutique
in the space where CBGB once stood. ''The whole purpose of coming here was to
retain part of the history,'' said the owner. And, he did not say, to help sell
$500 shirts and $2,000 jackets. PAGE B1

SMALL, AS ABSTRACT CONCEPT

In abstract painting, big has been viewed as better at least since Jackson
Pollock, Roberta Smith writes, with small abstractions mostly shunted off to the
wings. But, she adds, ''In a time of glut and waste on every front, compression
and economy have an undeniable appeal.'' And a number of small works by artists
young and less-so are on display in New York now.  PAGE B1

HONORING AN IDEAL

The goal was noble: two friends and performance artists would wear white wedding
dresses and hitchhike from Italy to the Middle East to send a message of peace.
After three weeks on the road, one was dead, killed by a driver who offered her
a ride. On Saturday, family, friends and supporters will honor her memory and
her quixotic quest.  PAGE B1

Playwrights Saving the World  B7

'Monet's Palate'  B14

OBITUARIES

ROBERT T. HARTMANN, 91

A speechwriter, he wrote President Gerald R. Ford's 1974 address to the nation
after the resignation of President Richard M. Nixon, proclaiming, ''My fellow
Americans, our long national nightmare is over.'' Mr. Ford at first suggested
that the phrase ''national nightmare'' be struck, thinking it a bit harsh. Mr.
Hartmann told him, ''Junk all the rest of the speech if you want to, but not
that.''  PAGE A17

DANNY FEDERICI, 58

A keyboardist, he played in Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band since it began and
was Mr. Springsteen's collaborator since they jammed together in Jersey Shore
clubs in the 1960's.  PAGE A17

MARTIN BALIN, 62

A Vietnam War protester, he was one of six whose plot to set fire to six
buildings in Manhattan in 1970 was derailed at the last moment by undercover
police officers. The arrests made front-page news in a turbulent time when
factions of the antiwar movement like the Weather Underground, a splinter group
of the Students for a Democratic Society, were increasingly veering toward
violence.  PAGE A17

SPORTS

TRAINER SAID TO SUPPLY STEROIDS

Denies Canseco's Allegations

In Jose Canseco's new book, he says that he introduced Alex Rodriguez to a
trainer named ''Max,'' who Canseco alleges provided Rodriguez with steroids. The
real name of the trainer, Joseph Dion, was made public Friday, and Dion denied
that he provided steroids to Rodriguez. The revelation comes four days before
Canseco is scheduled to meet with federal authorities for questioning in the
investigation of Roger Clemens.  PAGE D1

THE TOPSY-TURVY N.B.A. PLAYOFFS

Boston, the best team in the N.B.A.'s Eastern Conference, was its worst a year
ago, and it sits atop the seeding in the N.B.A. playoffs. The Western Conference
teams that have been so dominant recently could be eliminated in the first
round. The logjam of talented teams in the West and a top-heavy East means that
any number of teams could become champion.  PAGE D2

N.B.A. Approves Sonics' Relocation  D2

THIS WEEKEND

ARTS & LEISURE

In the summer of 2003, Robert Downey Jr. drove to a Burger King , tossed all his
drugs into the ocean, and dug into his burger. Five years on, a Burger King Kids
Meal comes with a Robert Downey Jr. action figure, part of the marketing push
for ''Iron Man,'' the coming superhero movie in which Mr. Downey plays Tony
Stark, an unfocused but brilliant man with a penchant for fast living who
straightens up once he almost loses his life.  PAGE 1

The actor Morgan Freeman is known for movie roles in which he plays stoic men
who offer sage advice -- ''the word dignified is pasted to my behind,'' he quips
-- but in the Broadway play, ''The Country Girl,'' he takes on a character who
is rudderless and in need of direction. The play marks Mr. Freeman's return to
the stage after decades of film work.  PAGE 1

EDUCATION LIFE

Barring a last-minute rescue, soon after next Saturday's commencement the
156-year-old Antioch College will be emptied of students, faculty and staff,
lose its accreditation and cease operations for at least a few years. Amid the
hostile factions, last-ditch negotiations and debates about the school's values,
a cadre of students and faculty members have stuck it out on a near-bankrupt
campus.  PAGE 18

BOOK REVIEW

Dermot Bolger's novel ''The Journey Home'' was released in Britain in 1990, but
it is only now appearing on the shelves of American bookstores. ''It is one of
the few Bolger novels -- he has written more than half a dozen, as well as
poetry and many plays -- in print in the United States, and that's a crying
shame,'' says Terrence Rafferty.  PAGE 1

TRAVEL

Ian Fisher says Rome's sights are best enjoyed at night. ''Rome at night is, in
short, a city lit like a theater, and, especially in the warmer months, should
be enjoyed like one.''  PAGE 8

EDITORIAL

NOW HE'S READY TO DEAL

President Bush's latest compromise for ending North Korea's nuclear program is
agitating critics -- outside his administration and in. It is an imperfect
solution. But imperfect may be all one can expect, after Mr. Bush wasted so much
time refusing to consider any compromise at all.  PAGE A18

TOO MUCH DISCRETION

New Yorkers can be forgiven for feeling as if they have been transported back to
the bad old days of Tammany Hall. It should not take federal indictments to show
City Council members that the current system is in need of a serious overhaul.
PAGE A18

THE UNFINISHED REFORM OF 9/11

Congress embraced nearly every call for reform from the 9/11 commission. Guess
which one it didn't? It has overlooked the call to consolidate Congress's
multiple intelligence oversight committees and subcommittees -- which ends up
leaving no one with real oversight power.  PAGE A18

OP-ED

BOB HERBERT

The Democrats are doing what they're good at -- figuring out ways to lose the
White House.  PAGE A19

GAIL COLLINS

President Bush held a press conference in the Rose Garden this week to give us a
global warming progress report. We're supposedly on the road toward reducing
greenhouse gas emissions by 18 percent by 2012. But goals that involve reducing
the rate at which something is growing are never quite so simple.  PAGE A19

CHARLES M. BLOW

Mr. Blow, graphics director for The Times from 1996 to 2004 and art director of
National Geographic magazine from 2006 to 2008, starts today as a graphics
columnist for the Op-Ed page.  PAGE A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (86%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); ELECTIONS
(75%); US PRESIDENTS (75%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (75%); LEGISLATION
(73%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (70%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(70%); LIBERALISM (70%); ATHLETES (69%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (69%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (68%); HAMAS (68%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); INTERNET & WWW (67%); DNA
(62%); SPORTS FANS (60%); BASEBALL (60%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (75%); FELIPE CALDERON (55%); JOHN MCCAIN (55%)

CITY: KANSAS CITY, MO, USA (73%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (66%)

STATE: MISSOURI, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (66%); XIZANG,
CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: ALBANIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE
(79%); DENMARK (76%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (71%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(71%); CHINA (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             584 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Behind TV Analysts, Pentagon's Hidden Hand

BYLINE: By DAVID BARSTOW

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; MESSAGE MACHINE; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 7915 words


In the summer of 2005, the Bush administration confronted a fresh wave of
criticism over Guantanamo Bay. The detention center had just been branded ''the
gulag of our times'' by Amnesty International, there were new allegations of
abuse from United Nations human rights experts and calls were mounting for its
closure.

The administration's communications experts responded swiftly. Early one Friday
morning, they put a group of retired military officers on one of the jets
normally used by Vice President Dick Cheney and flew them to Cuba for a
carefully orchestrated tour of Guantanamo.

To the public, these men are members of a familiar fraternity, presented tens of
thousands of times on television and radio as ''military analysts'' whose long
service has equipped them to give authoritative and unfettered judgments about
the most pressing issues of the post-Sept. 11 world.

Hidden behind that appearance of objectivity, though, is a Pentagon information
apparatus that has used those analysts in a campaign to generate favorable news
coverage of the administration's wartime performance, an examination by The New
York Times has found.

The effort, which began with the buildup to the Iraq war and continues to this
day, has sought to exploit ideological and military allegiances, and also a
powerful financial dynamic: Most of the analysts have ties to military
contractors vested in the very war policies they are asked to assess on air.

Those business relationships are hardly ever disclosed to the viewers, and
sometimes not even to the networks themselves. But collectively, the men on the
plane and several dozen other military analysts represent more than 150 military
contractors either as lobbyists, senior executives, board members or
consultants. The companies include defense heavyweights, but also scores of
smaller companies, all part of a vast assemblage of contractors scrambling for
hundreds of billions in military business generated by the administration's war
on terror. It is a furious competition, one in which inside information and easy
access to senior officials are highly prized.

Records and interviews show how the Bush administration has used its control
over access and information in an effort to transform the analysts into a kind
of media Trojan horse -- an instrument intended to shape terrorism coverage from
inside the major TV and radio networks.

Analysts have been wooed in hundreds of private briefings with senior military
leaders, including officials with significant influence over contracting and
budget matters, records show. They have been taken on tours of Iraq and given
access to classified intelligence. They have been briefed by officials from the
White House, State Department and Justice Department, including Mr. Cheney,
Alberto R. Gonzales and Stephen J. Hadley.

In turn, members of this group have echoed administration talking points,
sometimes even when they suspected the information was false or inflated. Some
analysts acknowledge they suppressed doubts because they feared jeopardizing
their access.

A few expressed regret for participating in what they regarded as an effort to
dupe the American public with propaganda dressed as independent military
analysis.

''It was them saying, 'We need to stick our hands up your back and move your
mouth for you,' '' Robert S. Bevelacqua, a retired Green Beret and former Fox
News analyst, said.

Kenneth Allard, a former NBC military analyst who has taught information warfare
at the National Defense University, said the campaign amounted to a
sophisticated information operation. ''This was a coherent, active policy,'' he
said.

As conditions in Iraq deteriorated, Mr. Allard recalled, he saw a yawning gap
between what analysts were told in private briefings and what subsequent
inquiries and books later revealed.

''Night and day,'' Mr. Allard said, ''I felt we'd been hosed.''

The Pentagon defended its relationship with military analysts, saying they had
been given only factual information about the war. ''The intent and purpose of
this is nothing other than an earnest attempt to inform the American people,''
Bryan Whitman, a Pentagon spokesman, said.

It was, Mr. Whitman added, ''a bit incredible'' to think retired military
officers could be ''wound up'' and turned into ''puppets of the Defense
Department.''

Many analysts strongly denied that they had either been co-opted or had allowed
outside business interests to affect their on-air comments, and some have used
their platforms to criticize the conduct of the war. Several, like Jeffrey D.
McCausland, a CBS military analyst and defense industry lobbyist, said they kept
their networks informed of their outside work and recused themselves from
coverage that touched on business interests.

''I'm not here representing the administration,'' Dr. McCausland said.

Some network officials, meanwhile, acknowledged only a limited understanding of
their analysts' interactions with the administration. They said that while they
were sensitive to potential conflicts of interest, they did not hold their
analysts to the same ethical standards as their news employees regarding outside
financial interests. The onus is on their analysts to disclose conflicts, they
said. And whatever the contributions of military analysts, they also noted the
many network journalists who have covered the war for years in all its
complexity.

Five years into the Iraq war, most details of the architecture and execution of
the Pentagon's campaign have never been disclosed. But The Times successfully
sued the Defense Department to gain access to 8,000 pages of e-mail messages,
transcripts and records describing years of private briefings, trips to Iraq and
Guantanamo and an extensive Pentagon talking points operation.

These records reveal a symbiotic relationship where the usual dividing lines
between government and journalism have been obliterated.

Internal Pentagon documents repeatedly refer to the military analysts as
''message force multipliers'' or ''surrogates'' who could be counted on to
deliver administration ''themes and messages'' to millions of Americans ''in the
form of their own opinions.''

Though many analysts are paid network consultants, making $500 to $1,000 per
appearance, in Pentagon meetings they sometimes spoke as if they were operating
behind enemy lines, interviews and transcripts show. Some offered the Pentagon
tips on how to outmaneuver the networks, or as one analyst put it to Donald H.
Rumsfeld, then the defense secretary, ''the Chris Matthewses and the Wolf
Blitzers of the world.'' Some warned of planned stories or sent the Pentagon
copies of their correspondence with network news executives. Many -- although
certainly not all -- faithfully echoed talking points intended to counter
critics.

''Good work,'' Thomas G. McInerney, a retired Air Force general, consultant and
Fox News analyst, wrote to the Pentagon after receiving fresh talking points in
late 2006. ''We will use it.''

Again and again, records show, the administration has enlisted analysts as a
rapid reaction force to rebut what it viewed as critical news coverage, some of
it by the networks' own Pentagon correspondents. For example, when news articles
revealed that troops in Iraq were dying because of inadequate body armor, a
senior Pentagon official wrote to his colleagues: ''I think our analysts --
properly armed -- can push back in that arena.''

The documents released by the Pentagon do not show any quid pro quo between
commentary and contracts. But some analysts said they had used the special
access as a marketing and networking opportunity or as a window into future
business possibilities.

John C. Garrett is a retired Army colonel and unpaid analyst for Fox News TV and
radio. He is also a lobbyist at Patton Boggs who helps firms win Pentagon
contracts, including in Iraq. In promotional materials, he states that as a
military analyst he ''is privy to weekly access and briefings with the secretary
of defense, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and other high level policy
makers in the administration.'' One client told investors that Mr. Garrett's
special access and decades of experience helped him ''to know in advance -- and
in detail -- how best to meet the needs'' of the Defense Department and other
agencies.

In interviews Mr. Garrett said there was an inevitable overlap between his dual
roles. He said he had gotten ''information you just otherwise would not get,''
from the briefings and three Pentagon-sponsored trips to Iraq. He also
acknowledged using this access and information to identify opportunities for
clients. ''You can't help but look for that,'' he said, adding, ''If you know a
capability that would fill a niche or need, you try to fill it. ''That's good
for everybody.''

At the same time, in e-mail messages to the Pentagon, Mr. Garrett displayed an
eagerness to be supportive with his television and radio commentary. ''Please
let me know if you have any specific points you want covered or that you would
prefer to downplay,'' he wrote in January 2007, before President Bush went on TV
to describe the surge strategy in Iraq.

Conversely, the administration has demonstrated that there is a price for
sustained criticism, many analysts said. ''You'll lose all access,'' Dr.
McCausland said.

With a majority of Americans calling the war a mistake despite all
administration attempts to sway public opinion, the Pentagon has focused in the
last couple of years on cultivating in particular military analysts frequently
seen and heard in conservative news outlets, records and interviews show.

Some of these analysts were on the mission to Cuba on June 24, 2005 -- the first
of six such Guantanamo trips -- which was designed to mobilize analysts against
the growing perception of Guantanamo as an international symbol of inhumane
treatment. On the flight to Cuba, for much of the day at Guantanamo and on the
flight home that night, Pentagon officials briefed the 10 or so analysts on
their key messages -- how much had been spent improving the facility, the abuse
endured by guards, the extensive rights afforded detainees.

The results came quickly. The analysts went on TV and radio, decrying Amnesty
International, criticizing calls to close the facility and asserting that all
detainees were treated humanely.

''The impressions that you're getting from the media and from the various
pronouncements being made by people who have not been here in my opinion are
totally false,'' Donald W. Shepperd, a retired Air Force general, reported live
on CNN by phone from Guantanamo that same afternoon.

The next morning, Montgomery Meigs, a retired Army general and NBC analyst,
appeared on ''Today.'' ''There's been over $100 million of new construction,''
he reported. ''The place is very professionally run.''

Within days, transcripts of the analysts' appearances were circulated to senior
White House and Pentagon officials, cited as evidence of progress in the battle
for hearts and minds at home.

Charting the Campaign

By early 2002, detailed planning for a possible Iraq invasion was under way, yet
an obstacle loomed. Many Americans, polls showed, were uneasy about invading a
country with no clear connection to the Sept. 11 attacks. Pentagon and White
House officials believed the military analysts could play a crucial role in
helping overcome this resistance.

Torie Clarke, the former public relations executive who oversaw the Pentagon's
dealings with the analysts as assistant secretary of defense for public affairs,
had come to her job with distinct ideas about achieving what she called
''information dominance.'' In a spin-saturated news culture, she argued, opinion
is swayed most by voices perceived as authoritative and utterly independent.

And so even before Sept. 11, she built a system within the Pentagon to recruit
''key influentials'' -- movers and shakers from all walks who with the proper
ministrations might be counted on to generate support for Mr. Rumsfeld's
priorities.

In the months after Sept. 11, as every network rushed to retain its own all-star
squad of retired military officers, Ms. Clarke and her staff sensed a new
opportunity. To Ms. Clarke's team, the military analysts were the ultimate ''key
influential'' -- authoritative, most of them decorated war heroes, all reaching
mass audiences.

The analysts, they noticed, often got more airtime than network reporters, and
they were not merely explaining the capabilities of Apache helicopters. They
were framing how viewers ought to interpret events. What is more, while the
analysts were in the news media, they were not of the news media. They were
military men, many of them ideologically in sync with the administration's
neoconservative brain trust, many of them important players in a military
industry anticipating large budget increases to pay for an Iraq war.

Even analysts with no defense industry ties, and no fondness for the
administration, were reluctant to be critical of military leaders, many of whom
were friends. ''It is very hard for me to criticize the United States Army,''
said William L. Nash, a retired Army general and ABC analyst. ''It is my life.''

Other administrations had made sporadic, small-scale attempts to build
relationships with the occasional military analyst. But these were trifling
compared with what Ms. Clarke's team had in mind. Don Meyer, an aide to Ms.
Clarke, said a strategic decision was made in 2002 to make the analysts the main
focus of the public relations push to construct a case for war. Journalists were
secondary. ''We didn't want to rely on them to be our primary vehicle to get
information out,'' Mr. Meyer said.

The Pentagon's regular press office would be kept separate from the military
analysts. The analysts would instead be catered to by a small group of political
appointees, with the point person being Brent T. Krueger, another senior aide to
Ms. Clarke. The decision recalled other administration tactics that subverted
traditional journalism. Federal agencies, for example, have paid columnists to
write favorably about the administration. They have distributed to local TV
stations hundreds of fake news segments with fawning accounts of administration
accomplishments. The Pentagon itself has made covert payments to Iraqi
newspapers to publish coalition propaganda.

Rather than complain about the ''media filter,'' each of these techniques simply
converted the filter into an amplifier. This time, Mr. Krueger said, the
military analysts would in effect be ''writing the op-ed'' for the war.

Assembling the Team

From the start, interviews show, the White House took a keen interest in which
analysts had been identified by the Pentagon, requesting lists of potential
recruits, and suggesting names. Ms. Clarke's team wrote summaries describing
their backgrounds, business affiliations and where they stood on the war.

''Rumsfeld ultimately cleared off on all invitees,'' said Mr. Krueger, who left
the Pentagon in 2004. (Through a spokesman, Mr. Rumsfeld declined to comment for
this article.)

Over time, the Pentagon recruited more than 75 retired officers, although some
participated only briefly or sporadically. The largest contingent was affiliated
with Fox News, followed by NBC and CNN, the other networks with 24-hour cable
outlets. But analysts from CBS and ABC were included, too. Some recruits, though
not on any network payroll, were influential in other ways -- either because
they were sought out by radio hosts, or because they often published op-ed
articles or were quoted in magazines, Web sites and newspapers. At least nine of
them have written op-ed articles for The Times.

The group was heavily represented by men involved in the business of helping
companies win military contracts. Several held senior positions with contractors
that gave them direct responsibility for winning new Pentagon business. James
Marks, a retired Army general and analyst for CNN from 2004 to 2007, pursued
military and intelligence contracts as a senior executive with McNeil
Technologies. Still others held board positions with military firms that gave
them responsibility for government business. General McInerney, the Fox analyst,
for example, sits on the boards of several military contractors, including
Nortel Government Solutions, a supplier of communication networks.

Several were defense industry lobbyists, such as Dr. McCausland, who works at
Buchanan Ingersoll & Rooney, a major lobbying firm where he is director of a
national security team that represents several military contractors. ''We offer
clients access to key decision makers,'' Dr. McCausland's team promised on the
firm's Web site.

Dr. McCausland was not the only analyst making this pledge. Another was Joseph
W. Ralston, a retired Air Force general. Soon after signing on with CBS, General
Ralston was named vice chairman of the Cohen Group, a consulting firm headed by
a former defense secretary, William Cohen, himself now a ''world affairs''
analyst for CNN. ''The Cohen Group knows that getting to 'yes' in the aerospace
and defense market -- whether in the United States or abroad -- requires that
companies have a thorough, up-to-date understanding of the thinking of
government decision makers,'' the company tells prospective clients on its Web
site.

There were also ideological ties.

Two of NBC's most prominent analysts, Barry R. McCaffrey and the late Wayne A.
Downing, were on the advisory board of the Committee for the Liberation of Iraq,
an advocacy group created with White House encouragement in 2002 to help make
the case for ousting Saddam Hussein. Both men also had their own consulting
firms and sat on the boards of major military contractors.

Many also shared with Mr. Bush's national security team a belief that
pessimistic war coverage broke the nation's will to win in Vietnam, and there
was a mutual resolve not to let that happen with this war.

This was a major theme, for example, with Paul E. Vallely, a Fox News analyst
from 2001 to 2007. A retired Army general who had specialized in psychological
warfare, Mr. Vallely co-authored a paper in 1980 that accused American news
organizations of failing to defend the nation from ''enemy'' propaganda during
Vietnam.

''We lost the war -- not because we were outfought, but because we were out
Psyoped,'' he wrote. He urged a radically new approach to psychological
operations in future wars -- taking aim at not just foreign adversaries but
domestic audiences, too. He called his approach ''MindWar'' -- using network TV
and radio to ''strengthen our national will to victory.''

The Selling of the War

From their earliest sessions with the military analysts, Mr. Rumsfeld and his
aides spoke as if they were all part of the same team.

In interviews, participants described a powerfully seductive environment -- the
uniformed escorts to Mr. Rumsfeld's private conference room, the best government
china laid out, the embossed name cards, the blizzard of PowerPoints, the
solicitations of advice and counsel, the appeals to duty and country, the warm
thank you notes from the secretary himself.

''Oh, you have no idea,'' Mr. Allard said, describing the effect. ''You're back.
They listen to you. They listen to what you say on TV.'' It was, he said,
''psyops on steroids'' -- a nuanced exercise in influence through flattery and
proximity. ''It's not like it's, 'We'll pay you $500 to get our story out,' ''
he said. ''It's more subtle.''

The access came with a condition. Participants were instructed not to quote
their briefers directly or otherwise describe their contacts with the Pentagon.

In the fall and winter leading up to the invasion, the Pentagon armed its
analysts with talking points portraying Iraq as an urgent threat. The basic case
became a familiar mantra: Iraq possessed chemical and biological weapons, was
developing nuclear weapons, and might one day slip some to Al Qaeda; an invasion
would be a relatively quick and inexpensive ''war of liberation.''

At the Pentagon, members of Ms. Clarke's staff marveled at the way the analysts
seamlessly incorporated material from talking points and briefings as if it was
their own.

''You could see that they were messaging,'' Mr. Krueger said. ''You could see
they were taking verbatim what the secretary was saying or what the technical
specialists were saying. And they were saying it over and over and over.'' Some
days, he added, ''We were able to click on every single station and every one of
our folks were up there delivering our message. You'd look at them and say,
'This is working.' ''

On April 12, 2003, with major combat almost over, Mr. Rumsfeld drafted a
memorandum to Ms. Clarke. ''Let's think about having some of the folks who did
such a good job as talking heads in after this thing is over,'' he wrote.

By summer, though, the first signs of the insurgency had emerged. Reports from
journalists based in Baghdad were increasingly suffused with the imagery of
mayhem.

The Pentagon did not have to search far for a counterweight.

It was time, an internal Pentagon strategy memorandum urged, to ''re-energize
surrogates and message-force multipliers,'' starting with the military analysts.

The memorandum led to a proposal to take analysts on a tour of Iraq in September
2003, timed to help overcome the sticker shock from Mr. Bush's request for $87
billion in emergency war financing.

The group included four analysts from Fox News, one each from CNN and ABC, and
several research-group luminaries whose opinion articles appear regularly in the
nation's op-ed pages.

The trip invitation promised a look at ''the real situation on the ground in
Iraq.''

The situation, as described in scores of books, was deteriorating. L. Paul
Bremer III, then the American viceroy in Iraq, wrote in his memoir, ''My Year in
Iraq,'' that he had privately warned the White House that the United States had
''about half the number of soldiers we needed here.''

''We're up against a growing and sophisticated threat,'' Mr. Bremer recalled
telling the president during a private White House dinner.

That dinner took place on Sept. 24, while the analysts were touring Iraq.

Yet these harsh realities were elided, or flatly contradicted, during the
official presentations for the analysts, records show. The itinerary, scripted
to the minute, featured brief visits to a model school, a few refurbished
government buildings, a center for women's rights, a mass grave and even the
gardens of Babylon.

Mostly the analysts attended briefings. These sessions, records show, spooled
out an alternative narrative, depicting an Iraq bursting with political and
economic energy, its security forces blossoming. On the crucial question of
troop levels, the briefings echoed the White House line: No reinforcements were
needed. The ''growing and sophisticated threat'' described by Mr. Bremer was
instead depicted as degraded, isolated and on the run.

''We're winning,'' a briefing document proclaimed.

One trip participant, General Nash of ABC, said some briefings were so clearly
''artificial'' that he joked to another group member that they were on ''the
George Romney memorial trip to Iraq,'' a reference to Mr. Romney's infamous
claim that American officials had ''brainwashed'' him into supporting the
Vietnam War during a tour there in 1965, while he was governor of Michigan.

But if the trip pounded the message of progress, it also represented a business
opportunity: direct access to the most senior civilian and military leaders in
Iraq and Kuwait, including many with a say in how the president's $87 billion
would be spent. It also was a chance to gather inside information about the most
pressing needs confronting the American mission: the acute shortages of
''up-armored'' Humvees; the billions to be spent building military bases; the
urgent need for interpreters; and the ambitious plans to train Iraq's security
forces.

Information and access of this nature had undeniable value for trip participants
like William V. Cowan and Carlton A. Sherwood.

Mr. Cowan, a Fox analyst and retired Marine colonel, was the chief executive of
a new military firm, the wvc3 Group. Mr. Sherwood was its executive vice
president. At the time, the company was seeking contracts worth tens of millions
to supply body armor and counterintelligence services in Iraq. In addition, wvc3
Group had a written agreement to use its influence and connections to help
tribal leaders in Al Anbar Province win reconstruction contracts from the
coalition.

''Those sheiks wanted access to the C.P.A.,'' Mr. Cowan recalled in an
interview, referring to the Coalition Provisional Authority.

Mr. Cowan said he pleaded their cause during the trip. ''I tried to push hard
with some of Bremer's people to engage these people of Al Anbar,'' he said.

Back in Washington, Pentagon officials kept a nervous eye on how the trip
translated on the airwaves. Uncomfortable facts had bubbled up during the trip.
One briefer, for example, mentioned that the Army was resorting to packing
inadequately armored Humvees with sandbags and Kevlar blankets. Descriptions of
the Iraqi security forces were withering. ''They can't shoot, but then again,
they don't,'' one officer told them, according to one participant's notes.

''I saw immediately in 2003 that things were going south,'' General Vallely, one
of the Fox analysts on the trip, recalled in an interview with The Times.

The Pentagon, though, need not have worried.

''You can't believe the progress,'' General Vallely told Alan Colmes of Fox News
upon his return. He predicted the insurgency would be ''down to a few numbers''
within months.

''We could not be more excited, more pleased,'' Mr. Cowan told Greta Van
Susteren of Fox News. There was barely a word about armor shortages or corrupt
Iraqi security forces. And on the key strategic question of the moment --
whether to send more troops -- the analysts were unanimous.

''I am so much against adding more troops,'' General Shepperd said on CNN.

Access and Influence

Inside the Pentagon and at the White House, the trip was viewed as a masterpiece
in the management of perceptions, not least because it gave fuel to complaints
that ''mainstream'' journalists were ignoring the good news in Iraq.

''We're hitting a home run on this trip,'' a senior Pentagon official wrote in
an e-mail message to Richard B. Myers and Peter Pace, then chairman and vice
chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.

Its success only intensified the Pentagon's campaign. The pace of briefings
accelerated. More trips were organized. Eventually the effort involved officials
from Washington to Baghdad to Kabul to Guantanamo and back to Tampa, Fla., the
headquarters of United States Central Command.

The scale reflected strong support from the top. When officials in Iraq were
slow to organize another trip for analysts, a Pentagon official fired off an
e-mail message warning that the trips ''have the highest levels of visibility''
at the White House and urging them to get moving before Lawrence Di Rita, one of
Mr. Rumsfeld's closest aides, ''picks up the phone and starts calling the
4-stars.''

Mr. Di Rita, no longer at the Defense Department, said in an interview that a
''conscious decision'' was made to rely on the military analysts to counteract
''the increasingly negative view of the war'' coming from journalists in Iraq.
The analysts, he said, generally had ''a more supportive view'' of the
administration and the war, and the combination of their TV platforms and
military cachet made them ideal for rebutting critical coverage of issues like
troop morale, treatment of detainees, inadequate equipment or poorly trained
Iraqi security forces. ''On those issues, they were more likely to be seen as
credible spokesmen,'' he said.

For analysts with military industry ties, the attention brought access to a
widening circle of influential officials beyond the contacts they had
accumulated over the course of their careers.

Charles T. Nash, a Fox military analyst and retired Navy captain, is a
consultant who helps small companies break into the military market. Suddenly,
he had entree to a host of senior military leaders, many of whom he had never
met. It was, he said, like being embedded with the Pentagon leadership. ''You
start to recognize what's most important to them,'' he said, adding, ''There's
nothing like seeing stuff firsthand.''

Some Pentagon officials said they were well aware that some analysts viewed
their special access as a business advantage. ''Of course we realized that,''
Mr. Krueger said. ''We weren't naive about that.''

They also understood the financial relationship between the networks and their
analysts. Many analysts were being paid by the ''hit,'' the number of times they
appeared on TV. The more an analyst could boast of fresh inside information from
high-level Pentagon ''sources,'' the more hits he could expect. The more hits,
the greater his potential influence in the military marketplace, where several
analysts prominently advertised their network roles.

''They have taken lobbying and the search for contracts to a far higher level,''
Mr. Krueger said. ''This has been highly honed.''

Mr. Di Rita, though, said it never occurred to him that analysts might use their
access to curry favor. Nor, he said, did the Pentagon try to exploit this
dynamic. ''That's not something that ever crossed my mind,'' he said. In any
event, he argued, the analysts and the networks were the ones responsible for
any ethical complications. ''We assume they know where the lines are,'' he said.

The analysts met personally with Mr. Rumsfeld at least 18 times, records show,
but that was just the beginning. They had dozens more sessions with the most
senior members of his brain trust and access to officials responsible for
managing the billions being spent in Iraq. Other groups of ''key influentials''
had meetings, but not nearly as often as the analysts.

An internal memorandum in 2005 helped explain why. The memorandum, written by a
Pentagon official who had accompanied analysts to Iraq, said that based on her
observations during the trip, the analysts ''are having a greater impact'' on
network coverage of the military. ''They have now become the go-to guys not only
on breaking stories, but they influence the views on issues,'' she wrote.

Other branches of the administration also began to make use of the analysts. Mr.
Gonzales, then the attorney general, met with them soon after news leaked that
the government was wiretapping terrorism suspects in the United States without
warrants, Pentagon records show. When David H. Petraeus was appointed the
commanding general in Iraq in January 2007, one of his early acts was to meet
with the analysts.

''We knew we had extraordinary access,'' said Timur J. Eads, a retired Army
lieutenant colonel and Fox analyst who is vice president of government relations
for Blackbird Technologies, a fast-growing military contractor.

Like several other analysts, Mr. Eads said he had at times held his tongue on
television for fear that ''some four-star could call up and say, 'Kill that
contract.' '' For example, he believed Pentagon officials misled the analysts
about the progress of Iraq's security forces. ''I know a snow job when I see
one,'' he said. He did not share this on TV.

''Human nature,'' he explained, though he noted other instances when he was
critical.

Some analysts said that even before the war started, they privately had
questions about the justification for the invasion, but were careful not to
express them on air.

Mr. Bevelacqua, then a Fox analyst, was among those invited to a briefing in
early 2003 about Iraq's purported stockpiles of illicit weapons. He recalled
asking the briefer whether the United States had ''smoking gun'' proof.

'' 'We don't have any hard evidence,' '' Mr. Bevelacqua recalled the briefer
replying. He said he and other analysts were alarmed by this concession. ''We
are looking at ourselves saying, 'What are we doing?' ''

Another analyst, Robert L. Maginnis, a retired Army lieutenant colonel who works
in the Pentagon for a military contractor, attended the same briefing and
recalled feeling ''very disappointed'' after being shown satellite photographs
purporting to show bunkers associated with a hidden weapons program. Mr.
Maginnis said he concluded that the analysts were being ''manipulated'' to
convey a false sense of certainty about the evidence of the weapons. Yet he and
Mr. Bevelacqua and the other analysts who attended the briefing did not share
any misgivings with the American public.

Mr. Bevelacqua and another Fox analyst, Mr. Cowan, had formed the wvc3 Group,
and hoped to win military and national security contracts.

''There's no way I was going to go down that road and get completely torn
apart,'' Mr. Bevelacqua said. ''You're talking about fighting a huge machine.''

Some e-mail messages between the Pentagon and the analysts reveal an implicit
trade of privileged access for favorable coverage. Robert H. Scales Jr., a
retired Army general and analyst for Fox News and National Public Radio whose
consulting company advises several military firms on weapons and tactics used in
Iraq, wanted the Pentagon to approve high-level briefings for him inside Iraq in
2006.

''Recall the stuff I did after my last visit,'' he wrote. ''I will do the same
this time.''

Pentagon Keeps Tabs

As it happened, the analysts' news media appearances were being closely
monitored. The Pentagon paid a private contractor, Omnitec Solutions, hundreds
of thousands of dollars to scour databases for any trace of the analysts, be it
a segment on ''The O'Reilly Factor'' or an interview with The Daily Inter Lake
in Montana, circulation 20,000.

Omnitec evaluated their appearances using the same tools as corporate branding
experts. One report, assessing the impact of several trips to Iraq in 2005,
offered example after example of analysts echoing Pentagon themes on all the
networks.

''Commentary from all three Iraq trips was extremely positive over all,'' the
report concluded.

In interviews, several analysts reacted with dismay when told they were
described as reliable ''surrogates'' in Pentagon documents. And some asserted
that their Pentagon sessions were, as David L. Grange, a retired Army general
and CNN analyst put it, ''just upfront information,'' while others pointed out,
accurately, that they did not always agree with the administration or each
other. ''None of us drink the Kool-Aid,'' General Scales said.

Likewise, several also denied using their special access for business gain.
''Not related at all,'' General Shepperd said, pointing out that many in the
Pentagon held CNN ''in the lowest esteem.''

Still, even the mildest of criticism could draw a challenge. Several analysts
told of fielding telephone calls from displeased defense officials only minutes
after being on the air.

On Aug. 3, 2005, 14 marines died in Iraq. That day, Mr. Cowan, who said he had
grown increasingly uncomfortable with the ''twisted version of reality'' being
pushed on analysts in briefings, called the Pentagon to give ''a heads-up'' that
some of his comments on Fox ''may not all be friendly,'' Pentagon records show.
Mr. Rumsfeld's senior aides quickly arranged a private briefing for him, yet
when he told Bill O'Reilly that the United States was ''not on a good glide path
right now'' in Iraq, the repercussions were swift.

Mr. Cowan said he was ''precipitously fired from the analysts group'' for this
appearance. The Pentagon, he wrote in an e-mail message, ''simply didn't like
the fact that I wasn't carrying their water.'' The next day James T. Conway,
then director of operations for the Joint Chiefs, presided over another
conference call with analysts. He urged them, a transcript shows, not to let the
marines' deaths further erode support for the war.

''The strategic target remains our population,'' General Conway said. ''We can
lose people day in and day out, but they're never going to beat our military.
What they can and will do if they can is strip away our support. And you guys
can help us not let that happen.''

''General, I just made that point on the air,'' an analyst replied.

''Let's work it together, guys,'' General Conway urged.

The Generals' Revolt

The full dimensions of this mutual embrace were perhaps never clearer than in
April 2006, after several of Mr. Rumsfeld's former generals -- none of them
network military analysts -- went public with devastating critiques of his
wartime performance. Some called for his resignation.

On Friday, April 14, with what came to be called the ''Generals' Revolt''
dominating headlines, Mr. Rumsfeld instructed aides to summon military analysts
to a meeting with him early the next week, records show. When an aide urged a
short delay to ''give our big guys on the West Coast a little more time to buy a
ticket and get here,'' Mr. Rumsfeld's office insisted that ''the boss'' wanted
the meeting fast ''for impact on the current story.''

That same day, Pentagon officials helped two Fox analysts, General McInerney and
General Vallely, write an opinion article for The Wall Street Journal defending
Mr. Rumsfeld.

''Starting to write it now,'' General Vallely wrote to the Pentagon that
afternoon. ''Any input for the article,'' he added a little later, ''will be
much appreciated.'' Mr. Rumsfeld's office quickly forwarded talking points and
statistics to rebut the notion of a spreading revolt.

''Vallely is going to use the numbers,'' a Pentagon official reported that
afternoon.

The standard secrecy notwithstanding, plans for this session leaked, producing a
front-page story in The Times that Sunday. In damage-control mode, Pentagon
officials scrambled to present the meeting as routine and directed that
communications with analysts be kept ''very formal,'' records show. ''This is
very, very sensitive now,'' a Pentagon official warned subordinates.

On Tuesday, April 18, some 17 analysts assembled at the Pentagon with Mr.
Rumsfeld and General Pace, then the chairman of the Joint Chiefs.

A transcript of that session, never before disclosed, shows a shared
determination to marginalize war critics and revive public support for the war.

''I'm an old intel guy,'' said one analyst. (The transcript omits speakers'
names.) ''And I can sum all of this up, unfortunately, with one word. That is
Psyops. Now most people may hear that and they think, 'Oh my God, they're trying
to brainwash.' ''

''What are you, some kind of a nut?'' Mr. Rumsfeld cut in, drawing laughter.
''You don't believe in the Constitution?''

There was little discussion about the actual criticism pouring forth from Mr.
Rumsfeld's former generals. Analysts argued that opposition to the war was
rooted in perceptions fed by the news media, not reality. The administration's
overall war strategy, they counseled, was ''brilliant'' and ''very successful.''

''Frankly,'' one participant said, ''from a military point of view, the penalty,
2,400 brave Americans whom we lost, 3,000 in an hour and 15 minutes, is
relative.''

An analyst said at another point: ''This is a wider war. And whether we have
democracy in Iraq or not, it doesn't mean a tinker's damn if we end up with the
result we want, which is a regime over there that's not a threat to us.''

''Yeah,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said, taking notes.

But winning or not, they bluntly warned, the administration was in grave
political danger so long as most Americans viewed Iraq as a lost cause.
''America hates a loser,'' one analyst said.

Much of the session was devoted to ways that Mr. Rumsfeld could reverse the
''political tide.'' One analyst urged Mr. Rumsfeld to ''just crush these
people,'' and assured him that ''most of the gentlemen at the table'' would
enthusiastically support him if he did.

''You are the leader,'' the analyst told Mr. Rumsfeld. ''You are our guy.''

At another point, an analyst made a suggestion: ''In one of your speeches you
ought to say, 'Everybody stop for a minute and imagine an Iraq ruled by
Zarqawi.' And then you just go down the list and say, 'All right, we've got oil,
money, sovereignty, access to the geographic center of gravity of the Middle
East, blah, blah, blah.' If you can just paint a mental picture for Joe America
to say, 'Oh my God, I can't imagine a world like that.' ''

Even as they assured Mr. Rumsfeld that they stood ready to help in this public
relations offensive, the analysts sought guidance on what they should cite as
the next ''milestone'' that would, as one analyst put it, ''keep the American
people focused on the idea that we're moving forward to a positive end.'' They
placed particular emphasis on the growing confrontation with Iran.

''When you said 'long war,' you changed the psyche of the American people to
expect this to be a generational event,'' an analyst said. ''And again, I'm not
trying to tell you how to do your job...''

''Get in line,'' Mr. Rumsfeld interjected.

The meeting ended and Mr. Rumsfeld, appearing pleased and relaxed, took the
entire group into a small study and showed off treasured keepsakes from his
life, several analysts recalled.

Soon after, analysts hit the airwaves. The Omnitec monitoring reports,
circulated to more than 80 officials, confirmed that analysts repeated many of
the Pentagon's talking points: that Mr. Rumsfeld consulted ''frequently and
sufficiently'' with his generals; that he was not ''overly concerned'' with the
criticisms; that the meeting focused ''on more important topics at hand,''
including the next milestone in Iraq, the formation of a new government.

Days later, Mr. Rumsfeld wrote a memorandum distilling their collective guidance
into bullet points. Two were underlined:

''Focus on the Global War on Terror -- not simply Iraq. The wider war -- the
long war.''

''Link Iraq to Iran. Iran is the concern. If we fail in Iraq or Afghanistan, it
will help Iran.''

But if Mr. Rumsfeld found the session instructive, at least one participant,
General Nash, the ABC analyst, was repulsed.

''I walked away from that session having total disrespect for my fellow
commentators, with perhaps one or two exceptions,'' he said.

View From the Networks

Two weeks ago General Petraeus took time out from testifying before Congress
about Iraq for a conference call with military analysts.

Mr. Garrett, the Fox analyst and Patton Boggs lobbyist, said he told General
Petraeus during the call to ''keep up the great work.''

''Hey,'' Mr. Garrett said in an interview, ''anything we can do to help.''

For the moment, though, because of heavy election coverage and general war
fatigue, military analysts are not getting nearly as much TV time, and the
networks have trimmed their rosters of analysts. The conference call with
General Petraeus, for example, produced little in the way of immediate coverage.

Still, almost weekly the Pentagon continues to conduct briefings with selected
military analysts. Many analysts said network officials were only dimly aware of
these interactions. The networks, they said, have little grasp of how often they
meet with senior officials, or what is discussed.

''I don't think NBC was even aware we were participating,'' said Rick Francona,
a longtime military analyst for the network.

Some networks publish biographies on their Web sites that describe their
analysts' military backgrounds and, in some cases, give at least limited
information about their business ties. But many analysts also said the networks
asked few questions about their outside business interests, the nature of their
work or the potential for that work to create conflicts of interest. ''None of
that ever happened,'' said Mr. Allard, an NBC analyst until 2006.

''The worst conflict of interest was no interest.''

Mr. Allard and other analysts said their network handlers also raised no
objections when the Defense Department began paying their commercial airfare for
Pentagon-sponsored trips to Iraq -- a clear ethical violation for most news
organizations.

CBS News declined to comment on what it knew about its military analysts'
business affiliations or what steps it took to guard against potential
conflicts.

NBC News also declined to discuss its procedures for hiring and monitoring
military analysts. The network issued a short statement: ''We have clear
policies in place to assure that the people who appear on our air have been
appropriately vetted and that nothing in their profile would lead to even a
perception of a conflict of interest.''

Jeffrey W. Schneider, a spokesman for ABC, said that while the network's
military consultants were not held to the same ethical rules as its full-time
journalists, they were expected to keep the network informed about any outside
business entanglements. ''We make it clear to them we expect them to keep us
closely apprised,'' he said.

A spokeswoman for Fox News said executives ''refused to participate'' in this
article.

CNN requires its military analysts to disclose in writing all outside sources of
income. But like the other networks, it does not provide its military analysts
with the kind of written, specific ethical guidelines it gives its full-time
employees for avoiding real or apparent conflicts of interest.

Yet even where controls exist, they have sometimes proven porous.

CNN, for example, said it was unaware for nearly three years that one of its
main military analysts, General Marks, was deeply involved in the business of
seeking government contracts, including contracts related to Iraq.

General Marks was hired by CNN in 2004, about the time he took a management
position at McNeil Technologies, where his job was to pursue military and
intelligence contracts. As required, General Marks disclosed that he received
income from McNeil Technologies. But the disclosure form did not require him to
describe what his job entailed, and CNN acknowledges it failed to do additional
vetting.

''We did not ask Mr. Marks the follow-up questions we should have,'' CNN said in
a written statement.

In an interview, General Marks said it was no secret at CNN that his job at
McNeil Technologies was about winning contracts. ''I mean, that's what McNeil
does,'' he said.

CNN, however, said it did not know the nature of McNeil's military business or
what General Marks did for the company. If he was bidding on Pentagon contracts,
CNN said, that should have disqualified him from being a military analyst for
the network. But in the summer and fall of 2006, even as he was regularly asked
to comment on conditions in Iraq, General Marks was working intensively on
bidding for a $4.6 billion contract to provide thousands of translators to
United States forces in Iraq. In fact, General Marks was made president of the
McNeil spin-off that won the huge contract in December 2006.

General Marks said his work on the contract did not affect his commentary on
CNN. ''I've got zero challenge separating myself from a business interest,'' he
said.

But CNN said it had no idea about his role in the contract until July 2007, when
it reviewed his most recent disclosure form, submitted months earlier, and
finally made inquiries about his new job.

''We saw the extent of his dealings and determined at that time we should end
our relationship with him,'' CNN said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 24, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about the Pentagon's relationship with news
media military analysts misidentified the military affiliation of one analyst,
John C. Garrett. He retired as a colonel from the Marines, not the Army.

The continuation of an article on Sunday about a Pentagon effort to use military
analysts to generate favorable news coverage carried 10 paragraphs that were
partly obscured in some editions by a chart.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A PENTAGON CAMPAIGN: Retired officers have been used to shape
terrorism coverage from inside the TV and radio networks.(pg. A1)
(pg. 24) CHARTS: Describing the Program: In memorandums and e-mail messages
obtained by The Times, Defense Department officials describe the goals and
mission of a program to shape public opinion about the Iraq war through retired
military officers who are media analysts. Key passages are highlighted by The
Times.
Molding the Message: The Defense Department has supplied military analysts with
thousands of talking points since 2002. Many were echoed on TV. Charts detail
associated newspaper clippings detailing the following: From a Nov. 1, 2006,
e-mail message about ''media experts visit proposal''
From a May 16, 2006, e-mail message about ''Taking groups to Iraq/Afghanistan''
From a Sept. 14, 2006, memorandum titled ''Itinerary for Defense Analysts''
 and Talking points issued in December 2002 and February 2003. (pg. 24)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IRAQ WAR (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (76%); LOBBYING (76%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (73%); TERRORISM (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (69%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (58%); DICK CHENEY (57%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             592 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 2, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Strike Kills Leader of a Somali Militia Suspected of Ties to Al Qaeda

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Eric Schmitt reported from
Washington, and Jeffrey Gettleman from Nairobi, Kenya.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1480 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


An American missile strike in Somalia apparently killed a militant long
identified as one of Al Qaeda's top operatives in East Africa on Thursday, but
while Bush administration officials claimed success they also acknowledged
facing an uphill battle to score lasting blows in their final months against the
terrorist group around the world.

Political resistance from the new government in Pakistan, restrictions on
pursuing militants across Afghanistan's borders and the possibility of popular
resentment in Somalia driving new recruits to militant Islam are the kinds of
hurdles administration officials said could be left to the next president.

American officials portrayed the attack on the operative, Aden Hashi Ayro, as a
product of intensified intelligence gathering in which they tracked him for
weeks and made use of the free rein granted to the Pentagon in carrying out
attacks in Somalia's largely ungoverned spaces. Thursday's attack was arguably
the most successful American strike against Islamic militants outside of Iraq,
Afghanistan or Pakistan since a deadly strike in Yemen in 2002, reflecting
broader American concerns about terrorist havens in Africa.

Mr. Ayro was one of the most feared and notorious figures in Somalia, a short,
wispy man believed to be in his 30s who had gone from lowly car washer to a top
terrorist suspect blamed for a string of atrocities, including killing a BBC
journalist, desecrating an Italian graveyard and planning suicide attacks all
across Somalia. He was a military commander for the Shabab, an Islamist militia,
which the American government recently classified as a terrorist group, saying
it was linked to Al Qaeda.

The United States has failed to contain Al Qaeda in places like Pakistan and
Afghanistan, and struggles even in Somalia, where the government gave the green
light 16 months ago for American strikes on militants there.

But American attacks on terrorism suspects in the region have proved unreliable
before, and human rights organizations have upbraided the United States for
launching airstrikes in Somalia in the past year that ended up wounding or
killing civilians.

Still, some administration officials said they wanted to make a mark on the
issue in the waning months of the Bush presidency, pointing to Al Qaeda's
resurgence in the tribal areas of Pakistan; the rising number of cross-border
attacks from Pakistan into  Afghanistan; and evidence that Al Qaeda and its
offshoots are seeking to establish surer footholds in the Horn of Africa and
other parts of the continent.

In January, American officials reached a quiet understanding with President
Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan to intensify strikes by pilotless aircraft against
suspected terrorists. A few weeks later Abu Laith al-Libi, a senior Qaeda
leader, was killed in a missile attack in the tribal areas.

Now administration officials contend that Pakistan's new government may throw a
wrench into their more aggressive strategy to hunt Al Qaeda and the Taliban by
negotiating with the militants. ''We're growing impatient,'' said one
administration official who was not authorized to speak publicly. Even within
Somalia, there was debate over whether Mr. Ayro's death would be a turning point
toward peace or fuel for more resistance.

Government officials have been trying to strike a truce with more moderate
elements of Somalia's Islamist movement and argued that with a violent leader
like Mr. Ayro gone, moderates would be more receptive.

''This will definitely weaken the Shabab,'' said Mohamed Aden, consul for
Somalia's embassy in Nairobi, Kenya. ''This will help with reconciliation. You
can't imagine how many Somalis are saying, 'Yes, this is the one.' The reaction
is so good.''

But while many Somalis disagreed with Mr. Ayro's tactics, he was also perceived
as a freedom fighter resisting an unpopular government backed by outsiders,
including Ethiopia and the United States. Several Somalia scholars said Mr.
Ayro's killing could lead to a dangerous blowback for Americans in East Africa,
a region that had already been hit by several Qaeda attacks.

''This will become a major recruiting tool,'' said one American official not
authorized to speak publicly. ''These guys will now feel the Americans are their
enemy and you're going to see more attacks against Americans in the region and
more foreign fighters flooding in.''

Maj. Sherri Reed, a spokeswoman for the United States Central Command in Tampa,
Fla., said the military had attacked ''a known Al Qaeda target'' in the central
Somali town of Dusa Marreb on Thursday, without giving more details of the
predawn strike. She said there was no evidence to suggest that any civilians had
been wounded or killed.

An American military official in Washington, who requested anonymity because of
the sensitivity of the operation, said  at least four Tomahawk cruise missiles
fired from a Navy ship or submarine off the Somali coast had slammed into a
small compound of single-story buildings in Dusa Marreb, a well-known hide-out
for Mr. Ayro and his associates. The military official and two American
intelligence officials said  all indications were that Mr. Ayro was killed,
along with several top lieutenants, but the attack was still being assessed.

''This was in the works for some time,'' said the official. He said  American
intelligence agents had been tracking Mr. Ayro for weeks through a combination
of communications intercepts, satellite imagery and other intelligence.

Around 3 a.m. Thursday, residents of Dusa Marreb were jolted out of bed by
several large explosions. According to witnesses and a spokesman for the Shabab,
more than 10 people were killed, including Mr. Ayro, Mr. Ayro's brother and
several other high-ranking Shabab commanders.

Some witnesses said that as many as 30 people were dead and that residents were
counting skulls to determine the number.

''Infidel planes bombed Dusa Marreb,'' a Shabab spokesman, Mukhtar Ali Robow,
told Reuters. ''Two of our important people, including Ayro, were killed.''

The American official said: ''For the Horn of Africa, this is pretty
significant. He's certainly considered a leader in Al Qaeda's effort there. This
can be chalked up as a success.''

Dusa Marreb is a stronghold of the Ayr clan, which Mr. Ayro belonged to. In
recent weeks, residents said, Islamist fighters had moved in, part of their
strategy to wrest back control from the Transitional Federal Government, which
officially leads Somalia but wields little power.

In 2006 Mr. Ayro was a  militia commander in  an Islamist movement that briefly
ruled Somalia. That rule ended that December when Ethiopian troops, backed by
American intelligence and air power, ousted the Islamists.

Since then, American forces have launched several airstrikes inside Somalia,
including one in January 2007 that was thought to have wounded Mr. Ayro.
American officials have accused Mr. Ayro of protecting wanted Qaeda members,
including some of the men thought to have planned the bombings of the American
Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.

The details of Mr. Ayro's life story are few. According to Somali intelligence
agents, he dropped out of school at a young age to wash cars and join one of the
street-gang-type militias that were fighting for control of Somalia in the early
1990s after the central government collapsed.

He became friends with a leader of his clan, Hassan Dahir Aweys, who arranged
for him to go to Afghanistan to fight with the Taliban against American forces
in 2001. Hethen returned to Mogadishu and trained fellow fighters in explosives,
according to the International Crisis Group, a research organization that
specializes in analyzing conflicts.

In January 2005 Mr. Ayro desecrated the graves of dozens of Italians who had
been buried in Mogadishu decades ago, when Somalia was an Italian colony. He was
essentially disowned by his clan after that. But his militant activities only
increased, and in February 2005 he was blamed for killing a BBC news producer
outside her hotel in Mogadishu.

In Dusa Marreb, clan elders rejected Mr. Ayro, said Mohammed Uluso, a leader of
the Ayr clan, because the elders ''didn't want to mix up their legitimate goals
with something suspicious.'' That might have been part of Mr. Ayro's undoing,
because Somali officials said that people in Dusa Marreb provided American
forces with up-to-the-minute intelligence on his movements.

Mr. Uluso said the Shabab would continue to be a potent resistance force because
many young Somalis saw the group as a ''heroic cause'' in terms of standing up
to the Americans. (Shabab is the Arabic word for youth.)

''The Shabab won't just disappear,'' Mr. Uluso said. ''But now that the hunt for
Ayro is over, at least people will get their freedom back. So many people were
hurt and oppressed in the effort to get him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Residents of Dusa Marreb, Somalia, walked Thursday through the
rubble of a compound that was destroyed by an American missile. At least 10
people were killed.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABDI GULED/REUTERS)
 Aden Hashi Ayro MAP: United States forces fired on Dusa Marreb from the sea.
Map details area of Site of missile attack in SOMALIA.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); TALIBAN (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); RELIGION (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(69%); CEMETERIES (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); UNMANNED AIRCRAFT (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); SOMALIA (98%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); AFRICA (94%);
PAKISTAN (94%); EASTERN AFRICA (93%); YEMEN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             596 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 20, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says It Is Holding 500 Youths in Iraq

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 491 words


The American military is holding about 500 juveniles in detention centers in
Iraq and has about 10 detained at the military base at Bagram, Afghanistan, the
United States has told the United Nations.

A total of 2,500 people under the age of 18, almost all in Iraq, have been
detained for periods of up to a year or more since 2002, the United States
reported last week to the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child.
Most are believed to be 16 or 17.

Civil liberties groups like the International Justice Network and the American
Civil Liberties Union denounced the detentions as a violation of treaty
obligations.

The United States confirmed a periodic report on its compliance with the
Convention on the Rights of the Child that ''as of April 2008, the United States
held about 500 juveniles in Iraq.''

''The juveniles that the United States has detained have been captured engaging
in anticoalition activity, such as planting improvised explosive devices,
operating as lookouts for insurgents or actively engaged in fighting against
U.S. and coalition forces,'' the report said.

The report said that of the 2,500 juveniles jailed since 2002, all but 100 had
been picked up in Iraq. Of the remainder, most were in Afghanistan. The report
also says it has held eight juveniles, ages 13 to 17, at its detention center at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

''It remains uncertain the exact age of these individuals, as most of them did
not know their date of birth or even the year they were born,'' the report says.
But military doctors who evaluated them believed that three were under age 16.
Six were released, and two are now adults facing war-crimes charges.

A Canadian, Omar Khadr, now 21, was captured in July 2002 and is charged with
murder. He is accused of throwing a grenade that killed an American Special
Forces soldier. Mohammed Jawad, an Afghan who the military says is about 23,
faces charges of attempted murder in connection with a 2002 grenade attack that
wounded two American soldiers.

The American report pointed out, ''Although age is not a determining factor in
whether or not we detain an individual under the law of armed conflict, we go to
great lengths to attend to the special needs of juveniles while they are in
detention.''

In Bagram, a military spokesman, First Lt. Richard K. Ulsh of the Marines, said
on Sunday, ''There are no detainees being held under the age of 16, and, without
getting into specifics due to the frequent fluctuation in the number of
detainees being held, we can tell you that there are currently less than 10
detainees being held under the age of 18.''

Jamil Dakwar, director of the A.C.L.U.'s Human Rights Program, released a
statement expressing his dismay.

''It is shocking to know that the U.S. is holding hundreds of juveniles in Iraq
and Afghanistan, and even more disturbing that there is no comprehensive policy
in place that will protect their rights as children,'' it said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); WAR CRIMES (86%); JAIL SENTENCING
(78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(77%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (69%); MURDER (51%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             606 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 29, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terrorism and the Olympics

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 804 words

DATELINE: KASHGAR, China


The reports of terror plots emanating this year from this Muslim region in the
far west of China might seem fanciful: A foiled plot to blow up a plane; a cache
of TNT to bomb the Summer Olympics; even a ''violent terrorist gang'' that
planned to kidnap Olympic athletes.

But these aren't whispers on the Internet. They're reports coming from the
Chinese government. So I flew out here to Kashgar --  an oasis on the ancient
Silk Road, where the minarets and camels and carpets provide a Middle Eastern
ambience  --  to look for terrorists.

Instead, China's State Security Ministry found me. I had been in Kashgar just a
few hours when my videographer, who is ethnically Chinese, called to say that
two plainclothes officials were interrogating him. They asked him not to tell me
since American journalists tend to be touchy about such things.

The interrogation was a sign of the authorities' anxiety about stability in
China's Muslim west. Separatists here in the Xinjiang region aim to create the
nation of ''East Turkestan'' and have periodically blown up police stations  --
even bombed three public buses in 1997.

The Chinese government has claimed that 162 people were killed in such terror
attacks by Uighur separatists between 1990 and 2001. Meanwhile, China has
sentenced more than 200 people to death since 1997 for engaging in such
separatist crimes.

Last year, Chinese officials said that 18 people had been killed when police
raided a Uighur terrorist training camp with ties to Al Qaeda. The raid netted
1,500 grenades.

Then in March, China announced that it had foiled a plot ''to create an air
crash,'' in a passenger plane shortly after it took off from the Xinjiang
capital of Urumqi. In April, the authorities said that they had confiscated
explosives from Uighurs who were planning suicide bomb attacks.

''This violent terrorist gang secretly plotted to kidnap journalists, visitors
and athletes during the Beijing Olympics,'' The Associated Press quoted Wu
Heping, a spokesman for the Public Security Ministry, as saying.

Then just this month, a crowded bus blew up in Shanghai, killing three people
and injuring many more. No one publicly claimed responsibility, but it recalled
the 1997 Uighur bus bombings.

Ronald Noble, the secretary general of Interpol, cited these incidents  --  and
also reports of a separatist plot to disrupt the Olympic Games with poison gas
--  and told a press conference that a terror attack at the Olympics was ''a
real possibility.''

It's not entirely clear what to make of all this, for as I strolled around
Kashgar I found the situation remarkably calm. I wasn't expecting to uncover a
terrorist cell, but I had anticipated more hostility toward the government.
Ordinary Uighurs I spoke with offered measured complaints, but they weren't
seething as Tibetans are.

''Nobody likes it when the Chinese all move in here,'' said a Uighur
shop-keeper. ''Of course, we're all upset. But what can we do?''

One young woman offered a different take. ''When I was a little kid, my mom
would tell me, 'Don't wander or the Han Chinese will steal you away. They eat
human flesh.' '' She laughed and added: ''But now we see more Han, and we're not
afraid of them. Relations are O.K.''

Some young Uighurs criticized the Beijing Olympics, saying the Games will drain
local budgets. But I could have found stronger anti-government sedition on any
street corner of Manhattan.

The only excitement I found in Kashgar was playing pied piper to State Security
officers who tailed me whenever I left the hotel.

Normally, the Chinese government downplays security risks, but human rights
groups argue persuasively that China is using concerns about Uighurs as an
excuse to crack down on peaceful Uighur dissidents. After 9/11, China declared
its own war on terror in Xinjiang, but Human Rights Watch and Amnesty
International have documented that this often has targeted Uighurs who are
completely nonviolent.

Unfortunately, the Bush administration has largely backed this Chinese version
of the war on terror. Indeed, a Department of Justice report this month suggests
that American troops softened up Uighur prisoners in Guantanamo Bay on behalf of
visiting Chinese interrogators. The American troops starved the Uighurs and
prevented them from sleeping, just before inviting in the Chinese interrogators.

That was disgraceful; we shouldn't do China's dirty work. It was one more
example of the Bush administration allowing the war on terror to corrode our
moral clarity.

We should encourage China to tolerate peaceful protesters even as it prosecutes
terrorists. But instead of clarifying that distinction, in recent years we have
helped China blur it. The risk of terrorism during the Olympics is real, but
that shouldn't force us to do violence to our principles.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); OLYMPICS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); BOMBINGS (89%);
AL-QAEDA (78%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (71%); SENTENCING (65%)

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (52%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (52%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (79%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: NORTHWEST CHINA (93%); XINJIANG, CHINA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%);
EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             616 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Elusive Starting Point on Harsh Interrogations

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1184 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In a flurry of oversight that some critics say comes years too late, Congress is
pressing Bush administration officials on a still-unanswered question: How did
the United States come to embrace harsh interrogation methods it had always
shunned?

The interrogation techniques themselves have been repeatedly discussed, and
administration officials have been forced to explain why waterboarding, a
simulated drowning technique of torturers dating back to the Spanish
Inquisition, was not torture when used by the C.I.A.

But it has never been clear what roles were played by President Bush, Vice
President Dick Cheney and their subordinates in approving the interrogation
techniques used after the Sept. 11 attacks against terrorism suspects. Only
gradually has the fog of secrecy begun to lift, and two hearings on Tuesday
showed there is a long way to go.

At the Senate Judiciary Committee, senior F.B.I. officials described the
bureau's halting efforts in 2002 to protest harsh interrogations being carried
out by the military at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and to make the case that
traditional rapport-building methods worked far better.

But the F.B.I. officials said agents were rebuffed and were told that senior
Pentagon officials, including Donald H. Rumsfeld, then the defense secretary,
with the backing of Justice Department legal opinions, had approved the
treatment. Valerie E. Caproni, the F.B.I.'s general counsel, testified that when
she asked to read classified legal opinions on torture in 2004, she was refused
access and has still not seen them.

Meanwhile, a House International Affairs subcommittee grilled John B. Bellinger
III, formerly legal adviser to the National Security Council and currently to
the State Department, about the transfer of prisoners by the Central
Intelligence Agency and others to countries where they face torture.

Mr. Bellinger, who is known to have fought inside the administration against
secret detention and harsh interrogations, largely dodged questions about
specific cases in which prisoners went to Egypt, Syria and other countries
condemned in State Department human rights reports. But growing emotional at one
point, he declared, ''I've been working for seven years for better laws and
better policies on detention.''

More testimony on interrogation is coming, some of it from officials with
firsthand knowledge of how the policies were developed, including those that
applied to the secret prisons that the C.I.A. established overseas.

Next Tuesday, the Defense Department's former legal counsel, William J. Haynes
II, and several other former military officials will address the Senate Armed
Services Committee, which has been investigating how harsh tactics were approved
for use at Guantanamo and elsewhere.

In the next few weeks, the House Judiciary Committee is expected to hear
testimony on interrogation from John Ashcroft, the former attorney general; John
Yoo, the former Justice Department official who wrote legal opinions justifying
harsh methods in 2002 and 2003; David S. Addington, chief of staff and legal
adviser to Mr. Cheney; and Douglas J. Feith, the former under secretary of
defense.

Last week, 56 House Democrats signed a letter to Attorney General Michael B.
Mukasey asking him to appoint a special counsel to investigate the interrogation
policies and whether they violated laws against torture.

Human rights advocates are heartened. ''Members of Congress are beginning to
connect the dots,'' said Caroline Fredrickson, director of the Washington
legislative office of the American Civil Liberties Union. ''First they blamed
the privates and the field operatives, then the generals. But now Congress is
finally beginning to ask who made the ultimate decisions at the top.''

The latest hearings reflect a slow transformation of Congressional sentiment.

In the first years after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, the
Republican-controlled Congress largely supported the tough stance the
administration took in the campaign against Al Qaeda. Interrogation programs
were kept highly classified, and the few Democrats who learned details made no
public protest.

In 2005, Congress, led by Senator John McCain, a Republican who had been
tortured in a North Vietnamese prison camp, banned the military from using harsh
methods. Still, many Democrats trod cautiously on the delicate subject of
interrogation, fearful of Republican accusations that they were soft on
terrorism.

''I think the oversight up to 2007 was abysmal: it just didn't exist,'' said
Representative Bill Delahunt, a Massachusetts Democrat who has organized a
series of recent hearings, including the one with Mr. Bellinger. ''Democrats
were powerless and had no access to information.''

But since gaining control of Congress last year, Democrats have become more
outspoken. They have gained political cover as more veteran F.B.I. agents and
military interrogators have spoken out publicly against the use of physical
pressure in interrogations, saying it violates American values and can produce
false information.

Jack Cloonan, who retired in 2002 after 27 years in the F.B.I., described at
Tuesday's hearing his success in questioning Qaeda members without force in the
1990s.

''Gaining the cooperation of an Al Qaeda member is a formidable task, but it is
not impossible,'' Mr. Cloonan said. He said he saw Qaeda operatives who had
pledged loyalty to Osama bin Laden ''cross the threshold and cooperate with the
F.B.I. because they were treated humanely, understood what due process was about
and were literally seduced by our legal system, as strange as that might
sound.''

Congress late last year passed a bill that extended the ban on harsh methods to
all agencies, including the C.I.A., but Mr. Bush responded with a veto. Now,
Democrats appear determined to examine the origins of the interrogation methods
and try again for a ban on the use of force.

''It is absolutely essential that we obtain reliable and usable intelligence to
successfully fight the war on terror,'' said Senator Dianne Feinstein, the
California Democrat who led Tuesday's hearing. ''I believe it is wrong to use
coercive interrogation and torture to try to accomplish that goal. I believe we
must stop it.''

Most Republicans continue to defend the administration's policies.
Representative Dana Rohrabacher, Republican of California, insisted that while
there had been occasional mistakes, the policies had prevented a repeat of Sept.
11. ''By and large, I would say our people have done a terrific job,'' he said.

But some Republicans have expressed doubts about some policies. Representative
Joe Pitts of Pennsylvania questioned Mr. Bellinger about the wisdom of accepting
''diplomatic assurances'' from Egypt that it would not torture Coptic Christians
and political opponents sent there.

Mr. Pitts and others expressed astonishment that Chinese interrogators were
permitted to go to Guantanamo to question Uighurs, members of a Muslim minority,
and that American military personnel kept the prisoners awake the night before
their interrogation to soften them up.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The detention center at the naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
where harsh interrogation techniques have drawn fire. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD
HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Glenn A. Fine, center, the inspector general at the Justice Department,
speaking with an aide on Tuesday at a Senate hearing. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRENDAN
SMIALOWSKI FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); APPROVALS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAWYERS (88%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (88%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%);
PRISONS (72%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (72%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%);
TERRORISM (69%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (64%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(72%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (68%); DICK CHENEY (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             617 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 11, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The End of Intervention

BYLINE: By MADELEINE K. ALBRIGHT.

Madeleine K. Albright was the United States secretary of state from 1997 to
2001.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 829 words

DATELINE: Washington


THE Burmese government's criminally neglectful response to last month's cyclone,
and the world's response to that response, illustrate three grim realities
today: totalitarian governments are alive and well; their neighbors are
reluctant to pressure them to change; and the notion of national sovereignty as
sacred is gaining ground, helped in no small part by the disastrous results of
the American invasion of Iraq. Indeed, many of the world's necessary
interventions in the decade before the invasion -- in places like Haiti and the
Balkans -- would seem impossible in today's climate.

The first and most obvious reality is the survival of totalitarian government in
an age of global communications and democratic progress. Myanmar's military
junta employs the same set of tools used by the likes of Stalin to crush dissent
and monitor the lives of citizens. The needs of the victims of Cyclone Nargis
mean nothing to a regime focused solely on preserving its own authority.

Second is the unwillingness of Myanmar's neighbors to use their collective
leverage on behalf of change. A decade ago, when Myanmar was allowed to join the
Association of Southeast Asian Nations, I was assured by leaders in the region
that they would push the junta to open its economy and move in the direction of
democracy. With a few honorable exceptions, this hasn't happened.

A third reality is that the concept of national sovereignty as an inviolable and
overriding principle of global law is once again gaining ground. Many diplomats
and foreign policy experts had hoped that the fall of the Berlin Wall would lead
to the creation of an integrated world system free from spheres of influence, in
which the wounds created by colonial and cold war empires would heal.

In such a world, the international community would recognize a responsibility to
override sovereignty in emergency situations -- to prevent ethnic cleansing or
genocide, arrest war criminals, restore democracy or provide disaster relief
when national governments were either unable or unwilling to do so.

During the 1990s, certain precedents were created. The administration of George
H. W. Bush intervened to prevent famine in Somalia and to aid Kurds in northern
Iraq; the Clinton administration returned an elected leader to power in Haiti;
NATO ended the war in Bosnia and stopped Slobodan Milosevic's campaign of terror
in Kosovo; the British halted a civil war in Sierra Leone; and the United
Nations authorized life-saving missions in East Timor and elsewhere.

These actions were not steps toward a world government. They did reflect the
view that the international system exists to advance certain core values,
including development, justice and respect for human rights. In this view,
sovereignty is still a central consideration, but cases may arise in which there
is a responsibility to intervene -- through sanctions or, in extreme cases, by
force -- to save lives.

The Bush administration's decision to fight in Afghanistan after 9/11 did
nothing to weaken this view because it was clearly motivated by self-defense.
The invasion of Iraq, with the administration's grandiose rhetoric about
pre-emption, was another matter, however. It generated a negative reaction that
has weakened support for cross-border interventions even for worthy purposes.
Governments, especially in the developing world, are now determined to preserve
the principle of sovereignty, even when the human costs of doing so are high.

Thus, Myanmar's leaders have been shielded from the repercussions of their
outrageous actions. Sudan has been able to dictate the terms of multinational
operations inside Darfur. The government of Zimbabwe may yet succeed in stealing
a presidential election.

Political leaders in Pakistan have told the Bush administration to back off,
despite the growth of Al Qaeda and Taliban cells in the country's wild
northwest. African leaders (understandably perhaps) have said no to the creation
of a regional American military command. And despite recent efforts to enshrine
the doctrine of a ''responsibility to protect'' in international law, the
concept of humanitarian intervention has lost momentum.

The global conscience is not asleep, but after the turbulence of recent years,
it is profoundly confused. Some governments will oppose any exceptions to the
principle of sovereignty because they fear criticism of their own policies.
Others will defend the sanctity of sovereignty unless and until they again have
confidence in the judgment of those proposing exceptions.

At the heart of the debate is the question of what the international system is.
Is it just a collection of legal nuts and bolts cobbled together by governments
to protect governments? Or is it a living framework of rules intended to make
the world a more humane place?

We know how the government of Myanmar would answer that question, but what we
need to listen to is the voice -- and cry -- of the Burmese people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ENRIC JARDI)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MYANMAR CYCLONE NARGIS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(85%); MILITARY RULE (78%); DISASTER RELIEF (78%); NATURAL DISASTERS (78%);
PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); COLD WAR (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (74%); CIVIL WAR (74%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
IRAQ WAR (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (69%); WAR CRIMES (68%); GENOCIDE (67%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%); FOREIGN POLICY (64%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (64%); FAMINE (63%)

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATION OF SOUTHEAST ASIAN NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE H W BUSH (56%)

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (93%); HAITI (92%); SIERRA
LEONE (79%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%); GERMANY (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); SOMALIA (79%); SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             620 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Vote Favors Terrorism Bill And Premier In Britain

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1059 words

DATELINE: LONDON


Prime Minister Gordon Brown faced down a revolt within his governing Labor Party
on Wednesday, winning a precariously narrow victory in the House of Commons for
a measure that among other things would allow the authorities to hold terrorism
suspects for up to 42 days without charges.

Whether the measure becomes law, and when, now depends on the government's
success in navigating the new counterterrorism bill past the House of Lords,
where it may not be introduced until the fall and where it is expected to meet
stronger opposition.

Opponents of the measure, which extends the current detention limit of 28 days,
say it would give Britain detention powers that have few parallels in other
Western democracies. They have promised a legal challenge under the European
Convention on Human Rights, a recourse that has led to increasingly frequent
rebuffs for the British government on issues affecting civil liberties.

The House of Commons vote was 315 to 306, with the nine-vote margin supplied by
a last-minute decision to vote for the measure by the Democratic Unionist Party,
a group of Northern Ireland Protestants who share power in the Belfast
government with the predominantly Roman Catholic Sinn Fein. More than 30 Labor
rebels who voted against the measure appeared to have stood firm in their
opposition despite intense pressure from Mr. Brown, whose determination to press
ahead with the bill had turned the vote into a test of his own embattled
leadership.

For weeks, backbench opposition within the Labor Party had threatened Mr. Brown
with a humiliating parliamentary defeat. The Labor rebels were joined in their
fight against the measure by the opposition Conservatives and Liberal Democrats,
by Britain's leading civil liberties groups, and by organizations representing
Britain's population of at least 1.5 million Muslims, which warned that use of
the extended detention powers against Muslim terrorism suspects would further
alienate Muslims and weaken the wider struggle against Islamic militancy.

By avoiding an immediate crisis for the government, Mr. Brown, 57, appeared to
have won breathing space over the summer to try to rebuild the Labor Party's
dismal political fortunes and to bolster his own position. Opinion polls show
that after barely a year in office, he is the most unpopular British leader of
modern times.

But the murmurings against Mr. Brown within the Labor Party, which must face the
resurgent Conservatives in a general election within two years, are not likely
to be stilled by a vote that the government survived only because of the
last-minute support of the deeply conservative Democratic Unionists. The bloc's
nine members made little secret of the fact that they had traded their votes for
concessions on a range of unrelated issues affecting Northern Ireland, including
a multimillion-dollar subsidy on water rates.

Other concessions offered by Mr. Brown appeared to have had only a marginal
impact on the vote. Among these was a pledge by the home secretary, Jacqui
Smith, to pay compensation, which some lawmakers said would be as much as $6,000
a day, to detainees held beyond 28 days who were released without charge.

The government had already redrafted the terrorism bill to provide a complex
network of safeguards. For suspects to be held beyond 28 days, the government
would have to win parliamentary backing for an order, valid for 30 days,
declaring ''a grave exceptional terrorist threat.'' Any suspect held beyond 28
days would have the right to appeal to a judge.

The new counterterrorism bill was passed three years after the July 7, 2005,
attacks on the London transit system that killed 56 people, including the four
suicide bombers. And it reflects growing fears that underground militant groups
are infiltrating mosques and Muslim community groups across Britain.

Jonathan Evans, the director general of Britain's domestic intelligence service,
MI5, warned last year that there were at least 2,000 people in Britain who posed
a threat to national security because of their support for terrorism, and said
that youths as young as 15 were being recruited by groups sympathetic to Al
Qaeda.

Supporters of the extended 42-day detention limit, including many of the
country's top police officials, have pointed to a wave of terrorism trials since
the 2005 attacks, including one under way in London in which eight men are
accused of a 2006 plot to smuggle explosives in soft drink bottles onto
airliners leaving Heathrow airport, in London, for the United States.

Ms. Smith has said that 65 Islamic terrorists have been convicted in trials held
in Britain in the past year alone.

Police commanders have said that some recent terrorist cases, including the
Heathrow plot, have involved complex investigations reaching into a web of
interlinked terrorist cells, and the decryption of evidence found on hundreds of
seized computers and the examination of thousands of computer disks. In some
cases, the commanders have said, they have brought charges right at the end of
the 28-day limit. Civil liberties groups have said that the crucial evidence in
the cases cited by the police was available much earlier in the detention
period.

The Brown government's decision to push for the longer detention limit is a new
step in the process of strengthening Britain's detention law in recent years.
From 48 hours in 2000, the limit was extended to 14 days in 2003, and to 28 days
in 2006, after the Blair government was defeated in 2005 in a bid to push the
limit to 90 days. After taking office last year, Mr. Brown proposed a limit of
56 days, but settled for 42 days in the face of widespread opposition.

Before the vote, Mr. Brown told the Commons that the government wanted to change
the law ''in a moment of calm,'' rather than wait for a ''a moment of panic''
after a major terrorist attack.

''Our first duty is the protection of national security, and we fail in our duty
if we don't take preventative measures,'' he said.

David Cameron, the Conservative leader, suggested that Mr. Brown was seeking to
reverse his sinking popularity by acting tough on terrorism, even at the cost of
legal safeguards that had taken centuries to develop.

''Isn't it clear that terrorists want to destroy our freedom, and when we trash
our liberties, we do their work for them?'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PARTIES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); RELIGION (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (89%);
VOTERS & VOTING (88%); ELECTIONS (79%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (79%); CAMPAIGNS
& ELECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CONSERVATISM (76%);
LIBERALISM (76%); POPULATION SIZE (74%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (73%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); WATER SUPPLY UTILITIES (71%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: SINN FEIN (55%)

PERSON: GORDON BROWN (89%); JACQUI SMITH (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             624 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Free a Cleric Linked to bin Laden and Wanted in Jordan

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 522 words


A London-based Muslim cleric who was known as Osama bin Laden's spiritual leader
in Europe was released under severe restrictions on Tuesday, after a court
decision that blocked his deportation to Jordan.

The cleric, Abu Qatada, a 48-year-old Palestinian with Jordanian citizenship and
refugee status in Britain, faces a 15-year prison term in Jordan, where he was
convicted in absentia for his connection to bomb attacks in 1998. This spring,
however, the Court of Appeal in Britain halted his deportation, ruling that
British officials could not guarantee Abu Qatada's safety or prevent the use
against him of evidence that was obtained through torture in Jordan.

In Spain, Baltasar Garzon, an investigating magistrate, has also requested his
extradition, on charges that he worked with a Syrian convicted for links to the
2004 Madrid transit bombings to provide support and money to militants of Al
Qaeda.

In Britain, Abu Qatada gained notoriety after calling on British Muslims to
become martyrs for the cause of Islam.

His fiery sermons are believed to have inspired Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who led Al
Qaeda in Mesopotamia until his death in 2006, as well as the terrorists who
attacked Madrid's transit system and those who were responsible for the Sept.
11, 2001, attacks in the United States.

Abu Qatada, whose real name is Omar Mahmoud Othman, was released on bail Tuesday
night from a prison near London. But his ability to interact with the outside
world will be severely limited, under restrictions imposed by a ruling issued
earlier in the day by a special tribunal.

He must surrender his passport, wear an electronic tag that will allow the
authorities to monitor his movements and remain at home 22 hours a day. He must
contact the authorities when he plans to leave home and must stay within
specified boundaries during that time.

He is forbidden to use a cellphone, fax machine, computer (even if it is not
connected to the Internet) or related equipment. He cannot go to a mosque.

Police officers may enter his home and search him and photograph him at any
time.

His access to visitors and ability to conduct banking and financial transactions
will also be drastically limited. And Abu Qatada will be barred from
communicating with an array of radical leaders, including Mr. bin Laden and his
chief deputy, Ayman al-Zawahri.

The ruling to block Abu Qatada's deportation was a setback to efforts by Britain
to deport foreign radical Islamists whom it considers threats to national
security, but against whom there is not enough evidence to press charges.

On Tuesday, the British home secretary, Jacqui Smith, said she was extremely
disappointed with the ruling that set Abu Qatada free. She said the decision
would be appealed in the House of Lords and pledged to ''take all steps
necessary to protect the public.''

Gareth Peirce, who is Abu Qatada's lawyer, is among the human rights activists
who have argued that the deportation strategy violates the rights of foreigners
who could face mistreatment and torture in countries with poor human rights
records like Jordan, Libya, Tunisia and Algeria.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); AL-QAEDA (91%);
TERRORISM (91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); RELIGION (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); EVIDENCE
(89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); EXTRADITION (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%);
MAGISTRATES (77%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); REFUGEES
(77%); APPEALS COURTS (77%); ELECTRONIC MONITOR SENTENCING (77%); INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); BAIL (72%); CITIZENSHIP (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (65%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); JACQUI SMITH (58%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (90%); LONDON, ENGLAND (88%)

COUNTRY: JORDAN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); SPAIN (90%); EUROPE (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); SYRIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             627 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 25, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israelis, Palestinians and the Chasm

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 675 words


To the Editor:

In his June 22 column, ''The Two Israels,'' Nicholas D. Kristof focuses on two
poles of Israeli society -- the Hebron settlers and the left-wing group B'Tselem
-- in an attempt to represent the ''bad'' and the ''good'' within Israel.

Mr. Kristof doesn't point out that aside from these two comparatively tiny
extremes, there exists a third Israel, which includes the vast majority of its
citizens. While this third Israel rarely agrees about social, economic or
political issues, it has reached a broad consensus on the conflict with the
Palestinians.

Israelis have elected governments that seek a Palestinian state, as well as
peaceful resolution of outstanding issues with neighboring Arab parties, for
more than 15 years. At the same time, virtually all Israelis firmly believe that
absent a strong and effective Palestinian partner, Israel must bear ultimate
responsibility for its own security.

Israelis are not happy to send their sons into Palestinian cities, or to hold up
ambulances at checkpoints. Such actions result from an awareness that without
these difficult policies, Israel's towns and cities will again be vulnerable to
deadly terrorism.

It is this reality -- a desire for peace coupled with an insistence on security
-- that animates the minds of most Israelis. It is this reality that Mr. Kristof
unfortunately doesn't mention.

Justin Weitz

Jerusalem, June 22, 2008

To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof describes two faces of Israel, one that he claims oppresses
Palestinians and the other that ''relentlessly'' stands up for Palestinians.

Unfortunately, Mr. Kristof would be hard pressed to find examples of
Palestinians who relentlessly stand up for Israelis, Palestinians who have taken
concrete steps to remove the anti-Semitic textbooks from Palestinian classrooms
or who have prevented Palestinian terrorists from using their homes to launch
rockets at Israeli civilians in Sderot and Ashkelon.

Mr. Kristof is appropriately concerned with the human rights of Palestinians.
Would that he devoted an equally heart-rending column to the human rights of
Israeli citizens who have lived through years of suicide attacks and still
suffer both the physical and psychological damage of rocket and mortar attacks.

The seeds of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict do not begin with the security
measures that Israel has taken to protect its citizens, but in the Palestinian
commitment to destroying Israel that begot these Israeli protective measures.

Israel voluntarily left Gaza nearly three years ago and provided Palestinians
the opportunity to demonstrate their willingness to build a viable economy and
to live in peace with Israel.

It is past time when Palestinians and their apologists stopped blaming Israel
for the conditions under which the Palestinians have chosen to live with their
Israeli neighbors. Jay N. Feldman

Port Washington, N.Y., June 22, 2008

To the Editor:

Having traveled in the West Bank last summer as a humanitarian worker, I can
attest to everything Nicholas D. Kristof described in his column about how
Israelis routinely mistreat and denigrate the Palestinians in Hebron and
throughout the West Bank.

As more Israelis stand up to the daily oppression of the Palestinians, it is
time for more Americans to act as well and challenge our elected officials to
cease their unconditional support of Israel.

Kudos to Mr. Kristof for his strong denunciation of Israeli actions.

Karen J. Longstreth

San Diego, June 23, 2008

To the Editor:

Of course, Nicholas D. Kristof is right: Israel can and should be a paragon of
justice, decency, fairness and peace. The abuses that Mr. Kristof documents,
whether the product of individual initiative or state policy, should never be
tolerated.

Israel should, even unilaterally, seek to reverse the decline in trust between
itself and the Palestinians. But would that there were two Palestines
corresponding to the two Israels that Mr. Kristof has identified!

Carl M. Perkins

Needham, Mass., June 22, 2008

The writer is a rabbi.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (87%); TEXTBOOKS (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (75%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%); CITY
LIFE (67%); CITIES (67%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (66%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%);
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (52%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             628 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 25, 2008 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Sonny Okosuns, 61, Musician With Message

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 569 words


Sonny Okosuns, a Nigerian singer and musician who achieved international stature
by aiming his music -- a catchy, rock-inflected cocktail of funk, reggae,
Afrobeat and more -- at human-rights abuses, died on May 24  in Washington. He
was 61.

Nigerian government officials confirmed his death. Reports in Nigerian
newspapers said the cause was colon cancer.

Mr. Okosuns added the final ''s'' to his surname in adulthood, Africa News
reported. He was referred to by both names.

His boyhood inspirations were Elvis Presley, Cliff Richard and the Beatles, but
at a time when Africans were still fighting for their freedom, he took the
position that songs needed a message. His anthem protesting apartheid in South
Africa, ''Fire in Soweto'' (1977), was probably his best-known song, and others
strongly promoted African unity and black pride.

''Papa's Land'' (1977) took on South African abuses. ''Holy Wars'' (1978)
addressed liberation movements throughout southern Africa.

''All my mates were singing love songs,'' he once said, according to an obituary
in The Independent, in London. ''I was trying to talk about what was happening
to black people.''

In a review of a live performance in The New York Times in 1988, Jon Pareles
said Mr. Okosuns delivered his freedom songs ''with a soul singer's gritty
urgency.''

Most of his  39 albums were made in Nigeria, but some were recorded in England,
France and the United States. In the 1970s and 80s, he toured in the United
States and did tours of Nigeria with the reggae star Jimmy Cliff and others.

In 1985, he joined musicians including Bruce Springsteen, Miles Davis, Ruben
Blades, Run-D.M.C. and Bob Dylan on ''Sun City,'' a benefit record to aid the
fight against apartheid. He was the only African.

Sunny Okosun was born on Jan. 1, 1947, in Benin City, Nigeria. He dropped out
after elementary school. His parents were traditional musicians, but he taught
himself the guitar.

In addition to foreign rock 'n' roll, he was inspired by popular films.
Vanguard, a Nigerian newspaper,  reported that his first recognition came as an
actor. He organized and played with several local bands before starting
Paperback Ltd. in 1972. That group was soon renamed Ozziddi, which means
''message.''

Mr. Okosuns popularized liberation music well ahead of any of his countrymen.
But his message was not radical, like that of Fela Anikulapo Kuti, a dissident
songwriter who directly challenged the government, Mr. Pareles wrote.

Musically, Mr. Okosuns combined Western funk and reggae with traditional
melodies and rhythms. He said he believed that the elements from elsewhere were
simply returning to Africa, where they had  originated. The result was a
zestful, funky strand in what has come to be called world music.

By the late 1980s, Mr. Okosuns found his popularity  ebbing, but he reinvented
himself as a gospel performer called Evangelist Sunny Okosuns. His 1994 album
''Songs of Praise'' sold almost a million copies, The Independent said.

After his death, Africa News reported on his complicated involvement with many
women, at least two of whom he married -- and these simultaneously.

The paper said that toward the end of his life, he took in many children to whom
he was not related and ran his home ''like a commune.'' It said he gave his
surname to many of the children but did not legally adopt them. His immediate
survivors include four children.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Music

PERSON: Sonny Okosuns

CORRECTION-DATE: July 14, 2008



CORRECTION: An obituary on June 25 about the Nigerian singer and musician Sonny
Okosuns referred incorrectly to his role on the 1985 anti-apartheid benefit
recording ''Sun City.'' The Malopoets, a band from Soweto, South Africa, were
also on the recording; Mr. Okosuns was not the only African.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Sonny Okosuns performing around 1984.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSIC (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (90%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); FOLK & WORLD MUSIC (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%);
VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (78%); SONG WRITING (78%); MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (78%);
JAZZ & BLUES (78%); POP & ROCK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS
(73%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (70%); FILM (60%); COLORECTAL CANCER (56%)

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (93%); SOUTH AFRICA (93%);
ENGLAND (79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%); FRANCE (54%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             629 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 26, 2008 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Why Obama Should Visit a Mosque

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg.

LENGTH: 822 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL


I'll admit it: I'm thin-skinned about the kinds of slurs and innuendo about
Muslims that have accompanied Barack Obama's presidential campaign. Years of
being subjected to them while I covered the Bosnian war did that.

We heard the whole gamut back then: how the European Muslims of Bosnia and
Kosovo were really ''Turks'' engaged in a ''demographic genocide'' (through high
birth rates) against Christians, and how they were engaged in a plot to
establish a ''Muslim crescent'' looping up from Turkey through the Balkans, and
how they roasted enemy prisoners alive on spits.

All the while, of course, said Bosnian Muslims were being herded by Christian
Serbs into concentration camps that were centers of torture and systematic
killing of a cruelty Europe believed it had forever banished.

That was before 9/11, of course, and before the Egyptian-born writer who uses
the pseudonym  Bat Yeor popularized the term ''Eurabia'' to express her vision
of a Muslim-infiltrated Europe capitulating Munich-like to Islamism, and before
Pat Buchanan's apocalyptic ''The Death of the West,'' and before Americans were
encouraged in numberless ways to equate Islam with terrorists plotting
Armageddon.

Give Americans the Rorschach test today and what they'll detect in the ink blots
are bearded Muslim ''suiciders.''

I'll admit something else: my own feelings about Islam have veered back and
forth in recent years. Most of us were ignorant when the planes-turned-missiles
struck. We've been searching for bearings: even the word ''jihad'' is variously
described as a holy war against the infidel and an inner struggle for higher
spiritual attainment.

When, in 2005, I talked to Ayaan Hirsi Ali, a Somalian-born Dutch author, in a
meeting in The Hague that had to be organized like an undercover operation
because of threats to her life from Islamic radicals, I was struck by her words:

''Islam is not a religion of peace, or only of peace with other Muslims. We
should acknowledge that it's a very violent religion, instead of pretending,
like Bush, that this violence is not true Islam.''

Certainly, the threat to her made in its name was violent. Certainly, the Koran
is a long way from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Certainly, there
are Koranic verses that Al Qaeda and other extremists have been able to use in
attempts to sanctify their murderous acts. Certainly Islam, politically
expressed, has often proved irreconcilable with modern notions of pluralism,
democracy and women's rights.

But a ''very violent religion?'' No. From Beirut to Baghdad to Cairo to here in
Istanbul, I have often felt the wonders of hospitality and generosity and wisdom
that seem to well from Islam.

At Obama's old school in Jakarta earlier this year, an establishment
scurrilously described as a madrassa'' in all the innuendo, a gentle principal
showed me the large mosque and small Christian prayer room. He then invoked the
words emblazoned on the coat of arms of Indonesia, the world's largest Muslim
country: ''Unity in diversity.''

That's what I saw among the kids at the school, 85 percent of whom are Muslim,
and the rest Christian. That's also what America's supposed to be about, not
religious slurring and stereotyping.

Yet, because he's named Barack Hussein Obama, and because his Kenyan grandfather
was a Muslim, and because his commitment to Israel has been questioned, and
because the U.S. Rorschach test is Muslim-menace mired, he's had to tread
carefully.

As Andrea Elliott chronicled in an important article in The Times, Obama has
visited churches and synagogues, but no mosque. He had to apologize after two
Muslim women wearing head scarves were barred from appearing behind him at a
recent rally in Detroit.

Obama should visit a mosque. He has repeatedly shown his courage during this
campaign; Americans have responded to his intellectual honesty. One of the
important things about him is the knowledge his Kenyan and Indonesian
experiences have given him of Islam as lived, rather than Islam as turned into
monstrous specter.

This enables him to break the monolithic, alienating view of a great world
religion that is as multifaceted as Judaism or Christianity.

I've no doubt that Obama is a strong supporter of Israel. But what I find as
important is that he would come to Islam without prejudice. That's the
precondition for dialogue, whether with Iran or between Israel and Palestine.

Here in Turkey, a Muslim country of myth-dispelling permissiveness, I met with
Joost Lagendijk, the chairman of the Turkish delegation of the European
Parliament. He's Dutch. What he hears at home is: ''Fear of Islam and fear of
Muslims and fear of immigrants.''

Fear-mongering about Islam is a global industry. It thrives on ignorance. Obama
has a unique power to break the cycle, not least by emboldening moderate Muslims
to denounce terror. Nothing would do more in the long run for the security of
the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); TERRORISM (88%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS
(78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%);
TORTURE (74%); WRITERS (72%); BIRTHS & BIRTH RATES (71%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(70%); WOMEN (60%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (60%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); AYAAN HIRSI ALI (51%)

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (91%); CAIRO, EGYPT (56%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (53%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); EGYPT (79%);
NETHERLANDS (58%)

LOAD-DATE: June 26, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             636 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 4, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Italy: Census of Gypsies Raises Fears

BYLINE: By ELISABETTA POVOLEDO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 90 words


The government's plans to fingerprint Gypsies living in camps in Italy,
including children, drew criticism from a Catholic human rights group in Rome
that warned that it would set a dangerous precedent. ''We are very worried about
discrimination according to race or religion,'' said Marco Impagliazzo,
president of the group, the Community of Sant'Egidio.  As part of a broader
crackdown on crime, the Italian government has pledged to take a census of all
Roma and Sinti people, as they prefer to be known, who are living in about 700
camps.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ROMANI PEOPLE (88%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); RELIGION (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%)

CITY: ROME, ITALY (91%)

COUNTRY: ITALY (91%)

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             642 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 17, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecuting Genocide

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 814 words


Many aid workers and diplomats suffered a panic attack when the chief prosecutor
of the International Criminal Court sought an arrest warrant this week for the
president of Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, for committing genocide. They feared
that Mr. Bashir would retaliate by attacking peacekeepers and humanitarian
workers.

But instead of wringing our hands, we should be applauding. The prosecution for
genocide is a historic step that also creates an opportunity in Sudan,
particularly if China can now be induced and shamed into suspending the transfer
of weapons used to slaughter civilians in Darfur.

If China continues  --  it is the main supplier of arms used in the genocide  --
then it may itself be in violation of the 1948 Genocide Convention. Article III
of the convention declares that one of the punishable crimes is ''complicity in
genocide''; that's the crime that China may be committing if it goes on
supplying arms used for genocide, even after the I.C.C. has begun criminal
proceedings against the purchaser of those weapons.

Beijing seems unabashed. Incredibly, China and Russia are acting as Mr. Bashir's
lawyers, quietly urging the United Nations Security Council to intervene to
delay criminal proceedings against him. Such a delay is a bad idea, unless Mr.
Bashir agrees to go into exile.

Still, China does care about its image. Beijing supplied arms to Pol Pot's
genocidal regime in Cambodia but later distanced itself from the Khmer Rouge as
international criticism grew. China also supported Slobodan Milosevic until he
was indicted, but then almost immediately let him hang out to dry.

One test of China's attitudes will be whether President Bashir is welcomed at
the Olympic Games' opening ceremony next month. (If President Bush is not
careful, he may find himself seated at the ceremony between Mr. Bashir and
Robert Mugabe.)

If Beijing reacts to Mr. Bashir the same way it did to its other war criminal
pals and suspends arms transfers, then there is real hope for Sudan. If Mr.
Bashir feared losing his weapons and spare parts, he would be willing to make
significant concessions that would make a peace deal more likely  --  and
ultimately an enforceable peace agreement is the only way that Darfur can
recover.

According to United Nations data, 88 percent of Sudan's imported small arms come
from China  --  and those Chinese sales of small arms increased 137-fold between
2001 and 2006. China has also sold military aircraft to Sudan, and the BBC
reported this week that two Chinese-made A-5 Fantan fighter aircraft were
spotted on a Darfur runway last month. The BBC also said that China is training
Sudanese military pilots in Sudan.

Likewise, Human Rights First, in a report on Chinese weapons sales to Sudan,
suggests that Chinese engineers supervise arms production at the Giad industrial
complex outside Khartoum. Chinese military companies have also helped set up
arms factories outside Khartoum at Kalakla, Chojeri and Bageer.

Instead of lashing out in reaction to the prospect of an arrest warrant, Mr.
Bashir may be forced to take the opposite tack: He may become more cooperative.

Mr. Bashir first used brutal methods  --  militias and a proxy invasion of a
neighboring country  --  in his long war against South Sudan. He didn't pay a
steep price, so he adopted the same scorched-earth policy in the Nuba Mountains.
When he again went unpunished, he quite rationally adopted the same measures to
suppress insurgency in Darfur.

Now, finally, we have a stick that has Mr. Bashir alarmed, and that gives us
leverage. So far, Mr. Bashir is responding by trying to win support from the
African Union and the Arab League, and that may restrain him from killing and
raping too many aid workers and peacekeepers in the coming months. It may even
induce him to cooperate with the U.N. in permitting more peacekeepers.

Unfortunately, the Arab League's secretary general, Amr Moussa, who quite
properly denounces abuses when suffered by Palestinians, has chosen to side with
Mr. Bashir rather than the hundreds of thousands of Muslims killed in Darfur. If
Israel bombed some desert in Darfur, Arab leaders might muster some indignation
about violence there.

A final thought: this prosecution for genocide offers a hint of historical
progress.

Throughout most of history, genocide was simply what happened to losers in a
conflict. In the Bible, if we are to take it literally, there are cases when God
gives a nod to genocide (''Now go and completely destroy the entire Amalekite
nation  --  men, women, children, babies''). Such divinely sanctioned ethnic
cleansing reflected the norms of war for much of history, finally beginning to
yield in the last couple of centuries.

Now this prosecutor's pursuit of a head of state suggests that human standards
truly are changing  --  and that is a prerequisite for ending genocide itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); ARMS TRADE (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); IMPORT TRADE
(78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (74%); OLYMPICS (72%); SALES FIGURES (69%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (66%); PEACE PROCESS (64%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (63%); AIRPORT
RUNWAYS (63%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); SUDAN (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); CAMBODIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             644 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 17, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

McCain's Superfuture

BYLINE: By GAIL COLLINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 824 words


John McCain gave a speech this week  describing what the world would look like
after his first term in office.

It looked great! The terrorists are on the run, Iraq is a ''functioning
democracy,'' and back home the economy is terrific, thanks to a combination of
business tax cuts and savings gleaned from eliminating useless government
programs. For average citizens, the tax code has been made so simple and
undemanding that filling out I.R.S. forms would probably become an enjoyable
family activity, like miniature golf.

It was a little like those old Victorian novels in which the hero visits the
future and discovers that by 2000, America has become perfect. Not only have
wars and poverty been wiped out, houses have self-washing windows and everyone
gets free tickets to great sporting events and concerts, for which good seats
are always available at the last minute.

The most intriguing part of the McCain vision is the League of Democracies. This
is his plan for a planetary alliance of economically powerful, democratically
governed nations whose leaders would work together to protect human rights and
combat terrorism. The proper policy response, no doubt, is: what about the
United Nations? But all I really want to know is: will there be uniforms?

Jan. 1, 2013: President McCain celebrated the multitudinous achievements of his
first four years in office with special friends in the White House. The tiny
American contingent of troops still stationed in Iraq joined the festivities by
satellite from a golf course in Baghdad, where they have been spending their
time since the war was won.

Members of the League of Democracies opened the New Year's ceremony with their
pledge to ''fight a never-ending battle for truth, justice and the
small-d-democratic way.'' Wearing their colorful terrorism-fighting costumes
were French President Nicolas Sarkozy, now better known to the planet by his nom
de guerre of Pate Man, and Germany's green-haired Angela (EcoGirl) Merkel,
accompanied as always by her sidekick, Icy the Polar Bear. Silvio Berlusconi of
Italy wore a business suit, but still wowed the crowd with his trademark power
of shooting molten-gold bullion at his assailants.

On the one hand, it's always helpful to hear a candidate's broad vision. On the
other, the vision loses some of its import if you can't get there from here.
Pressed for details on his foreign-policy strategies, McCain said the secret was
''setting goals and achieving.'' You can just hear the Democrats of 2013 kicking
themselves: Goals and achievements! Why didn't we think of that?

While McCain was unveiling his great expectations in Ohio, back in Washington
Congress was voting by overwhelming majorities to pass an enormous, wasteful,
ridiculous farm bill that provides massive subsidies to wealthy people who grow
wheat, corn, soybeans, rice and cotton -- along, of course, with Senator Mitch
McConnell's famous tax break for breeders of thoroughbred horses. McCain said
he'd veto the bill if he were president, a threat that loses some of its wow
quotient when the bill in question just passed both chambers by veto-proof
majorities. (Both Hillary Clinton and Barack Obama dived into the tank and
supported the package.)

Among the smaller subsidies was one for goat mohair. This was a target for the
Clinton administration's big efficiency drive, partly because the nation's
well-being does not really require a secure supply of mohair, and partly because
it has the disadvantage of sounding silly. Mohair price supports were eliminated
with great fanfare and effort. Then Congress promptly reinstated them as an
emergency measure. (I have fond memories of Lamar Smith, a Texas Republican,
yelping: ''Mohair is popular! I have a mohair sweater! It's my favorite one!'')
Special breaks for mohair were cemented back into agriculture policy under
George Bush, even though Bush really did seem to want to do something about
wasteful farm spending.

All of which explains why presidents who run for office promising to cut the fat
out of the budget wind up sighing and learning to live with goats on the dole.

The farm bill is one big hairball of accommodations and trade-offs, and cheers
to McCain for taking a principled stand against it. But unless he's been serving
on a U.S. Senate in an alternate universe, he knows that getting rid of even a
small sliver of the unnecessary programs beloved by somebody's constituents
would be a Herculean challenge. It would be good to have a president willing to
try. It would be scary to have one who builds his entire economic plan on the
presumption that by 2013 he could wring ''great reductions in government
spending'' that way.

And if his domestic vision is that far removed from reality, what does that say
about the goals-and-achievements stepladder to international peace and harmony
via military interventions and a League of Democracies?

Although if the costumes were neat enough. ...

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); TAX
LAW (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TAXES & TAXATION (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%);
SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (75%); GOLF (75%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (74%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (72%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (69%);
SPORTS & RECREATION (68%); SPORTS (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(66%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (90%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (50%); SILVIO BERLUSCONI (50%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (78%); FRANCE (78%)

LOAD-DATE: May 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             649 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2008 Saturday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Where's Our Disgust?

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 143 words


To the Editor:

''Time Runs Out for an Afghan Held by U.S.'' (front page, Feb. 5) sheds new
light on the human rights violations the United States government continues to
perpetrate in Guantanamo Bay.

In the meantime, our nation's political leadership and citizens in whose name
this continuing outrage is carried out barely emit a whimper of disgust.

Imagine our reaction if this were a story about an American citizen who was
apprehended by another government, spirited out of the country and held for more
than five years without any meaningful opportunity to challenge the dubious
accusations against him while dying a slow death.

We'd rightly condemn such behavior as inhumane and barbaric, which is what the
rest of the world sees in Guantanamo Bay. American values?

Larry Cox Executive Director, Amnesty International USA New York, Feb. 5, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: November 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             651 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2008 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Where's Our Disgust?

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 142 words


To the Editor:

''Time Runs Out for an Afghan Held by U.S.'' (front page, Feb. 5) sheds new
light on the human rights violations the United States government continues to
perpetrate in Guantanamo Bay.

In the meantime, our nation's political leadership and citizens in whose name
this continuing outrage is carried out barely emit a whimper of disgust.

Imagine our reaction if this were a story about an American citizen who was
apprehended by another government, spirited out of the country and held for more
than five years without any meaningful opportunity to challenge the dubious
accusations against him while dying a slow death.

We'd rightly condemn such behavior as inhumane and barbaric, which is what the
rest of the world sees in Guantanamo Bay. American values?

Larry Cox Executive Director, Amnesty International USA New York, Feb. 5, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2009


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             653 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Neighbor vs. Neighbor

SECTION: Section RE; Column 0; Real Estate Desk; CORRECTION; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 94 words


A report in the Big Deal column last Sunday about lawyers who sue their
neighbors in apartment buildings misstated the circumstances under which lawyers
can be refused housing in New York City. Although a 1977 court decision upheld a
landlord's right to refuse to rent to a lawyer, the city's human rights law was
amended in 1986 to bar discrimination in housing on the basis of a lawful
occupation. Co-op and condominium boards may, however, reject lawyers and other
applicants based on specific actions -- for instance, a pattern of filing
lawsuits against neighbors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); RENTAL PROPERTY (88%); RESIDENTIAL CO-OWNERSHIP (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(88%); MULTIFAMILY REAL ESTATE (88%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (87%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); RESIDENTIAL COOPERATIVES (85%);
RESIDENTIAL CONDOMINIUMS (85%); CONDOMINIUMS (85%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (84%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: November 18, 2009


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             656 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 30, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Trial of Chief of Milosevic's Secret Police Begins

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 697 words


Slobodan Milosevic is dead, but a new trial touching the heart of his regime has
begun in The Hague.

The prosecution at the United Nations war crimes tribunal of Jovica Stanisic,
the former chief of Mr. Milosevic's secret police and a man once considered the
second most powerful official in Serbia, started on Monday.

During Serbia's wars against Croatia and Bosnia in the 1990s, Mr. Stanisic was
believed to be a key strategist of campaigns, often fought through covert police
actions, that terrorized and killed many civilians.

Also on trial is Franko Simatovic, the chief of the secret police's special
operations unit, which was in charge of training covert groups and directing
them in the field. Prosecutors say the two men acted on direct orders from Mr.
Milosevic, Serbia's president, who trusted his secret police more than his
military during the wars.

The defendants were arrested in 2003. Each faces five counts of murder,
persecution, forced deportations and inhuman acts during the Balkan wars. Both
men have pleaded not guilty.

Prosecutors have said that in the spring of 1991, Mr. Stanisic created a large
covert fighting force that was like a parallel army. They say that under the
oversight of the Serbian Ministry of Interior, fighters were trained at more
than two dozen camps, with many posing as volunteers. They fought in Bosnia and
Croatia, prosecutors said, often acting as hit men who moved ahead of military
columns to terrorize, expel and kill thousands of non-Serb civilians from lands
that the Milosevic regime intended to be for Serbs only.

The operations of the secret police in Croatia and Bosnia have not been fully
exposed in court and have been little debated in Serbia. The covert units were
designed to give the Serbian government and its military deniability for some of
the most brutal campaigns against civilians.

At the tribunal, several other trials involving high-level officials are under
way or awaited. But lawyers and human rights groups are following the case
against the two secret police chiefs with special interest because of their
close ties to Mr. Milosevic. His trial ended inconclusively when he died in his
cell in 2006.

There are many links between the Milosevic trial and the charges against his
secret police officials, and judges have decided that some of the secret
testimony and documents from the Milosevic proceedings, which had remained
confidential, can now be used and disclosed at this trial.

Mr. Simatovic, 58, was in court on Tuesday as prosecutors concluded their long
opening statement. But Mr. Stanisic, 57, has not appeared at any recent
hearings, because he has been diagnosed with kidney problems and severe
depression. After postponing the trial four times because of his illness and
medical treatment, judges ordered a video link installed in prison for Mr.
Stanisic. But prison officials said he had refused to watch the proceedings.

The presiding judge, Patrick Robinson, said the trial could start, despite a
doctor's warning that the case ''could harm the health of the accused.'' He said
Mr. Stanisic's condition would be closely monitored.

Soon after the long-awaited trial began, however, new delays loomed. Mr.
Stanisic's lawyer, Geert-Jan Knoops, said that he wanted to resign from the
case; he said that requiring his client to watch the proceedings via video from
a cellblock was unique in international law.

Prosecutors said they would present evidence that a number of violent
paramilitary groups like Arkan's Tigers, the Scorpions, Frenki's men and others
that rampaged through towns and villages, expelling and killing non-Serbs -- and
often looting cars, cattle and valuables -- were not rogue bands of criminals or
volunteers, but well-trained, well-equipped and well-paid fighters connected
with the secret police.

''Milosevic was regularly informed of all activities through Stanisic and
Simatovic,'' the lead prosecutor, Dermot Groome, said on Tuesday in his opening
statement.

The prosecution is expected to call 90 witnesses, the first of whom began to
testify Tuesday. The witness appeared anonymously, his voice scrambled because
he said he feared for his safety.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); ARMIES (78%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAWYERS (75%);
ARRESTS (73%); DEPORTATION (73%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (71%); ARMED FORCES (68%);
MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (60%); UROGENITAL DISORDERS & INJURIES (60%);
MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (93%); NETHERLANDS (88%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2009


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             659 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Explosions On Buses In China Kill 2 And Injure 14

BYLINE: By JIM YARDLEY; Zhang Jing contributed research for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 737 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Two public buses exploded during the Monday morning rush hour in the city of
Kunming, killing at least two people and injuring 14 others in what the
authorities described as deliberate attacks as China is tightening security
nationwide and warning of possible terrorist threats in advance of next month's
Olympic Games.

The blasts struck at 7:05  and 8:10 a.m., state media reported. Public security
officials in Kunming, the capital of Yunnan Province in southwestern China,
provided no information about whether the explosions were coordinated, nor did
the authorities say whether they were the work of terrorist groups or
disgruntled individuals.

By Monday afternoon, the police were still searching for suspects. Checkpoints
were set up on highways, while the police were tightening security at Kunming's
airport and train terminal, according to the Web site of the provincial public
security bureau. A photograph of one bus posted online showed shards  from a
shattered window spread across a street but also suggested that the blast had
not been powerful enough to inflict catastrophic damage.

China has experienced a spate of riots and public protests as the country
prepares for the Aug. 8 opening ceremonies of the Beijing Olympics.

In recent years, public protests have become common in China, especially in
rural areas where farmers have demonstrated against illegal land seizures and
official corruption. But the authorities are trying to tamp down embarrassing
outbursts ahead of the Olympics and have ordered local authorities to address
local grievances and block petitioners from coming to Beijing.

As many as 30,000 people rioted in Weng'an County, in Guizhou Province, in late
June, in response to allegations that the local police had mishandled the
investigation of the death of a teenage girl. Last week, a mob of 100 angry
protesters attacked a village police station in Guangdong Province in an
uprising over allegations of police malfeasance.

Last weekend, the police in a rural region of Yunnan Province killed two people
after a violent clash with 500 rubber farmers. The farmers, armed with knives,
injured 41 police officers and damaged several police cars in a confrontation
rooted in a long-running dispute between farmers and a local rubber company,
state media reported. Provincial officials are investigating the attack.

Beyond the escalating internal disturbances, the authorities are warning that
foreign terrorist groups may be plotting to disrupt the Olympics. Chinese
officials have singled out the Eastern Turkistan Islamic Movement and say they
destroyed 41 training bases and arrested 82 people.

''Intelligence reports show the group has been planning to carry out terrorist
attacks during the Games,'' Ma Zhenchuan, director of Olympic security, told
China Central Television.

Some human rights advocates say China is exaggerating the threat posed by the
group to justify a broad security crackdown in Xinjiang, the restive western
region that is home to the country's Muslim Uighur population.

In Kunming, the first bus blast killed Wang Dezhi, a 30-year-old woman, while
injuring 10 other people, according to the provincial public security Web site.
The second explosion was  65 minutes later on a  bus  following the same route.
In this blast, a 26-year-old man, Chen Shifei, died and four people were
injured.

Witnesses on one bus told Chinese newspapers that a short man in a black shirt
and gray pants boarded the bus before the explosion and sat behind the driver.
After the bus stopped and then prepared to get  going again, the man  jumped up
and yelled for the driver to let him off, the witnesses said.

Witnesses told a joint reporting team from the Yunnan Information Daily and the
Southern Newspaper Group that the man had left a black leather bag on the bus.
About 30 seconds later, the bus exploded. Witnesses on the second bus told
Chinese journalists they had also seen a black bag.

Ms. Wang was returning with her husband to celebrate the birthday of their
5-year-old daughter. Her husband suffered minor injuries in the explosion.

With more than  three million residents, Kunming is a temperate city that serves
as a gateway to some of China's most scenic areas in outlying Yunnan Province.
It serves as a transportation hub to Southeast Asia and is known for its high
percentage of minority communities in the province's mountainous regions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: One of two buses damaged in separate explosions in Kunming, in
southwest China, on Monday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SUMMER OLYMPICS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
RIOTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (88%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES
(78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (75%); MISCONDUCT (72%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); CORRUPTION
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); RAIL STATIONS & TERMINALS (68%); PETITIONS (66%);
RUBBER & SILICONE (61%); RELIGION (60%); WEB SITES (54%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (94%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); YUNNAN, CHINA (93%);
GUANGDONG, CHINA (79%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%); GUIZHOU, CHINA (79%); SOUTH CHINA
(73%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             660 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

The Justice Department and Sex Trafficking

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; LETTERS; Pg.

LENGTH: 477 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Justice Department, Blind to Slavery,'' by John R. Miller (Op-Ed, July
11):

Every year at least 14,500 to 17,500 people are trafficked into the United
States. From the passage of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000
through 2007, the Department of Justice has undertaken only about 110 sex
trafficking prosecutions. This is a result of the onerous standard of proof
required by the act  to convict human traffickers.

Unfortunately Senators Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Sam Brownback have refused to
support the amendments that would make this law meaningful, which were in the
trafficking bill that passed the House of Representatives last year by a vote of
405 to 2.

As the Senate Judiciary Committee member from New York, a major destination and
transit point for traffickers, Senator Charles E. Schumer should play the
leadership role on this bill that Representative Carolyn B. Maloney played in
the House, and insist that the criminal justice trafficking provisions contained
in the House bill be included in the Senate version. Otherwise, human slavery in
the United States will continue to flourish.

Kenneth Franzblau Trafficking Program Director Equality Now New York, July 11,
2008

To the Editor:

John R. Miller advocates several major reforms in the government's enforcement
of trafficking laws, changes that at first glance seem quite sensible.

Yet the devil is in the details, as many of the changes would violate citizens'
rights, undermine the established principle of criminal intent and shift the
burden of proof away from the state. One example is the notion of prosecuting
Americans who buy sex abroad, even when they do so in a country where
prostitution is legal. It is no wonder that the Justice Department is opposed,
as Mr. Miller reports, to some of these departures from justice.

Ever since he was appointed to run the State Department's trafficking office,
Mr. Miller has made sweeping generalizations about sex workers that reflect a
staunch prohibitionist ideology, myths that are not supported by research.

It is not the case, as Mr. Miller claims, that the average age of entry into
prostitution is 14, nor is it true that ''most prostitutes are poor, young,
abused, harassed, raped, beaten and under the control of pimps against their
will.'' Such claims are based on unrepresentative samples of the most desperate
sector of the sex trade, and are meant to shock the reader and to generate
support for zero-tolerance policies and stiff penalties for those involved in
sex work.

To call prostitution the ''oldest form of abuse'' is a catchy slogan but a
fallacy, as decades of research show.

RONALD WEITZER  Arlington, Va., July 11, 2008

The writer is a professor of sociology at George Washington University and
author of ''Sex for Sale: Prostitution, Pornography and the Sex Industry.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (92%); SEX TRAFFICKING (91%); LEGISLATION (91%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); SLAVERY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
PROSTITUTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%);
WRITERS (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); FINES &
PENALTIES (75%); CRIMINAL LAW (75%); PORNOGRAPHY (71%); BURDENS OF PROOF (69%);
APPOINTMENTS (68%); SOCIOLOGY (61%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%); EQUALITY NOW (55%)

PERSON: JOE BIDEN (57%); SAMUEL BROWNBACK (55%); CHARLES SCHUMER (55%); CAROLYN
MALONEY (54%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             663 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Despite Rebel Losses, Cocaine Sustains War in Rural Colombia

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1672 words

DATELINE: PASTO, Colombia


Along with Colombia's successes in fighting leftist rebels this year, cities
like Medellin have staged remarkable recoveries. And in the upscale districts of
Bogota, the capital, it is almost possible to forget that the country remains
mired in a devilishly complex four-decade-old war.

But it is a different story in the mountains of the Narino department. Here, and
elsewhere in large parts of the countryside, the violence and fear remain
unrelenting, underscoring the difficulty of ending a war fueled by a drug trade
that is proving immune to American-financed efforts to stop it.

Soaring coca cultivation, forced disappearances, assassinations, the
displacement of families and the planting of land mines stubbornly persist, the
hallmarks of a backlands conflict that threatens to drag on for years, even
without the once spectacular actions of guerrillas in Colombia's large cities.

For those caught in the cross-fire, talk of a possible endgame for the war seems
decidedly premature, even given the deaths this year of several top guerrilla
leaders, the desertion of hundreds of rebels each month and the rescue of prized
hostages like the former presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt.

''The armed groups are like malaria, evolving to resist eradication and killing
with efficiency,'' Antonio Navarro Wolff, governor of Narino and a former
guerrilla from the defunct M-19 group, said in an interview. ''If anything,
Narino shows the guerrillas may have lost their chance for victory but not their
ability to cause suffering.''

Today, a dizzying array of armed groups lord over the farmlands of Narino. These
include not only leftist guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or FARC, but also right-wing militias operating under names like the
Black Eagles or the Peasant Self-Defense Forces of Narino.

Their presence reflects the symbiotic nature of the armed groups and the drug
trade, each drawing strength from the other.

In Narino, flanked by the Pacific Ocean on the west and Ecuador on the south,
coca growers have nimbly sidestepped almost a decade of fumigation efforts by
reorganizing industrial-size farms into smaller plots that are much harder to
find and spray from the air. They are taxed and protected by forces on the
various sides of the conflict.

The United Nations reported in June that coca cultivation in Colombia surged 27
percent in 2007 to 244,634 acres, the first significant increase in four years.
Narino had the largest increase of any Colombian department, an administrative
district, up 30 percent to 50,061 acres.

The expansion has allowed Colombia to remain by far the world's largest coca
producer and the supplier of 90 percent of the cocaine consumed in the United
States.

It has also made the drug-fueled conflict a resilient virus in large pockets of
the country, with double-digit increases in coca cultivation in at least three
other departments, Putumayo, Meta and Antioquia. In Narino, almost every week,
government officials, Roman Catholic leaders or aid workers report actions by
the rebels or paramilitary groups.

In the last week of June, four schoolteachers in remote areas of the province
were killed by a FARC column called Mariscal Sucre, one of three units of the
FARC that are active in the area. The rebels claimed that the schoolteachers,
all of them recently posted to remote schoolhouses by Roman Catholic officials,
were army informants.

''The guerrillas left the bodies of two of the teachers in front of their
schoolhouses, preventing their families from giving them a Christian burial''
because the families were too afraid to collect the bodies, said Eduardo Munoz,
human rights director at Simana, the Narino teachers union.

Just weeks before, in April, the FARC knocked out power for 300,000 residents
along the Pacific coast with an attack on an electrical station. Colombian
soldiers also found eight fuel-processing depots -- holding 77,000 barrels of
oil -- used by the guerrillas for fuel and to process coca into cocaine in
makeshift labs.

Nationwide, the FARC still collects $200 million to $300 million a year by
taxing coca farmers and coordinating cocaine smuggling networks, according to
Bruce Bagley, a specialist on the Andean drug war who teaches at the University
of Miami.

That is down from $500 million earlier this decade, Mr. Bagley said, but it is
still enough to finance the FARC after recent desertions and killings that have
thinned its ranks to about 9,000 from 17,000.

Similarly, while the FARC's share of the cocaine trade has declined, Colombia's
share of the world cocaine production has remained stable at about 60 percent.
That means opportunities for new players like Colombia's resurgent right-wing
militias and small-scale armed gangs taking the place of disassembled cartels.

''A few battles won is not a war won,'' Mr. Bagley said. ''The FARC and other
groups will survive as long as there are safe havens, the flow of drug money and
large, remote regions unconnected to the broader economy.''

One such area is El Rosario, a municipality three hours from Pasto, the capital
of Narino, by four-wheel drive on winding switchbacks along the spine of the
Andes.

A decade ago, coca was a rare crop in the area, farmers in El Rosario said.
Then, eradication efforts under Plan Colombia, the $5 billion counterinsurgency
and antinarcotics effort financed by the United States, forced the migration of
coca cultivation here from other parts of the country.

To them, the eradication effort has simply pushed the coca -- and the groups
that feed off it -- into ever-more isolated parts of the country. Now that coca
has become their livelihood, too, the farmers are determined to hold on to it.

At one remote spot, a 45-minute hike from a section of the  dirt road, Liborio
Rodriguez maintains a small coca field on a slope that has been subjected to
aerial spraying and direct eradication efforts in recent years.

''I know nothing is eternal, but I am not leaving this land,'' said Mr.
Rodriguez, 41, while he and half a dozen laborers harvested leaves off coca
bushes under the hot sun, pausing to sip chicha, an alcoholic drink made from
corn. ''After everything we have been subjected to, I feel that I can survive
here.''

He and the other farmers say they have developed strategies to protect their
coca bushes, planting smaller plots under canopies of trees and coating their
leaves with  sugar cane juice, thought to prevent phosphate-based herbicides
from sticking.

In an example of unintended consequences, the phosphates repelled from coca
bushes may soak into the ground and serve as a fertilizer, some botanists say,
helping increase coca yields.

Other coca farmers have developed hybrid varieties of coca that grow lower to
the ground and can be harvested four to six times a year, almost double previous
levels.

Faced with the unexpected surge in coca cultivation in Narino and other areas,
Colombian officials take comfort in findings by the United Nations that cocaine
production in the country is believed to have remained stable in 2007, at about
660 tons.

And they say cultivation could have been much larger than the 543,630 acres
measured last year were it not for the aerial spraying and manual eradication
efforts, combined with strides in intercepting cocaine shipments and military
victories against the FARC in numerous rural redoubts.

Yet while interdiction levels are promising, the growth of coca cultivation also
promises the FARC and rival groups new opportunities to profit from the cocaine
trade.

One paramilitary group, the Black Eagles, has so terrified residents of El
Rosario that they will hardly utter the militia's name when discussing how it
extorts payments from them each month.

Elsewhere in Narino, residents similarly report that paramilitary groups are
thriving, despite government efforts to demobilize more than 30,000 paramilitary
combatants in recent years.

These militias, sometimes in camouflaged uniforms -- bearing the letters A.C.N.,
the initials in Spanish for Peasant Self-Defense Forces of Narino, or O.N.G.,
for New Generation Organization -- have uprooted villagers near the Pacific
coast, according to testimony collected by aid workers, as paramilitary groups,
guerrillas and small-scale drug gangs struggled for control of cocaine smuggling
routes.

Government figures suggest that displacements are declining in Narino, with
about 7,500 people forced from their homes so far this year in comparison with
almost 30,000 in all of 2007. But other agencies paint a more distressing
picture.

Codhes, a leading human rights group, said overall displacements in Colombia
climbed 38 percent last year to more than 300,000, with Narino emerging as ''the
center of Colombia's humanitarian crisis,'' said Jorge Rojas, the group's
director.

Seemingly marginal organizations persist in pockets of rural distress. Another
leftist rebel group, the National Liberation Army, or E.L.N., has at least 100
combatants in the area, local officials and aid workers said.

A FARC rival that has been vastly diminished in recent years, the E.L.N.
normally avoids involvement in the cocaine trade. But its riches are so
tempting, community leaders say, that a rogue column of the group in Narino,
Comuneros del Sur, has secured a new lease on life by financing itself through
drug deals.

In June, three boys from the Awa indigenous group walked into a rural area
planted with land mines by the E.L.N., community leaders said. The boys, ages 8,
12 and 15, were instantly killed, placing them among 31 victims of land mines in
Narino this year, a grim figure that includes 19 civilians, according to
Colombia's government.

''Our view is that all sides are not weakening but getting stronger,'' said an
Awa leader, asking not to be identified out of fear of retribution from the
rebels. ''Where else in the world can the authorities claim to be winning when
their opponents continue planting both coca and mines?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Eradication efforts elsewhere have pushed coca cultivation into
rural El Rosario, where workers processed coca leaves recently. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
SCOTT DALTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); COCAINE (90%); RURAL COMMUNITIES
(89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); ASSASSINATION (78%); LANDMINES (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); FARMERS & RANCHERS (76%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); INTERVIEWS (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (52%)

CITY: MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (91%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (90%)

STATE: PACIFIC OCEAN (52%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             665 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 1, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Stop Prostitution at Its Root

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 183 words


To the Editor:

In ''Prostitution and Prevention'' (editorial, July 29), you address the growing
problem of child prostitution in the United States. You insightfully point out
the hidden role of the men who drive the sex trade.

We at the Coalition Against Trafficking in Women have long called for the
adoption of Sweden's legal approach to prostitution and sex trafficking, which
criminalizes the demand for commercial sexual exploitation. Sweden's law
represents an inspired paradigm shift from a law-and-order focus to a human
rights approach.

This reflects the growing understanding that prostitution is not a victimless
crime; the prostituted are its victims. Prostitution and sex trafficking are
highly political and can and must be ended in our lifetime.

This can be achieved by creating the social, political, legal and cultural
conditions that are hostile to the commercial sexual exploitation of others.
Failing that, we will continue to see the expansion of this modern-day slavery.

Norma Ramos

Co-executive Director

Coalition Against Trafficking in Women

New York, July 29, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION (92%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); ILLEGAL
PROSTITUTION (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); SLAVERY (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             667 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ragtag Taliban Show Tenacity In Afghanistan

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1656 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


Six years after being driven from power, the Taliban are demonstrating a
resilience and a ferocity that are raising alarm here, in Washington and in
other NATO capitals, and engendering a fresh round of soul-searching over how a
relatively ragtag insurgency has managed to keep the world's most powerful
armies at bay.

The mounting toll inflicted by the insurgents, including nine American soldiers
killed in a single attack last month, has turned Afghanistan into a deadlier
battlefield than Iraq and refocused the attention of America's military
commanders and its presidential contenders on the Afghan war.

But the objectives of the war have become increasingly uncertain in a conflict
where Taliban leaders say they do not feel the need to control territory, at
least for now, or to outfight American and NATO forces to defeat them -- only to
outlast them in a region that is in any case their home.

The Taliban's tenacity, military officials and analysts say, reflects their
success in maintaining a cohesive leadership since being driven from power in
Afghanistan, their ability to attract a continuous stream of recruits and their
advantage in having a haven across the border in Pakistan.

While the Taliban enjoy such a sanctuary, they will be very hard to beat,
military officials say, and American officials have stepped up pressure on
Pakistan in recent weeks to take more action against the Taliban and other
militants there. That included a visit last month  by a top official of the
Central Intelligence Agency who, American officials say, confronted senior
Pakistani leaders about ties between the country's powerful spy service and
militants operating in Pakistan's tribal areas.

Pakistani officials say those ties, which stretch back decades, have been
broken. But there is no doubt that the Taliban continue to use Pakistan to
train, recruit, regroup and resupply their insurgency.

The advantage of that haven in Pakistan, even beyond the lawless tribal realms,
has allowed the Taliban leadership to exercise uninterrupted control of its
insurgency through the same clique of mullahs and military commanders who ran
Afghanistan as a theocracy and harbored Osama bin Laden until they were driven
from power in December 2001.

The Taliban's reclusive leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, a one-eyed cleric and war
veteran, is widely believed by Afghan and Western officials to be based in
Quetta, the capital of Baluchistan Province in Pakistan, near the border with
Afghanistan.

He runs a shadow government, complete with military, religious and cultural
councils, and has appointed officials and commanders to virtually every Afghan
province and district, just as he did when he ruled Afghanistan, the Taliban
claim.

He oversees his movement through a grand council of 10 people, the Taliban
spokesman, Zabiullah Mujahed, said in a telephone interview.

Mullah Bradar, one of the Taliban's most senior and ruthless commanders, who has
been cited by human rights groups for committing massacres, serves as his first
deputy. He passes down Mullah Omar's commands and makes all military decisions,
including how foreign fighters are deployed, according to Waheed Muzhta, a
former Taliban Foreign Ministry official who lives in Kabul and follows the
progress of the Taliban through his own research.

The Taliban even produce their own magazine, Al Somood, published online in
Arabic, where details of their leadership structure can be found, he said.

But while the Taliban may be united politically, the insurgency remains poorly
coordinated at operational and strategic levels, said Gen. David D. McKiernan,
commander of the NATO force in Afghanistan.

Taliban forces cannot hold territory, and they cannot defeat NATO forces in a
direct fight, other NATO officials say. They also note that scores of senior and
midlevel Taliban commanders have been killed over the past year, weakening the
insurgents, especially in the south.

Three senior members of the grand council were killed in 2007, and others have
been detained, Mr. Muzhta said. The military council has lost 6 of its 29
members in recent years, he said. Despite their losses, however, the Taliban
repeatedly express confidence that the United States and its allies will grow
weary of a thankless war in a foreign land, withdraw and leave Afghanistan open
for a return of the Taliban to power.

The Taliban say they need little in the way of arms or materiel. ''The Taliban
are now mounting a hit-and-run war against their enemies,'' Mr. Mujahed, the
spokesman, said. ''It doesn't need much money or weapons compared to what the
foreign troops are spending.''

Even so, Western officials say the Taliban have a steady stream of financing
from Afghanistan's opium trade, as well as from traders, mosques, jihad
organizations and sympathizers in the region, and Arab countries.

At the same time,  Taliban leaders can still exploit their position as moral
authorities -- Taliban means religious students -- which gives them overarching
power over the various commanders, bandits, smugglers and insurgents fighting
around Afghanistan.

That aura is increasingly terrifying. Known for their harsh rule when in power,
the Taliban have turned even more ruthless out of power, and for the first time
they have shown great cruelty even toward their fellow Pashtun tribesmen.

The Taliban have used terrorist tactics -- which include beheadings, abductions,
death threats and summary executions of people accused of being spies -- as well
as a skillful propaganda campaign, to make the insurgency seem more powerful and
omnipresent than it really is.

''The increasing use of very public attacks has had a striking effect on morale
far beyond the immediate victims,'' the International Crisis Group, a nonprofit
group that seeks to prevent and resolve deadly conflicts, said in a recent
report.

Some of that brutality may be attributed to the growing influence of Al Qaeda,
but much of it has by now taken root within the insurgents' ranks.

After the American-led invasion of Afghanistan in 2001, Al Qaeda and the Taliban
both sought refuge in Pakistan's tribal areas, which have since become a
breeding ground where they and other foreign fighters have found common cause
against the American forces in Afghanistan and have shared terrorist tactics and
insurgent strategies.

Pakistan's tribal areas along the border are now the main pool to recruit
fighters for Afghanistan, General McKiernan said. Pakistani insurgent groups in
the region -- Pakistani Taliban -- have also become a potent threat to the
security and stability of Pakistan itself.

Jihad does not recognize borders, the Taliban like to say, and indeed much
unites the Taliban on both sides of the border. They share a common Pashtun
heritage, a longstanding disregard for the Afghan-Pakistani border drawn by the
British and the goal of establishing a theocracy that would impose Islamic law,
or Shariah.

In fact, the dispatches of the Pakistani Taliban leader, Baitullah Mehsud, carry
the symbol of the Islamic Emirate, the name the Afghan Taliban used for their
government.

Mr. Mehsud and his cohort have sworn allegiance to the Afghan Taliban leader,
Mullah Omar, as well as to Jalaluddin Haqqani, a former minister in the Taliban
government who now commands Taliban forces in much of eastern Afghanistan.

Western military officials often describe Mr. Haqqani as running a distinct
network with close links to Arab members of Al Qaeda, but he and his followers
have also proclaimed allegiance to Mullah Omar.

Even Mr. bin Laden has paid tribute to Mullah Omar as Amir ul-Momineen, or
Leader of the Faithful, the paramount religious leader.

To avoid jeopardizing their sanctuary or their hosts, however, the Taliban have
always maintained the pretence that their leadership is based inside Afghanistan
and that the insurgency is made up entirely of Afghans.

The two Afghan Taliban spokesmen, Mr. Mujahed and Qari Yousuf Ahmadi, who speak
regularly by telephone to local journalists, never reveal their whereabouts.
They profess sympathy for their Muslim brothers, the Pakistani Taliban, but deny
that there is any joint leadership or unified strategy.

They also claim that the Afghan Taliban broke with Al Qaeda after the Sept.  11
attacks, which  led to the fall of the Taliban government in Afghanistan.

The Afghan government dismisses those claims, however, and insists that the
Taliban on both sides of the border are directed by Pakistani intelligence
officials with the aim of destabilizing Afghanistan and maintaining some sway
over their neighbor.

While the Pakistani government was one of the only supporters of the Taliban
government when it was in power from 1996 to 2001, today the Pakistani
authorities profess not to know the whereabouts of Mullah Omar or his
colleagues.

But Afghan and NATO officials say the Taliban today operate much as the
mujahedeen did in the 1980s, when they used Pakistan as their rear base, to
drive out the Soviet Army, which had invaded Afghanistan.

Many members of President Hamid Karzai's government, who were themselves
mujahedeen, say the Taliban are even using some of the same contacts from 20
years ago, including a well-known trader in Quetta who handles logistics,
housing and other supplies.

He was widely known to be the front man for the largest Pakistani intelligence
agency, Inter-Services Intelligence, according to one former mujahedeen
commander who is now a senior official in the Afghan government.

Meanwhile, Taliban spokesmen dismiss the idea of negotiations or power-sharing
deals with the Afghan government, even though Afghan officials say that more
Taliban members have made overtures to talk in recent months.

''We carried out the fight to oppose the invaders,'' one of the Taliban
spokesmen, Mr. Ahmadi, said. ''Now they are on the brink of humiliation. That's
the aim of our fight.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Afghan soldiers at an outpost in Wardak Province, near the site
where a Taliban attack killed three coalition soldiers in June. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
MOISES SAMAN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A1)
  A police checkpoint in Kabul. Officials here are alarmed that the Taliban has
been able to keep the most powerful armies at bay. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOISES SAMAN
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
RELIGION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMIES (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (70%);
INTERVIEWS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%); ESPIONAGE (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(50%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (91%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (54%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (95%); PAKISTAN (94%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             669 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2008 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

As China Girds for Olympics, New Violence

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG and KEITH BRADSHER; Edward Wong reported from Beijing and
Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong. Jake Hooker, Huang Yuanxi and Jessie Jiang
contributed research.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 1624 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Chinese officials have thrown an almost smothering blanket of security across
this capital of 17 million in preparation for the start of the Olympic Games on
Friday. Above all else, Chinese leaders say, these Olympics will be ''safe.''

They warn that terrorism is a constant threat, particularly from Muslim
separatist groups in the Xinjiang region of western China. On Monday morning,
Xinhua, the state news agency, reported what appeared to be the deadliest
assault against Chinese security forces in recent memory: 16 policemen were
killed and 16 others injured when attackers threw two grenades into a police
station in the desert oasis town of Kashgar, in the far west, after driving a
truck into the station at 8 a.m. Two men were arrested.

Even before that raid, Chinese officials had transformed Beijing into a giant
fortress. Surface-to-air missiles take aim at the sky above the Olympic stadiums
here. Surveillance cameras mounted on light poles scan sidewalks. Police
officers search thousands of cars and trucks entering the city.

Even civilians have been called on to strengthen the motherland: Tens of
thousands of middle-age and elderly residents wearing red armbands, reminiscent
of the zealous Red Guard youth from decades ago, now patrol neighborhoods
looking for even a slightly suspicious act or person.

But human rights advocates accuse the Chinese government of using the pretext of
terrorism to silence dissent and clamp down on ethnic minority groups that chafe
at rule by ethnic Han Chinese, who dominate the Communist Party leadership. Some
security experts say many of the surveillance measures will probably stay in
place after the Games, to bolster the reach of the authorities.

To hear Chinese officials tell it, the threats come from a dizzying array of
malcontents: groups advocating independence in the western autonomous regions of
Xinjiang and Tibet, followers of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement, Al
Qaeda, and unstable individuals.

''I believe that Beijing's Olympics are now facing real threats from terrorist
attacks,'' said Li Wei, a counterterrorism expert at the China Institutes of
Contemporary International Relations, a research organization that advises the
government.

''I think the Olympics are the most important international sports event in four
years,'' he said, ''and it's the biggest focus of the international media in
four years, so this might draw some attention from terrorist groups.''

The specter of terrorism has fallen over every Olympics since the 1972 Summer
Games in Munich, when 11 Israeli athletes and coaches were killed by a
Palestinian group.

Experts on terrorism say the extensive preparations are among the most
comprehensive of any Games and may be enough to discourage any attacks in the
capital. But China still faces a risk of terrorist attacks elsewhere during the
Games, particularly after the raid on Monday and a recent series of bus bombings
outside Beijing.

The authorities in Beijing are preventing some people from the provinces from
entering the city during the Olympics and have slowed or halted the issuing of
visas to certain foreigners. All this could dampen attendance at the Games.

Terrorism experts inside and outside China say the biggest threat to this
Olympics comes from violent separatists from Xinjiang, a region historically
dominated by the Uighurs, a Muslim Turkic group, but now governed by Han
Chinese.

In the first half of 2008, 82 people were arrested in Xinjiang in connection
with terrorist plots aimed at the Olympics, the police say.

Chinese officials say the greatest risk of an attack comes from a shadowy group
called the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, or ETIM, which promotes independence
for the region's Uighurs. The State Department listed the group as a terrorist
organization in 2002. Scholars of Xinjiang debate the potency and makeup of the
group, and some question whether such a group even exists.

Some outside experts say the organization is fairly small and includes a group
called the Turkestan Islamic Party, which released a video on July 23 showing a
masked man identified as Commander Seyfullah claiming responsibility for recent
bus explosions in Kunming and Shanghai that killed five people and wounded at
least 26.

Mr. Li and Chinese officials say the explosions were the acts of disgruntled
individuals and not terrorist attacks, though several outside terrorism experts
suspect the East Turkestan Islamic Movement was involved.

Steve Vickers, a longtime head of Hong Kong criminal intelligence who is now the
chief executive of International Risk, an Asian security consulting firm, said
''the threat remains moderate but slightly elevated because of the Olympics.''

Although he is one of the experts who say the greatest threat comes from ETIM or
offshoots of the group, he said that ''the Chinese have been on these people a
long time'' and have contained them well.

Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and
Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore, said an
ETIM attack outside Beijing was likely. Such attacks could be expected to spread
fear and disrupt the Olympics.

Mr. Gunaratna estimated that the group has about 40 members based in the
mountainous tribal areas of Pakistan who intend to carry out operations. Uighurs
trained in Afghanistan before the American invasion in 2001, though their ties
with ETIM or other groups are unclear.

ETIM now survives in Pakistan under the protection of Al Qaeda and the Pakistani
Taliban, and it has in recent years adopted the ideology of global jihad
espoused by Al Qaeda, Mr. Gunaratna said.

He added that China lacked an understanding of these groups and that harsh
tactics adopted against the Uighurs would turn more Uighurs into radicals.

Chinese officials are warning of at least one other group fomenting unrest among
the Uighur. Xinhua has reported that an international Sunni group called Hizb
ut-Tahrir, or Party of Liberation, whose goal is to re-establish an Islamic
empire across Asia, was responsible for organizing protests in late March in the
western city of Khotan that involved hundreds of people.

The new security measures in Beijing include increasing scrutiny in places where
Muslims gather. In late July, after the bombings in Kunming, police officers
were seen sitting across from a mosque in the Russian quarter of Beijing. The
owner of the Xinjiang Kashgar Restaurant near the main Olympic venue said he
shut down Tuesday after repeated visits from officials who cited health
concerns. He said several other Muslim restaurants nearby had received similar
visits. The owner, a Uighur, spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear that
he would be further harassed by the authorities.

Not only Uighurs are being singled out. A British woman of Tibetan ethnicity who
was living in Beijing, Dechen Pemba, said she had been taken to the airport last
month and deported without warning or reason.

In Xinjiang, an extra layer of security screening has been added to 13 airports,
according to Xinhua. Certain liquids, including alcohol, are banned from trains
in Xinjiang, and a security inspector has been put on board each of the 4,000
buses in Urumqi, the region's capital.

Here in Beijing, the city is edging toward war footing. More than 34,000
military personnel and 74 airplanes, 47 helicopters and 33 navy ships have been
deployed, said Col. Tian Yixiang, director of the military affairs department in
the Olympic security command center.

Xinhua reported on Thursday that the government would put up to 6,000 security
people on Beijing's 18,000 buses during the Olympics, and another 30,000 at bus
stops and terminals.

The Chinese government has also been installing tens of thousands of
surveillance cameras on lamp poles and in Internet cafes and bars.

Critics of the measure say the cameras can be used not only to track potential
terrorists, but also anyone who opposes the nation's one-party rule. Western
companies like I.B.M., General Electric, Honeywell and United Technologies have
been shipping their latest computer tools to automatically analyze video images
from thousands of cameras and alert computer operators to patterns that might
indicate a threat.

The Security Industry Association, a Washington-based trade group for security
companies around the world, said in a study last year that from 2001, when
Beijing was awarded the Olympics, China spent as much as $6.5 billion on
security in the Beijing area alone. The bulk of the spending is for extensive
video monitoring systems that will stay in place after the Games.

''The surveillance system deployed by China for the Olympics, which includes key
pieces of Western technology, is the most comprehensive and sophisticated
surveillance system ever,'' said James C. Mulvenon of the Center for
Intelligence Research and Analysis in Washington, a private group that does
classified work for the American government. ''Properly used, it will definitely
increase security at the Olympics, and Western companies will have contributed
to that security.''

Largely separate from the Olympics, China is moving to install video monitoring
systems in its 600 largest cities, and some, from Shenzhen in southeastern China
to Lhasa, Tibet, are already far along.

Dr. Mulvenon said the large volume of sales from foreign companies raised the
risk that Western equipment would be used to spy on Chinese dissidents after the
Olympic athletes and spectators have gone home.

''The longer-term implications are less positive,'' he said. ''Whereas the
legacy of previous Olympics was sports stadiums, the legacy of the Beijing
Olympics will be a high-tech police state.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Chinese paramilitary officers awaited instructions last week in
the National Aquatics Center, known as the Water Cube, in Beijing. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY ODED BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); SPORTS & RECREATION (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); SPORTS (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); CULTS & SECTS (76%); COACHES &
TRAINERS (72%); ETHNIC GROUPS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); ARRESTS (70%); MOTOR VEHICLES (69%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (68%); POLITICAL PARTIES (65%); ETHNICITY (64%); DESERTS (55%);
SENIOR CITIZENS (52%); AGING (51%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (95%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (95%); NORTHWEST CHINA (93%); XINJIANG, CHINA (90%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (59%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ISRAEL (79%); TIBET
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             670 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 4, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

As China Girds For Olympics, New Violence

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG and KEITH BRADSHER; Edward Wong reported from Beijing and
Keith Bradsher from Hong Kong. Jake Hooker, Huang Yuanxi and Jessie Jiang
contributed research.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1515 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Chinese officials have thrown an almost smothering blanket of security across
this capital of 17 million in preparation for the start of the Olympic Games on
Friday. Above all else, Chinese leaders say, these Olympics will be ''safe.''

They warn that terrorism is a constant threat, particularly from Muslim
separatist groups in the Xinjiang region of western China. On Monday morning,
Xinhua, the state news agency, reported what appeared to be the deadliest attack
against Chinese security forces in recent memory: 16 policemen were killed and
16 others injured when attackers threw two grenades into a police station in the
desert oasis town of Kashgar, in the far west, after driving a truck into the
station at 8 a.m. Two men were arrested.

Even before that raid, Chinese officials had transformed Beijing into a giant
fortress. Surface-to-air missiles take aim at the sky above the Olympic stadiums
here. Surveillance cameras mounted on light poles scan sidewalks. Police
officers search thousands of cars and trucks entering the city.

Even civilians have been called on to strengthen the motherland: Tens of
thousands of middle-age and elderly residents wearing red armbands, reminiscent
of the zealous Red Guard youth from decades ago, now patrol neighborhoods
looking for even a slightly suspicious act or person.

But human rights advocates accuse the Chinese government of using the pretext of
terrorism to silence dissent and clamp down on ethnic minority groups that chafe
at rule by ethnic Han Chinese, who dominate the Communist Party leadership. Some
security experts say many of the surveillance measures will probably stay in
place after the Games, to bolster the reach of the authorities.

To hear Chinese officials tell it, the threats come from a dizzying array of
malcontents: groups advocating independence in the western autonomous regions of
Xinjiang and Tibet, followers of the banned Falun Gong spiritual movement, Al
Qaeda, and unstable individuals.

''I believe that Beijing's Olympics are now facing real threats from terrorist
attacks,'' said Li Wei, a counterterrorism expert at the China Institutes of
Contemporary International Relations, a research organization that advises the
government.

''I think the Olympics are the most important international sports event in four
years,'' he said, ''and it's the biggest focus of the international media in
four years, so this might draw some attention from terrorist groups.''

The specter of terrorism has fallen over every Olympics since the 1972 Summer
Games in Munich, when 11 Israeli athletes and coaches were killed by a
Palestinian group.

Experts on terrorism say the extensive preparations are among the most
comprehensive of any Games and may be enough to discourage any attacks in the
capital. But China still faces a risk of terrorist attacks elsewhere during the
Games, particularly after the raid on Monday and  a recent series of bus
bombings outside Beijing.

Terrorism experts inside and outside China say the biggest threat to this
Olympics comes from violent separatists from Xinjiang, a region historically
dominated by the Uighurs, a Muslim Turkic group, but now governed by Han
Chinese.

In the first half of 2008, 82 people were arrested in Xinjiang in connection
with terrorist plots aimed at the Olympics, the police say.

Chinese officials say the greatest risk of an attack comes from a shadowy group
called the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, or ETIM, which promotes independence
for the region's Uighurs. The State Department listed the group as a terrorist
organization in 2002. Scholars of Xinjiang debate the potency and makeup of the
group, and some question whether such a group even exists.

Some outside experts say the organization is fairly small and includes a group
called the Turkestan Islamic Party, which released a video on July 23 showing a
masked man identified as Commander Seyfullah claiming responsibility for recent
bus explosions in Kunming and Shanghai that killed five people and wounded at
least 26.

Mr. Li and Chinese officials say the explosions were the acts of disgruntled
individuals and not terrorist attacks, though several outside terrorism experts
suspect the East Turkestan Islamic Movement was involved.

Steve Vickers, a longtime head of Hong Kong criminal intelligence who is now the
chief executive of International Risk, an Asian security consulting firm, said
''the threat remains moderate but slightly elevated because of the Olympics.''

Although he is one of the experts who say the greatest threat comes from ETIM or
offshoots of the group, he said that ''the Chinese have been on these people a
long time'' and have contained them well.

Rohan Gunaratna, head of the International Center for Political Violence and
Terrorism Research at Nanyang Technological University in Singapore, said an
ETIM attack outside Beijing was likely. Such attacks could be expected to spread
fear and disrupt the Olympics.

Mr. Gunaratna estimated that the group has about 40 members based in the
mountainous tribal areas of Pakistan who intend to carry out operations. Uighurs
trained in Afghanistan before the American invasion in 2001, though their ties
with ETIM or other groups are unclear.

ETIM now survives in Pakistan under the protection of Al Qaeda and the Pakistani
Taliban, and it has in recent years adopted the ideology of global jihad
espoused by Al Qaeda, Mr. Gunaratna said.

He added that China lacked an  understanding of these groups and that harsh
tactics adopted against the Uighurs would turn more Uighurs into radicals.

Chinese officials are warning of at least one other group fomenting unrest among
the Uighur. Xinhua has reported that an international Sunni group called Hizb
ut-Tahrir, or Party of Liberation, whose goal is to re-establish an Islamic
empire across Asia, was responsible for organizing protests in late March in the
western city of Khotan that involved hundreds of people.

The new security measures in Beijing include increasing scrutiny in places where
Muslims gather. In late July, after the bombings in Kunming, police officers
were seen sitting across from a mosque in the Russian quarter of Beijing. The
owner of the Xinjiang Kashgar Restaurant near the main Olympic venue said he
shut down Tuesday after repeated visits from officials who cited health
concerns. He said several other Muslim restaurants nearby had received similar
visits. The owner, a Uighur, spoke on the condition of anonymity for fear that
he would be further harassed by the authorities.

Not only Uighurs are being singled out. A British woman of Tibetan ethnicity who
was living in Beijing, Dechen Pemba, said she had been taken to the airport last
month and deported without warning or reason.

In Xinjiang, an extra layer of security screening has been added to 13 airports,
according to Xinhua. Certain liquids, including alcohol, are banned from trains
in Xinjiang, and a security inspector has been put on board each of the 4,000
buses in Urumqi, the region's capital.

Here in Beijing, the city is edging toward war footing. More than 34,000
military personnel and 74 airplanes, 47 helicopters and 33 navy ships have been
deployed, said Col. Tian Yixiang, director of the military affairs department in
the Olympic security command center.

The Chinese government has also been installing tens of thousands of
surveillance cameras on lamp poles and in Internet cafes and bars.

Critics of the measure say the cameras can be used not only to track potential
terrorists, but also anyone who opposes the nation's one-party rule. Western
companies like I.B.M., General Electric, Honeywell and United Technologies have
been shipping their latest computer tools to automatically analyze video images
from thousands of cameras and alert computer operators to patterns that might
indicate a threat.

The Security Industry Association, a Washington-based trade group for security
companies around the world, said in a study last year that from 2001, when
Beijing was awarded the Olympics, China spent as much as $6.5 billion on
security in the Beijing area alone. The bulk of the spending is for extensive
video monitoring systems that will stay in place after the Games.

''The surveillance system deployed by China for the Olympics, which includes key
pieces of Western technology, is the most comprehensive and sophisticated
surveillance system ever,'' said James C. Mulvenon of the Center for
Intelligence Research and Analysis in Washington, a private group that does
classified work for the American government.

Largely separate from the Olympics, China is moving to install video monitoring
systems in its 600 largest cities, and some are already far along.

Dr. Mulvenon said the  sales from foreign companies raised the risk that Western
equipment would be used to spy on Chinese dissidents after the Olympics.

''The longer-term implications are less positive,'' he said. ''Whereas the
legacy of previous Olympics was sports stadiums, the legacy of the Beijing
Olympics will be a high-tech police state.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Chinese paramilitary officers awaited instructions last week in
the National Aquatics Center, known as the Water Cube, in Beijing. (PHOTOGRAPH
BY ODED BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUMMER OLYMPICS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(78%); SPORTS & RECREATION (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); SPORTS (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); AL-QAEDA (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); CULTS & SECTS (76%); COACHES &
TRAINERS (72%); ETHNIC GROUPS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); ARRESTS (70%); MOTOR VEHICLES (69%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (68%); POLITICAL PARTIES (65%); ETHNICITY (64%); DESERTS (55%);
SENIOR CITIZENS (52%); AGING (51%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); NORTHWEST CHINA (93%); XINJIANG, CHINA (90%);
SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (59%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); ISRAEL (79%); TIBET
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             677 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 10, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The United States v. the Driver

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 655 words


Last week was hardly the first time that we have found ourselves scratching our
heads in anguished confusion about what, exactly, President Bush is trying to
achieve by trashing the Constitution at Guantanamo Bay. But the sentencing of
Osama bin Laden's driver, Salim Ahmed Hamdan, to five and a half years in prison
is a good moment to stop and reflect.

For years, Mr. Bush and his supporters have been telling the world that it is
necessary to hold prisoners without charges, to abuse them in ways most
civilized nations consider torture, and to deny them basic human rights because
of the serious threat they pose to America. These are ''dangerous terrorists
captured on the battlefield,'' Senator John McCain, the Republican presidential
candidate, said in a statement on Wednesday.

The administration considered Mr. Hamdan such a priority that it took his case
all the way to the Supreme Court, insisting Mr. Bush had the power to hold
anyone he deemed an enemy combatant for as long as he wanted under any
conditions he wanted. Mr. Hamdan's trial was the first by a military commission
in Guantanamo.

We use the word ''trial'' loosely. The proceedings were marked by secret
testimony by secret witnesses. The former chief prosecutor in Guantanamo
testified that he quit after being told that these trials could not produce
acquittals. In the end, Mr. Hamdan was found guilty only of providing material
support to terrorists and was sentenced to five and half years -- a term he
might complete before year's end. Still, in the twisted world of Mr. Bush's
prison camps, it is unclear if Mr. Hamdan will be released after serving his
sentence.

Mr. Hamdan, however, is hardly a high value target. The comedian Stephen Colbert
captured the absurdity of the proceedings perfectly on Thursday night when he
called the trial ''the most historic session of traffic court ever.'' It will
not be long, Mr. Colbert added, ''before we track down Ayman al-Zawahiri's
dermatologist.''

Mr. Colbert's dark humor was a fitting coda to a case that illuminated so much
of what is wrong with Guantanamo and the administration's war on terrorism.

Mr. Bush would like to be remembered for his leadership in fighting terrorism,
but his decisions have defied common sense, including his dismissal of the fact
that Mr. bin Laden remains at large. In a 2002 press conference, he said, ''I
just don't spend that much time on him.'' In 2006, he told conservative
columnists that sending troops ''stomping through Pakistan in order to find bin
Laden is just simply not the strategy that will work.''

Mr. Bush is operating according to a logic that says the right way to win
against Al Qaeda is to invade Iraq, which had no connection to Al Qaeda. And the
right way to dismantle Mr. bin Laden's terrorism network is to express unconcern
about chasing him down while relentlessly pursuing his driver.

Mr. Bush's hapless, and often unconstitutional, approach to combating terrorism
will leave his successor a great deal of work to do. The rule of law, including
fair and open trials, must be restored. Guantanamo needs to be shut down, as Mr.
McCain has said many times. Detainees must be put on trial quickly in real
courts, and those who are not guilty must be freed.

There are some evidently dangerous men in Guantanamo, including Khalid Sheikh
Mohammed, accused of being the organizer of the Sept. 11 attacks. But it is hard
to see a real trial ever taking place for Mr. Mohammed, who was subject to
waterboarding and other abuse during interrogation, and the priority assigned to
a small fish like Mr. Hamdan makes us wonder whether the administration has
powerful cases against the hundreds of other Guantanamo detainees.

Mr. Bush's supporters have been crowing over the Hamdan verdict as if it were
some kind of a triumph. In truth, it is a hollow victory in the war on terror, a
blow to America's standards of justice and image in the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA
(89%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); POWS & MIAS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); SUPREME
COURTS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); VERDICTS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); TORTURE (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (74%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA
(74%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (74%); CONSERVATISM (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(73%); WITNESSES (73%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (69%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); US
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (69%); ACQUITTAL (68%); ARMED FORCES (66%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (63%); WAR & CONFLICT (62%); WRITERS (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (88%); STEPHEN COLBERT (78%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (77%); JOHN
MCCAIN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (88%); IRAQ (79%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             679 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 13, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2340 words


International

OPULENCE AND CHAOS

In a Nigerian Boomtown

Lagos, the Nigerian mega-city on Africa's west coast, is often described as a
city with contrasting superlatives. The city is flush with cash and glitter from
the high cost of oil, making it one of the most expensive cities even as the
quality of life sags under the weight of overpopulation. The average citizen
survives on less than $2 a day. PAGE A13

DISSIDENT ESCAPES POLICE CUSTODY

Human rights advocates said Hua Huiqi, a religious dissident in China who was
detained by the authorities on his way to a church service where President Bush
was scheduled to worship, has escaped from police custody and gone into hiding.
Mr. Hua, an advocate for religious freedom, is the pastor of a ''house church,''
an underground congregation that operates outside China's tightly controlled
religious bureaucracy. He has been arrested, jailed and beaten several times.
PAGE A12

EXPERT CITES A STRONGER AL QAEDA

An American terrorism analyst said that Al Qaeda had been successful in forging
close ties to Pakistani militant groups, which have given the group an
increasingly secure safe haven in the mountainous tribal areas of Pakistan. As a
result, he says, Al Qaeda is more capable of attacking inside the United States
than it was last year, and its senior leaders have produced ''dozens'' of
militants capable of blending into Western society to carry out attacks. PAGE A9

DEATH TOLL CLIMBS IN INDIA

In Indian-controlled Kashmir, the death toll from violence reached 19 as
security forces fired on protesters defying a curfew. Six protesters died when
the police opened fire in an attempt to stop thousands of protesters from the
Muslim-majority Kashmir Valley from approaching the disputed border with
Pakistan, the state government said. PAGE A9

REPORTS OF SIDE DEAL IN ZIMBABWE

News agencies reported that Arthur Mutambara, the leader of a breakaway faction
of Zimbabwe's opposition party, had signed a deal with President Robert Mugabe
to form a unity government -- sidelining the country's main opposition leader,
Morgan Tsvangirai, by reaching the deal without him or much of his party. PAGE
A13

THREE KILLED IN CHINESE ATTACK

Three security officers were killed and one was wounded in a stabbing attack at
a road checkpoint near Kashgar in the far west of China, according to the state
news agency. The attack is the third in nine days against Chinese security
forces in the Xinjiang region, which is home to the Uighurs, a Muslim ethnic
minority. Many Uighurs resent being ruled by ethnic Han Chinese. PAGE A12

National

GOVERNOR WEIGHED IN FOR DUPONT

After Meeting With Its Lawyers

When Gov. Joe Manchin III filed a friend-of-the-court brief in June arguing that
the State Supreme Court should review a $382 million judgment against the DuPont
Company, it was the first time a West Virginia governor had done so in a case in
which the state was not a party. But documents from the governor's office show
that he consulted extensively with the company before filing the brief and that
his executive assistant is a former DuPont employee who once worked on the same
case before leaving the company. PAGE A14

FREEZE ON BUS COMPANY APPROVALS

The federal government froze all approvals for new bus companies because a fatal
crash in Texas last Friday exposed a flaw in regulations that allows banned
companies to start doing business again under new names. The agency ordinarily
approves about 100 carriers a month. Federal officials said the bus that crashed
belonged to a man whose previous bus company had been shut down for safety
violations. PAGE A14

PANEL FINDS DISCRIMINATION AT GYM

Nevada's civil rights panel found that a health club discriminated against men
by charging them more for membership than it charged women. The panel's finding
could also affect the ability of casino-resort operators to offer different
prices for men and women at nightclubs and other attractions. PAGE A17

NAVY AGREES TO SONAR RESTRICTION

The Navy agreed in a settlement to limit where it operates certain sonar systems
criticized by environmentalists who say it hurts the ability of whales and other
marine mammals to find food and avoid predators. The settlement restricts the
Navy's use of low-frequency sonar to military training areas near Hawaii and in
the western Pacific Ocean. PAGE A19

CITIZEN JOURNALIST RAKES THE MUCK

After public denials, Mayor C. Ray Nagin of New Orleans conceded that there were
''documentation issues'' and ''discrepancies'' in a program meant to help
rebuild his scarred city. At the center of the controversy is Karen Gadbois,
above, a blogger whose persistence led her to discover that something was amiss
in the remediation program. PAGE A14

BUSINESS

A YEAR AFTER UPHEAVAL BEGAN,

Securities Market Still Jammed

A year after financial tremors first shook Wall Street, a crucial artery of
modern money management -- the market for securitization, through which
mortgages and other debts are packaged and sold as securities -- remains broken.
And until that conduit is fixed or replaced, analysts say, borrowers will see
interest rates continue to rise even as availability worsens for home mortgages,
student loans, auto loans and commercial mortgages. PAGE C1

CNN TO DOUBLE DOMESTIC PRESENCE

CNN announced that it would assign journalists to 10 cities across the United
States, a move that will double the number of domestic cities where the cable
news network has outposts. But the journalists will not work from expensive
bureaus -- rather, they will borrow office space from local news stations and
use laptops to file stories for the Internet and TV. PAGE C1

KING OF THE ROAD NO LONGER

Once the pride of Detroit, sport utility vehicles are piling up in dealers'
lots, prompting automakers to offer some of their largest discounts ever --
$10,000 or more on some -- just to get rid of them. The automakers say they need
the space for the fuel-efficient cars consumers are clamoring for. PAGE C1

CORPORATIONS FAILED TO PAY TAXES

Two out of every three United States corporations paid no federal income taxes
from 1998 through 2005, according to a report by the Government Accountability
Office. The study, which is likely to fuel a debate among politicians and policy
experts over the contribution of businesses to Treasury coffers, did not
identify the corporations or analyze why they paid no taxes. PAGE C3

New York Report

IT DEPENDS ON WHAT

You Mean by 'Demolish'

A state agency has proposed a change in rules related to rent-stabilized
housing, in which property owners can evict tenants if a building is slated for
demolition. But at a contentious public hearing in Lower Manhattan including
tenants and owners, it seemed that neither side cared for the state's definition
of ''demolition.'' PAGE B5

RANGEL TOUTS HOUSING DEAL

At a press event in Harlem, Representative Charles B. Rangel announced the
preservation of almost 400 federally subsidized apartments. What did not come
up, however, were the rent-stabilized apartments that the congressman has kept
at a luxury building nearby or of the Congressional ethics inquiry he has sought
about whether the arrangement was proper. PAGE B1

Arts

BEHIND THE SCENES

In an Era of Tumult

When historians discuss the 1960s, they tend to spend a lot of time on all the
sex, drugs and rock 'n' roll. Less ink is spilled on the crafters of a huge wave
of social and economic legislation. Those lesser-known policy makers are the
focus of the book ''The Liberal Hour,'' which Barry Gewen writes ''is a valuable
corrective to a lot of hackneyed thinking about the significance of the '60s.''
PAGE E2

MOVIE TYPES SKEWERING HOLLYWOOD

''Tropic Thunder,'' the new film written and directed by and starring Ben
Stiller, features Robert Downey Jr. in blackface, an unrecognizable Tom Cruise
as a Jewish caricature and more than a few jokes about the mentally disabled.
And yet, as Manohla Dargis writes, it saves most of its contempt for the
machinery of movies: the stars, makers and even die-hard fans. PAGE E1 WALKING
IN THE WEST BANK

The Arabic word sarha means ''to roam freely, at will, without restraint.'' That
ethos informs Raja Shehadeh's ''Palestinian Walks: Forays Into a Vanishing
Landscape,'' an account of six walks in the West Bank, which recently won
Britain's pre-eminent award for political writing. And because of the region's
politics, those walks are increasingly fraught. PAGE E1

Dining

LOS ANGELES SEEKS TO REGULATE

Fast Food in Certain Areas

If the Los Angeles City Council gets its way, residents of some of the city's
poorer neighborhoods are going to have to travel quite a bit if they're craving
fast food, because of a moratorium, part of a city plan to combat obesity. But
the language of the law leaves much open to interpretation, and vendors of
healthier fast food made from high-quality ingredients are worried they'll get
swept along in the tide. Page F1

THE ART OF THE NOODLE

Austere. Unaffected. Matsugen is a restaurant serving exclusively Japanese fare
in a way that evokes the feeling of dining in Japan. And that's not a
coincidence. Deliberately avoiding obvious menu choices like the ubiquitous
California roll, the restaurant devotes half its menu to soba, a buckwheat
noodle prepared in three categories of weight and texture, writes Frank Bruni.
Page F7

SPECIALTY ROASTERS ON THE MOVE

Contrary to most New Yorkers' belief that their city is the center of the
universe, most of the world's most respected coffee roasters have been
elsewhere. But that is changing, and one of those changes was carried in a
U-Haul from Portland, Ore. Stumptown Coffee Roasters is expecting to open its
roastery in Red Hook, Brooklyn. It is not alone. Intelligentsia Coffee Roasters
and Tea Traders from Chicago is eyeing a move to SoHo. So, New Yorkers, take
heart. The city might not be the center of the universe yet, but it is getting
closer. Page F5

Sports

WITH LOTS OF MONEY AND TRAINING,

Age Is Just a Number

At age 41, Dara Torres is still an elite athlete who can compete at the highest
levels. Exercise physiologists say the conventional wisdom about age and sports
is more urban legend than fact, and there are likely to be more Dara Torreses in
the future -- because of an infusion of money into many sports, combined with
improvements in sports medicine and training. PAGE D1

WHY ALL THE EMPTY SEATS?

In Beijing, Olympic organizers had hoped to provide every athlete the thrill of
filled arenas and provide television cameras with unending views of cheering
faces. But while the events are supposedly sold out and many athletes have been
thrilled to compete in front of far more fans than they are accustomed to, most
venues have been about three-quarters full, with a few filled to barely half of
capacity. PAGE D6

U.S. BOXING REELING AFTER LOSSES

Once a boxing superpower, the United States has had a turbulent Olympic outing.
USA Boxing sent nine boxers to the Summer Games. After four days of competition,
five remain. Among the eliminated was Rau'shee Warren, the reigning flyweight
world champion and the team's best hope of winning gold. PAGE D1

REMAINING UPBEAT AFTER INJURY

Ten years ago, Sang Lan was a 17-year-old competing at the Goodwill Games in New
York. During a routine warm-up vault, Sang landed on her head and sustained a
spinal injury that left her paralyzed from the chest down. A decade later, she
is a college graduate and news media figure, a symbol of gymnastics' inherent
danger and of spirited resilience in the face of catastrophic disability. PAGE
D5

Obituaries

ALEXANDER SLOBODYANIK, 65

The Ukrainian pianist made his Carnegie Hall debut in 1968 in a solo recital,
and earned stardom in the former Soviet Union with his virtuosity and emotional
interpretations of Romantic composers. He had been a concert pianist and
in-demand teacher since moving to the United States in 1989. PAGE B6

BERTRAND CASTELLI, 78

The executive producer of the original Broadway production of ''Hair,'' he was
not a familiar name, but he was known as a world-class bon vivant, a painter, a
screenwriter, a balletomane and a choreographer. PAGEB6

AURELIUS H. PIPER SR., 92

The hereditary chief of the Golden Hill Paugussett Indian Tribe since 1959, he
was known as Big Eagle, was named chief and assumed responsibility for the
tribe's quarter-acre reservation in Trumbull. He served on boards and
commissions throughout Connecticut, fighting for the rights of American Indians
and other minorities. PAGE B6

Editorial

AN ENDANGERED ACT

The Bush administration has never masked its distaste for most environmental
laws or its ambitions to thwart Congress's will. Now in its waning months, it is
trying to undermine the Endangered Species Act. Page A20

MR. MUKASEY IN DENIAL

On Tuesday, Attorney General Michael Mukasey described the shameful
politicization of the Justice Department as a ''painful'' episode in which ''the
system failed.'' He conveniently made no mention of the role played by members
of President Bush's inner circle. Page A20

DAY LABORERS AND HOME DEPOT

Los Angeles's proposed ordinance to require more orderly hiring sites for day
laborers is a small measure that makes a huge amount of sense. Page A20

Op-Ed

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

On July 30, the Senate voted for the eighth time in the last year on a bill that
would have extended the investment tax credits for installing solar energy and
the production tax credits for building wind turbines. But a core of Republican
senators who either don't want to give Democrats a victory or simply don't
believe in renewable energy won't approve the bill. Page A21

OLIVIA JUDSON

The coming school year will see more fights over the teaching of evolution and
whether intelligent design, or even biblical accounts of creation, have a place
in America's classrooms. Well, evolution should be central to beginning biology
classes for at least three reasons. Page A21

TEXT THE VOTE

Barack Obama has been savvy with his use of text messages in his campaign. In an
Op-Ed article, Garrett M. Graff writes that cellphone messages could be the
presumptive Democratic nominee's secret weapon in November. Page A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS (A3, A4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); ARRESTS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (75%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (75%); POLITICS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%);
CITY LIFE (73%); ETHNICITY (71%); MOUNTAINS (71%); GOVERNORS (70%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (67%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (64%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (64%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (63%); LAWYERS (60%); SUPREME COURTS (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(60%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (54%); JOE MANCHIN (50%)

CITY: LAGOS, NIGERIA (92%)

STATE: JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (92%); KASHMIR (92%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%);
XINJIANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); NIGERIA (94%); ZIMBABWE (93%); INDIA (92%); ASIA (92%);
AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             687 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 28, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Officials Describe Afghan Airstrike

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 847 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


American military officials sought on Wednesday to refute claims that as many as
90 civilians -- among them 60 children -- were killed in airstrikes on a village
in western Afghanistan last Friday.

In the face of an investigation by Afghan officials and a report by a United
Nations team that support the high number of deaths, United States officials
maintain that 25 militants and 5 civilians were killed in airstrikes called in
after Afghan and American commandos came under heavy fire during a raid on the
compound of a top Taliban commander.

American officials have refused to comment publicly on the conflicting death
tolls pending the outcome of an investigation ordered over the weekend by Maj.
Gen. Jeffrey J. Schloesser, a top American commander. The results are expected
to be announced later this week, American officials said.

But four military and Pentagon officials agreed to give details of the incident
on the condition of anonymity because of the inquiry under way.

One American military official, who has seen photographs taken at the scene as
troops went house to house assessing damage and casualties, said there was no
evidence to support the higher civilian death toll. Nor was there any evidence
of a large number of recently dug graves or large number of injuries reported in
local hospitals, the official said.

The political and diplomatic consequences of the attack have been mounting by
the day, with the government of President Hamid Karzai using the episode to
demand greater coordination between Afghan and allied forces.

On Tuesday, a United Nations human rights team said it had found ''convincing
evidence'' to support the higher death toll, corroborating figures given earlier
by a government commission sent from Kabul to investigate the bombing, which put
the total dead at up to 95.

But American officials, venting frustration over what they said were cursory
reviews, said Wednesday that neither investigation had found any physical
evidence to support the higher death tolls, and instead relied on the word of
villagers who either supported or were cowed by Taliban fighters in the region.

If the higher death tolls prove to be correct, however, this would almost
certainly be a severe embarrassment to the military, and the deadliest case of
civilian casualties caused by any United States military operation in
Afghanistan since 2001.

While much remains unclear about what happened in Friday's incident, several
American military officials gave this version of what took place.

About 1 a.m. on Friday, Afghan national army commandos and American Special
Operations forces supporting them came under heavy fire from militants armed
with automatic rifles and rocket-propelled grenades as they approached a walled
cluster of single-story homes and other buildings in a village of Shindand
District, in western Afghanistan. The target of the raid was a Taliban
commander, Mullah Sadiq, and several of his fighters.

American forces called in airstrikes from a lumbering AC-130 gunship, an Air
Force Special Operations aircraft outfitted with side-firing cannons and
105-millimeter howitzers. The gunship blasted at least two of the buildings from
which insurgents were firing at the allied forces.

American commanders said that even before the shooting started, allied troops
saw women and children fleeing the compound into the night.

By dawn, the fighting had ended. Combat photographers documented the scene,
according to the Americans. In addition to the 25 militants, including Mullah
Sadiq, two women and three children were killed, possibly in the cross-fire,
American officials said. One woman and one child who were wounded in the
fighting were flown on American helicopters to receive medical attention, the
Americans said.

The allied forces seized several dozen men in the compound, eventually releasing
all but about half a dozen. There were no women or children left in the
compound, American officials said.

The Afghan and American forces seized several assault rifles, 4,000 rounds of
ammunition, mines, bomb-making materials, grenades, $4,000 in American and
Afghan currency, as well as photographs of the exterior of American bases in the
area, the Americans said.

At the Pentagon on Wednesday, Gen. James T. Conway, the commandant of the Marine
Corps and a former top commander in Iraq, offered no details on the attack but
sought to explain the inherent risks in attacking militants in residential areas
in Afghanistan or Iraq.

''Sometimes we think there's been overt efforts on the part of the Taliban, in
particular, to surround themselves with civilians so as to, at a minimum, reap
an I.O. advantage if civilians are killed,'' General Conway told reporters,
using the shorthand for information operations, or propaganda. ''You want to
strike the precise building that you're targeting, but sometimes there are other
people there. And you don't know that, because you're not on the inside looking
out.''

He added, ''This is a dirty game being played but, again, we are as precise as
we can.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Afghan villagers in Shindand District mourned a relative who
reportedly died in an airstrike.(PHOTOGRAPH BY FRAIDOON POOYAA/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); EVIDENCE (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); ARMIES
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (76%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (76%); AIR FORCES (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); HOSPITALS (51%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (95%)

LOAD-DATE: August 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             689 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

With the Best Intentions

BYLINE: By ADAM HOCHSCHILD.

Adam Hochschild is the author, most recently, of ''Bury the Chains: Prophets and
Rebels in the Fight to Free an Empire's Slaves.'' He is currently writing a book
on Britain in World War I.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1282 words


FREEDOM'S BATTLE:

The Origins of Humanitarian Intervention

By Gary J. Bass

509 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. $35

''Freedom's Battle'' is really two books that don't quite fit together. The
longer and better one is a lively narrative history of a string of European
efforts to stop various massacres in the 19th-century Ottoman Empire. In several
short chapters before and after this story is a shorter and weaker book, in
which Gary J. Bass argues for humanitarian military interventions as a tool of
international justice today. The historical episodes, he claims, are ''rare
lights along an otherwise dark road'' that show us how these might work. For me
that road remains dark, for reasons I will come back to, but much of the history
Bass unearths is fascinating and well told.

He begins with the Greek war of independence, where the most famous volunteer
was Lord Byron, who died of fever after declaring ''my plain, sworn, downright
detestation / Of every despotism in every nation.'' Byron was one of about 80
British volunteers; an American committee sent muskets and cannons. Most
important, Britain, France and Russia sent ships. At Navarino Bay in 1827, in
the last great naval battle before the age of steam, they wiped out almost the
entire Ottoman fleet. Greek independence was assured.

The next European action came in 1860, in response to massacres of Christians by
the Druse in Syria. France supplied most of the troops; other countries,
including Britain, Russia, Austria and Holland, supplied ships. Finally, the
last intervention Bass chronicles was sparked by ''Januarius Aloysius MacGahan,
an Irish-American journalist with almost no discernible self-preservation
instincts.'' After covering various hot spots from Central Asia to the Paris
Commune, MacGahan, reporting for a British newspaper in 1876, found himself
looking at thousands of corpses and skeletons in a Bulgarian mountain village.

Bass is alert to the way, then and now, a reporter's presence can determine
which atrocity people back home get upset about. Some 12,000 Bulgarians had been
slaughtered, igniting a firestorm of protest in both Britain and Russia, where
Dostoyevsky, among others, called for action. Railing against the massacre of
fellow Slavs, Russia declared war on the Ottoman Empire.

Russian fervor had been partly stoked by the translated thunderings of the
former (and future) British Prime Minister William Ewart Gladstone. ''There is
not a criminal in an European gaol, there is not a cannibal in the South Sea
Islands,'' Gladstone wrote, ''whose indignation would not rise and overboil'' at
the Bulgarian killings. Still thundering, he swept back into office a few years
later, campaigning mainly on the issue of his rival Disraeli's inadequate
response to the Bulgarian horrors.

Bass, who teaches at Princeton and is also the author of a book on war crimes
tribunals, writes with a jaunty flair and an eye for eccentric characters; he
describes Gladstone, for instance, as ''a very weird man. He was glowering and
dauntingly intense, slim with a huge head, with a large nose topped by
terrifying frowning eyes.'' Sometimes, however, he gets carried away, and
sultans, admirals, generals, envoys, massacres and battles flash by in too
dizzying a profusion. The Times of London ''had under 6,000 readers at the time
of the Scio massacre in 1822, but as many as 70,000 by the time of Batak.'' Whoa
there, remind us: When was Batak? What was Batak?

To be sure we don't forget his political purpose, Bass tells his 19th-century
story with a 21st-century vocabulary: mission creep, civil society,
nation-building, exit strategy. But although these interventions undoubtedly
saved lives, Bass the diligent historian undermines Bass the policy advocate by
making clear that the motives behind them were not entirely humanitarian. In
Britain's case, perhaps yes: popular movements pushed reluctant British
governments to act against a strategic ally. But France had strong imperial
ambitions of its own in the eastern Mediterranean, and for more than a century,
Russia had been the major Ottoman rival for influence in the Balkans and the
Caucasus.

When he argues for humanitarian military interventions today, Bass's policy
prescriptions are a mixed bag. Such interventions should happen, he says, only
in the worst emergencies (like genocide), should avoid starting a major war,
should not be done for material or strategic gain and should be multilateral.
And everything else should be tried first: ''If international pressure gets the
Sudanese government to restrain the Janjaweed militia from mass murder in
Darfur, that would be far better than an invasion.'' So far so good.

However, his enthusiasm for interventions is so high that he then goes on to
suggest the world be divided into ''spheres of humanitarian interest'' along the
model of the 1774 Treaty of Kutchuk-Kainardji, which gave czarist Russia the
right to protect Orthodox Christians in Ottoman lands. ''Australia led the
charge on East Timor; the major European countries should have properly done so
for Bosnia; and a revitalized South Africa should be doing so for Zimbabwe.'' So
what would that leave the United States? Latin America? Tell that to the Latin
Americans, who've already endured more than a hundred years of United States
interventions, seldom, if ever, for any humanitarian purpose. For Bass, the
world is divided far too neatly into ''free and unfree countries.'' When he says
that ''today's leading democracies have not yet shouldered the responsibilities
that previous great powers did,'' he seems strangely blind to how easily a
country can be a democracy at home and an arrogant bully overseas.

There's another problem here as well. When Bass blithely calls for ''one, two,
three, many Treaties of Kutchuk-Kainardji,'' he overlooks the fact that this
treaty was imposed after a war, by the victor. Indeed, it is hard to imagine any
other circumstances in which any government, good or evil, would grant another
country the permanent right of intervention. Dividing the world into ''spheres
of humanitarian interest'' could well require one, two, three, many wars.

What is driving Bass, I suspect, is the feeling so many of us had during the
1990s: outrage over the tragic failure of the United States and its European
allies to stop the genocide in Rwanda, and their long, inexcusable delay about
doing so in Bosnia. He would like to make sure this never happens again -- and
so would I. But his book appears at a historical moment totally overshadowed by
a far larger and more dangerous intervention, which he refers to only in
passing: the catastrophic invasion of Iraq.

This invasion was multilateral (remember the ''coalition of the willing''?) and,
after those elusive weapons of mass destruction could not be found, quickly
rebranded as humanitarian: a crusade to depose a tyrant and install democracy.
In a supposedly postcolonial age, interventions will almost always be promoted
as humanitarian. And in a world running short of fossil fuels, most of them,
like the one in Iraq, are ultimately likely to be about oil. I'm all for using a
large toolbox of instruments to establish a world standard for human rights:
investigations, boycotts, embargoes, transnational indictments like the one that
snared General Pinochet, the International Criminal Court and more. We should
also set an example by not torturing prisoners or holding them for years without
charge or trial. But in a decade roiled by the Iraq war, a decade that could
also see an attack on Iran, we should think long and hard before urging powerful
nations to shoulder their military ''responsibilities.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The United States military delivering humanitarian aid to
Georgia on Aug. 14. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DAVID MDZINARISHVILI/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WRITERS (89%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); JOURNALISM (76%); BRITISH PRIME
MINISTERS (71%); ARMED FORCES (70%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (67%); RELIGION
(50%); PRIME MINISTERS (50%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (70%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); FRANCE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CENTRAL ASIA
(79%); ASIA (79%); SYRIA (79%); AUSTRIA (54%)

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             703 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Libel Tourism': When Freedom of Speech Takes a Holiday

BYLINE: By ADAM COHEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL OBSERVER; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 731 words


When Rachel Ehrenfeld wrote ''Funding Evil: How Terrorism Is Financed  and How
to Stop It,'' she assumed she would be protected by the First Amendment. She
was, in the United States. But a wealthy Saudi businessman she accused in the
book of being a funder of terrorism, Khalid bin Mahfouz, sued in Britain, where
the libel laws are heavily weighted against journalists, and won a sizable
amount of money.

The lawsuit is a case of what legal experts are calling ''libel tourism.'' Ms.
Ehrenfeld is an American, and ''Funding Evil'' was never published in Britain.
But at least 23 copies of the book were sold online, opening the door for the
lawsuit. When Ms. Ehrenfeld decided not to defend the suit in Britain, Mr. bin
Mahfouz won a default judgment and is now free to sue to collect in the United
States.

The upshot is a First Amendment loophole. In the Internet age, almost every
American book can be bought in Britain. That means American authors are subject
to being sued under British libel law, which in some cases puts the initial
burden on the defendant to prove the truth of what she has written. British
libel law is so tilted against writers that the United Nations Human Rights
Committee criticized it last month for discouraging discussion of important
matters of public interest.

Mr.  bin Mahfouz, who has denied financing terrorism, said Ms. Ehrenfeld's book
contained inaccuracies and demanded a retraction. He also demanded a significant
contribution to a charity of his choice -- a charity Ms. Ehrenfeld said she
feared would be one with ties to terrorism. Ms. Ehrenfeld, who describes herself
as being ''in the business of stopping people who fund terrorism,'' refused to
back down. ''I said,'' she later recalled, ''he's found the wrong victim.''

Ms. Ehrenfeld rallied prominent champions of free speech to her cause, including
the American Library Association, the Association of American Publishers and the
PEN American Center. She also set to work trying to change American law. The New
York State Legislature passed a bill that some are calling ''Rachel's law,''
which blocks enforcement of libel judgments from countries that provide less
free-speech protection than the United States. Gov. David Paterson signed it on
May 1.

A similar, bipartisan bill has been introduced in Congress. The federal bill
would extend protection to the entire country. It would also allow American
authors and publishers to countersue, and if a jury found that the foreign suit
was an attempt to suppress protected speech, it could award treble damages.
There is little opposition to it -- and Congress should pass it before it
adjourns later this month.

''Libel tourism'' is a threat to America's robust free-speech traditions, which
protect authors here. If foreign libel judgments can be enforced in American
courts, there will be a ''race to the bottom''; writers will only have as much
protection as the least pro-free-speech nations allow.

Most writers, particularly  those  who concern themselves with arcane subjects
like terrorism financing, are not wealthy. The prospect of a deep-pocketed
plaintiff coming after them in court can be frightening. Even if the lawsuit
fails, the cost and effort involved in defending against it can be considerable.

The result is what lawyers call a ''chilling effect'' -- authors and publishers
may avoid taking on some subjects, or challenging powerful interests. That has
already been happening in Britain. Craig Unger's ''House of Bush, House of Saud:
The Secret Relationship Between the World's Two Most Powerful Dynasties'' was a
best seller in the United States. But its British publisher canceled plans to
publish the book, reportedly out of fear of being sued. (A smaller publisher
later released it.)

Ms. Ehrenfeld says that even in the United States, writers and publishers have
been backing away from books about terrorism financing -- particularly about the
Saudi connection -- out of fear of being sued. It is hard to know if other books
are not being written out of fear of lawsuits -- that is the essence of the
chilling effect.

Britain should rethink its libel laws, as the U.N. committee urged, for the sake
of its citizens. But until it does, the United States should ensure that other
countries' pro-plaintiff libel laws do not infect this country and diminish our
proud tradition of freedom of expression.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LIBEL & SLANDER (92%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); WRITERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PUBLISHING (89%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); CHARITIES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%);
LEGISLATION (77%); DAMAGES (76%); JURY TRIALS (76%); VERDICTS (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL
ASSOCIATIONS (63%)

COMPANY: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

PERSON: DAVID PATERSON (50%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 17, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

NATO Tries to Reduce Afghan Casualties

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER; Salman Masood contributed reporting from Islamabad,
Pakistan, and Graham Bowley and Eric Schmitt from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 971 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


The senior American military commander in Afghanistan said Tuesday that in an
effort to reduce civilian casualties, he had tightened the rules around when
NATO troops here may use lethal force.

The commander, Gen. David D. McKiernan, also said that the military mission in
Afghanistan was still short-handed by thousands of troops. General McKiernan was
speaking to reporters traveling with Defense Secretary Robert M. Gates, who
arrived here after attending the ceremony for the change of American commanders
in Baghdad.

President Bush has ordered that an additional Marine Corps battalion and an Army
brigade combat team arrive in Afghanistan by early next year. But even then,
General McKiernan said, the Afghan mission requires at least three more combat
brigades. The total of additional combat and support troops needed could exceed
15,000.

The additional forces are required to stem violence across Afghanistan, which is
up about 30 percent compared with this time last year, the general said  in an
interview at his headquarters here.

Because of the troop shortage, he said, the military was relying more on air
power; that has contributed to the rise in civilian casualties, which has
outraged Afghans and brought international condemnation.

The civilian casualties have also become one of the greatest sources of tension
between NATO forces and the Afghan government.

Hoping to reduce that toll, General McKiernan said, he issued a ''revised
tactical order'' to NATO troops on Sept. 2, which emphasized putting Afghan
forces out front in searches of homes and requiring multiple sources of
information before attacking targets.

It also set rules calibrating how quickly troops may increase their use of force
to lethal levels, the general said.

Most of the rules were already in place, General McKiernan said, but the revised
order also was meant to re-emphasize proper procedures, especially as new forces
are scheduled to enter the combat zone in the coming months.

The revised order was issued after an American strike in Western Afghanistan in
August, but fell short of the formal status-of-forces agreement demanded by the
Afghan government in the wake of that strike.

The Afghan government and the United Nations said that the strike had killed
about 90 civilians. The United States military says only 5 to 7 civilians were
killed, along with more than 30 insurgents. But General McKiernan has reopened
the military's investigation of the episode.

For civilians and American and NATO forces, this year has been the deadliest
since the Taliban were ousted in 2001, according to the office of the United
Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights, which released its latest casualty
figures on Tuesday.

It said 1,445 civilians were killed in the first eight months of this year,
compared with 1,040 for the same period in 2007.

Of those deaths, 800, or 55 percent, were attributed to the Taliban and other
insurgent forces, twice the number from last year, as they press a campaign of
intimidation aimed at civilians who support the government.

In a common refrain of military commanders, General McKiernan said ultimate
success in the war depended on competent government and economic development.

He also acknowledged that a particularly vexing problem facing the military
effort was that the insurgents have found a haven across the border in tribal
areas of Pakistan, where American commandos carried out an incursion from
Afghanistan on Sept. 3.

That incursion, along with a rising number of strikes by unmanned drones, has
severely strained relations between the United States and Pakistan.

The chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm. Mike Mullen, made a hastily
arranged visit to Pakistan on Tuesday for talks aimed at easing those tensions.
Like Mr. Gates, he arrived after attending the ceremony in Baghdad where Gen.
Ray Odierno took over command of American forces in Iraq from Gen. David H.
Petraeus.

Admiral Mullen's visit also coincided with conflicting accounts about a possible
second American raid on Monday, as well as a warning by the Pakistan military
that it would shoot at any foreign forces that crossed the border.

A Pakistani military spokesman, Maj. Gen. Athar Abbas, said the Pakistani Army
reserved the right to use force to defend the country and its people, but he
said there was ''no change in policy.''

Asked what the Pakistan military would do if there was a future incursion by
American troops, he said: ''There is a big 'if' involved. We will see to it when
such a situation arises.''

A Pakistani governor made a televised appearance on Tuesday to insist that
American forces had tried to cross the border early Monday and had been repulsed
by Pakistani fire, as local residents and a Pakistani government official had
said the day before.

But the Pakistani and United States military publicly denied any such incursion,
and a Pakistani intelligence official said an American helicopter had mistakenly
crossed the border briefly, leading Pakistani ground forces to fire into the
air.

In an interview on Pakistani television on Tuesday, the governor, Owais Ahmed
Ghani of North-West Frontier Province, said that only Pakistan had ''a right to
conduct operations on its soil.''

He said that Pakistan ''will jealously guard its right,'' and that incursions
will not be tolerated.

The Pakistani leadership, meanwhile, has warned that American attacks on
Pakistani soil threaten to undermine the country's democratically elected
government.

''This situation doesn't help democracy,'' Pakistan's newly elected president,
Asif Ali Zardari, was quoted as saying after meeting in London on Tuesday with
Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain.

Asked about future cross-border raids, Mr. Zardari said, ''I don't think there
will be any more.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (94%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TALIBAN (89%); ARMIES (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%);
INVESTIGATIONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (94%)

PERSON: ROBERT M GATES (56%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (57%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (57%)

LOAD-DATE: September 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indian Police Kill 2 Suspects In Bombings Of New Delhi

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 336 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Less than a week after five bombs tore through busy streets and markets in the
Indian capital, the city police said they had killed the mastermind of the
serial blasts in a gun battle in an apartment in a crowded neighborhood.

Police identified the man only as Atif, also known as Basheer, who they said
belonged to Indian Mujahedeen, a group that claimed responsibility for the
blasts that took place Sept. 13.  The police said they killed one of his
accomplices and arrested a second, while two others escaped.

The city's police chief, Y. S. Dadwal, told reporters on Friday evening that the
suspects fired first during a raid on what they suspected was a militant safe
house in a Muslim-majority neighborhood, Jamia Nagar. The shootings, known in
the peculiar parlance of Indian law enforcement as ''encounter killings,'' come
as pressure mounts on Indian officials to respond to a spate of terrorist
attacks around the country.

Encounter killings are commonly used to eliminate criminal and terrorism
suspects, human rights advocates say. They say that these killings have been a
favorite tactic of Indian officials in insurgency-hit states like Kashmir.

Muslim groups have cautioned police against conducting random sweeps of Muslim
neighborhoods. The raid on Friday led the All India Minority Forum  to call for
a judicial inquiry into the killings.

Previous terrorist attacks have also been followed by raids and sometimes
killings of suspects. But they have done nothing to stanch future attacks.

The police said Friday that they seized a computer and an AK-47 rifle from the
apartment.

The New Delhi bombings, which killed at least 21 people, came on the heels of a
series of terrorist attacks in recent months for which the Indian Mujahedeen, a
previously unknown outfit, claimed responsibility.

Last July, serial bombings in the western city of Ahmedabad killed more than 50
people, a day after a bomb in Bangalore killed one. In May, synchronized bombs
in Jaipur, west of here, killed more than 60.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Police officers near the site of a gunfight with bombing
suspects in New Delhi. The police said that they killed two and arrested one and
that two others escaped. (PHOTOGRAPH BY GURINDER OSAN/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); SHOOTINGS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (90%); BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (58%); AHMEDABAD,
GUJARAT, INDIA (58%)

STATE: KASHMIR (79%); KARNATAKA, INDIA (58%); GUJARAT, INDIA (58%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (99%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             714 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 13, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

North Koreans Confirm Pledge to Disable Plant

BYLINE: By CHOE SANG-HUN and HELENE COOPER; Choe Sang-hun reported from Seoul,
and Helene Cooper from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 902 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea


North Korea welcomed its removal from Washington's list of terrorism sponsors
and confirmed on Sunday that it would resume disabling its main nuclear weapons
complex and allow international monitors back to the site.

Washington's decision to take North Korea off the list of state sponsors of
terrorism, announced Saturday, is an important symbolic gesture for the North,
an isolated and poverty-stricken country, removing one of hurdles to gaining a
measure of international acceptance. But there is much in Washington's tortuous
relationship with North Korea that stays the same, including economic sanctions
against the North.

President Bush said in June that he was prepared to take North Korea off the
terrorism list in recognition of the country's commitment to halt its
development of nuclear weapons. The offer languished for months as
administration officials tried to persuade North Korean officials to allow a
strict inspection program to verify that the country was keeping its word.

In the end, the administration won only some concessions. The State Department
said that the new agreement called for American inspectors to be granted access
not only to declared nuclear sites, but also, ''based on mutual consent,'' to
sites where the United States suspected nuclear activity.

In the past, once accords were reached, North Korea and the United States have
disagreed about what was promised. The North Korean position on Sunday came in
the form of remarks attributed by the Korean Central News Agency, a state organ,
to an unnamed spokesman for the Foreign Ministry. The remarks confirmed the
State Department's understanding that the North Korean government would return
to its earlier work disabling the plutonium plant at its Yongbyon compound. But
it did not mention inspections at undeclared nuclear sites.

Kim Sook, the South Korean nuclear envoy, said Sunday that American officials
had resorted to ''indirect and condensed terminology'' to facilitate a
compromise, and that he believed the two sides shared an understanding of the
wording.

In part to fend off criticism that they did not get enough concessions from
North Korea, Bush administration officials were quick to cite the long list of
punitive restrictions still in force. Indeed, reporters at the State Department
news conference Saturday morning were handed the list of sanctions before they
were given the fact sheet that said North Korea was being removed from the
terrorism list.

''North Korea remains subject to numerous sanctions resulting from its 2006
nuclear test, its proliferation activities, its human rights violations and its
status as a Communist state,'' Sean McCormack, a State Department spokesman,
said.

The list of trade prohibitions is long.

It includes a ban on exports of nuclear and missile-related items, heavy
conventional arms and ''luxury goods,'' which the United Nations Security
Council imposed in retaliation for North Korea's detonating a nuclear device in
October 2006. How to apply the ban on luxury goods was left to each country to
determine as it saw fit; the United States tried to tailor its ban to deprive
the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-il, of the types of goods he was reported to
like most. The list included DVD players and big flat-screen television sets.

John R. Bolton, a former United States ambassador to the United Nations and a
sharp critic of the deal that was announced on Saturday, argues that even if
taking North Korea off the terrorism list is symbolic, it  could encourage
foreign investment there.

''By taking them off the terrorism list, you remove one of the legitimizers of
the other sanctions,'' Mr. Bolton, a former under secretary of state for arms
control and international security, said Sunday. ''For North Korea, that was
important, because it makes them look like more of a normal nation.''

Worries about granting legitimacy to North Korea also appeared to color
reactions in Japan.

Japanese leaders had wanted to use possible removal from the terrorism list as
leverage to force the North to address concerns over abductions of Japanese
citizens decades ago. Although the State Department emphasized that both Mr.
Bush and Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice had spoken with their Japanese
counterparts, the country's finance minister, Shoichi Nakagawa, said he doubted
that Japanese officials had been fully consulted beforehand.

Still, on Sunday, Prime Minister Taro Aso said that Japan and the other
countries negotiating with North Korea in ''six-party talks'' on its nuclear
program would have ''ample opportunity'' to discuss the kidnappings. ''We have
not lost any leverage at all,'' the Japanese prime minister was quoted as
saying.

The South Korean government hailed the agreement as an important breakthrough,
stopping North Korea from making good on threats to reactivate its nuclear
weapons program.

Some hawkish members of the governing party in Seoul, which won a majority in
elections in April with a promise to get tough on the North, complained that
North Korea had been allowed to slip off the terrorism list without apologizing
for the bombing of a South Korean passenger jet in 1987, in which 115 people
were killed.

North Korea was put on the terrorism list after South Korea arrested a woman who
later said she was a North Korean agent and had planted a bomb on the jet. North
Korea has denied involvement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NUCLEAR WEAPONS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); EXPORT
TRADE (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); INSPECTIONS (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); LUXURY GOODS (60%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (95%);
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             723 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 22, 2008 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Summoning the Songs of Voices Stilled

BYLINE: By STEVE SMITH

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; MUSIC REVIEW; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 498 words


In a recital the appealing soprano Isabel Bayrakdarian presented at Zankel Hall
in March, she and her husband, Serouj Kradjian, a pianist and composer, included
a handful of songs by Gomidas, a composer revered as an architect of Armenian
music. Those selections, it turns out, were the preface to a deeper exploration:
Ms. Bayrakdarian and Mr. Kradjian, both Canadians of Armenian descent, recently
issued an irresistible CD, ''Gomidas Songs,'' on the Nonesuch label.

When Ms. Bayrakdarian and Mr. Kradjian arrived at Zankel Hall with the Manitoba
Chamber Orchestra on Monday night, they were wrapping up a tour promoting the
disc. But the title of their program, ''Remembrance Concert,'' indicated another
mission: the tour, sponsored by the International Institute for Genocide and
Human Rights Studies, was meant to commemorate victims of the massacre of
Armenians in Turkey starting in 1915, and of all genocides.

Gomidas, a priest as well as a composer, collected and arranged hundreds of
Armenian folk songs around the turn of the 20th century, before his career was
cut short by the events of 1915. Though his life was spared through the
intervention of notable associates, his spirit was shattered; he died four years
later in a French psychiatric clinic.

Some selections, like ''Andooni''  (''Without a Home'') and ''Groong''  (''The
Crane''), overtly conveyed the ache of the concert's premise. But even in gentle
songs dealing with themes of youth, nature and love, a hint of sadness lingered.

Ms. Bayrakdarian playfully gamboled through childlike melodies, her voice warm
and sunny; in the laments her plaintive tone cut to the heart. She made
sinuously winding melismatic passages seem effortless.

Mr. Kradjian's transparent orchestrations provided a flattering backdrop, with
colorful flourishes like pattering raindrops in ''Antsrevn Yegav'' (''It's
Raining'') and rustling winds in ''Dzirani Dzar'' (''Apricot Tree''). Some songs
featured gorgeously breathy sounds from Hampic Djabourian on duduk, a
double-reed instrument that sounds something like a soprano saxophone. Yet the
loveliest selection was the simplest: ''Akh Maral Jan'' (''Ah, Dear Maral''), in
which Ms. Bayrakdarian's voice soared over Mr. Kradjian's spare arpeggios.

The rest of the program reflected the concert's title in different ways. Ravel's
''Two Hebraic Songs,'' and Variations on a Moravian Folksong by Gideon Klein, a
Holocaust victim, forged a connection to the horrors of World War II. Ms.
Bayrakdarian gave a stirring account of the Ravel songs, and Anne Manson, the
conductor, drew hearty sounds from the players in the Klein work.

Bartok's Romanian Folk Dances and Nikos Skalkottas's Greek Dances, like the
Gomidas songs, preserved folkloric sources in concert-music guise. Ms. Manson
favored poise and polish over grit and elasticity, to curiously anemic effect at
times. Mr. Kradjian, in a set of Gomidas piano works, struck a more persuasive
balance between elegance and spirit.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 2008



CORRECTION: A music review on Wednesday about a concert by the soprano Isabel
Bayrakdarian, at Zankel Hall, featuring music of the Armenian composer Gomidas
misstated the date of his death. It was in 1935, two decades after the start of
the massacre of Armenians in Turkey in 1915, not four years after.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Isabel Bayrakdarian with the pianist Serouj Kradjian and the
Manitoba Chamber Orchestra.(PHOTOGRAPH BY RACHEL PAPO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSIC (90%); MUSIC COMPOSITION (90%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (90%); WIND
INSTRUMENTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); FOLK & WORLD MUSIC (89%); KEYBOARD
INSTRUMENTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (78%); DANCE (78%); MUSIC
GROUPS & ARTISTS (78%); MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS (78%); SPONSORSHIP (77%); HOLOCAUST
(69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); WORLD WAR II (60%)

STATE: MANITOBA, CANADA (72%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (93%); CANADA (88%); TURKEY (71%)

LOAD-DATE: October 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             726 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 24, 2008 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Afghan Bombing Kills 3 Coalition Troops

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and TAIMOOR SHAH; Carlotta Gall and Taimoor Shah
reported from Kabul. Alan Cowell contributed from London.

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 422 words


KABUL, Afghanistan --  The United States military said on Thursday that a
roadside bomb had killed three soldiers from the American-led coalition fighting
militants.

A U.S. military statement gave no details of the nationality or the precise
location of the attack in western Afghanistan, but said a fourth soldier was
wounded in the incident.

The governor of Farah Province in western Afghanistan, Ruhul Amin, said on
Thursday that a roadside bomb hit a vehicle carrying three coalition members on
patrol at night, but he did not specify their nationality or indicate that there
had been fatalities.

United States forces in Farah Province run a reconstruction team.

The number of militant attacks has risen sharply this year as the resurgent
Taliban, driven out by an American-led force in 2001, seeks to undermine the
government of President Hamid Karzai and its western backers.

The bombing came one day after the United States-led coalition said on Wednesday
that an airstrike by its forces that  killed nine Afghan Army soldiers may have
been a case of mutually mistaken identity.

Gen. Zahir Azimi, the spokesman for the Afghan Defense Ministry, said the
airstrike in Khost Province in eastern Afghanistan killed nine soldiers and
wounded three others, one seriously. Other officials in the area said the attack
might have been carried out by helicopter gunships.

In a statement, the coalition said a convoy of its troops had been ''involved in
multiple engagements'' that led to the deaths of the Afghan soldiers. ''Initial
reports from troops on the ground indicate that this may be a case of mistaken
identity on both sides,'' the statement said.

It did not give a death toll or identify the nationality of the force
responsible for the strike.

Col. Greg Julian, a spokesman for American forces in Afghanistan, said the
fighting erupted as coalition troops approached an Afghan Army position.

Afghan anger over airstrikes has been deepening, but mainly over civilian
casualties. American and NATO airstrikes have killed some 500 Afghan civilians
in the past five years, according to Human Rights Watch and news reports. In one
of the most contentious cases, an American AC-130 gunship attacked a suspected
Taliban compound in August, prompting assertions by villagers that more than 90
civilians were killed, a majority of them women and children.

The American military initially said five to seven civilians were killed, but a
subsequent report by a military investigator put the civilian death toll at more
than 30.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (91%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); ARMIES (90%); BOMBS
& EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED
FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (73%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); HELICOPTERS (50%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (96%)

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             728 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 27, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lessons From the '83 Beirut Bombing

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 697 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Lebanon's Bloody Sunday,'' by Randy Gaddo, and ''From Beirut to 9/11,'' by
Robert C. McFarlane (Op-Ed, Oct. 23):

No one doubts that radical Islamic terrorists are a real threat and that the
United States should have an active, engaged foreign policy in the Middle East.

When Mr. Gaddo and Mr. McFarlane rehash ''stay the course'' arguments, however,
they don't note the long history of Middle Eastern occupation by white
Europeans. The military occupation of Iraq has convinced many Middle Eastern
Muslims that we are just the latest colonial power bent on domination of land,
wealth and resources, namely oil.

What if we pursued a policy of energy independence to demonstrate that we don't
need the oil, withdrew our soldiers to demonstrate that we are not an empire,
and put our best foot forward by promoting human rights, education and
sustainable development? We might actually gain some allies in the region.

Charles C. Wall   East Setauket, N.Y., Oct. 23, 2008

To the Editor:

Robert C. McFarlane suggests that had the United States stayed in Lebanon after
the bombing of the Marine barracks, it could have salvaged the ''fragile''
Lebanese government instead of sending a message of paralysis.

He doesn't mention that by the time American troops entered Beirut, the Lebanese
civil war had been raging for nearly a decade, pitting an array of combatants at
the cost of thousands of lives.

Had Vice President George H. W. Bush in early 1984 not conveyed to President
Ronald Reagan the consensus of the national security advisers that it was time
to quit, the United States would have been required to send many more troops,
resulting in many more American deaths.

Today, with all its difficulties, Lebanon is managing its affairs without our
boots on the ground. The lesson of Lebanon should be this: When confronted with
family quarrels (civil wars) that don't affect our vital national interests,
stay out.

Bennett Ramberg  Los Angeles, Oct. 23, 2008

The writer served as a policy analyst at the State Department during the George
H. W. Bush administration.

To the Editor:

Randy Gaddo and Robert C. McFarlane are no doubt correct that terrorists
concluded after the bombing of the Marine barracks in Beirut that their tactics
were effective in neutralizing American power. Yet both writers seem to perceive
a single enemy, ''Middle Eastern terrorists,'' behind that attack and those
since.

Terrorism is a means, not the product of some unified ''terrorist army'' we can
meet head-on and destroy. To begin with, Hezbollah is a Shiite group; Al Qaeda
is Sunni. Part of our vulnerability stems from our unwillingness to understand
what differentiates the identities and motives of terrorist groups.

The writers' suggestions that military might will prevail in this struggle are
more elegies for an America-dominated past than realistic appraisals of the
globalized present, in which diplomacy, education and travel are powerful arms
for defending pluralism and democracy.

By all means let us be strong -- but let us be smart, too.

Mark Cruse   Tempe, Ariz., Oct. 23, 2008

To the Editor:

The United States had no business being involved in Beirut. One could argue that
the terrorists would not have come to the United States 18 years later if it had
not been involved in Beirut in the first place. The reason so many in the Middle
East are against us is that we prop up dictators and monarchs and blatantly side
with one country on each and every issue.

Suresh Kamath  Edison, N.J., Oct. 23, 2008

To the Editor:

Robert C. McFarlane wants ''experience and judgment in the White House.'' So do
I.

On April 18, 1983, the United States Embassy in Beirut was bombed. Sixty-three
people were killed, including 17 Americans. Many more were severely injured,
including my sister. That bombing was six months before the Marine barracks
bombing, yet Mr. McFarlane doesn't mention it.

The current Treasury secretary, Henry M. Paulson Jr., failed to anticipate the
present chaos on Wall Street. We don't need another unprepared administration.
We need  Barack Obama and Joseph R. Biden Jr.

Elizabeth Simon   Port Washington, N.Y., Oct. 23, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORISM (89%); WRITERS (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); RELIGION
(77%); ARMIES (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%);
FOREIGN POLICY (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(67%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (79%); GEORGE H W BUSH (56%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (95%)

COUNTRY: LEBANON (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); MIDDLE EAST (94%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             730 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 29, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iran: American Student Held

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING MIDDLE EAST; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 102 words


An Iranian-American graduate student from Los Angeles has been detained for
nearly two weeks by the Iranian authorities, a Foreign Ministry spokesman,
Hassan Ghashghavi, said Tuesday. The student, Esha Momeni, was in Iran to visit
relatives and do research on women's rights when she was arrested on Oct. 15
while driving in Tehran, according to Amnesty International. Iranian officials
said initially that she had been arrested for a traffic violation. But Amnesty
International said that after being stopped, Ms. Momeni was taken to her
relatives' home, where her computer and research materials were confiscated.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (88%); VEHICULAR
OFFENSES (86%); ARRESTS (84%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (55%); WOMEN (55%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); IRAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 29, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Somalia: Rape Victim Executed

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 69 words


A woman was stoned to death for adultery on Monday in an Islamist-controlled
region of Somalia. Somali human rights officials said the woman, 23, had been
raped, but the Islamist authorities determined that she was guilty of adultery.
She was buried up to her neck and stoned after a crowd of thousands gathered at
a soccer field in the town of Kismayu, which is controlled by the Shabab, a
radical Islamist group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL-SHABAAB (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); SOCCER (52%)

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             736 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 7, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Rare Turn, Iran's Leader Sends Letter To Obama

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI; Ethan Bronner contributed reporting from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN


President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran sent an unusual letter congratulating
President-elect Barack Obama on Thursday for his victory in the American
presidential race, even though the two nations have had no diplomatic ties for
nearly 30 years.

Mr. Ahmadinejad has written letters to world leaders in the past, including one
to President Bush. But this is the first time an Iranian leader has
congratulated the winner of an American election, at least since the Iranian
revolution.

Diplomatic ties between Iran and the United States were severed in 1979, when
radical students attacked the United States Embassy in Tehran and took American
diplomats hostage.

Iranian leaders continue to use hostile language toward the United States, and
Mr. Ahmadinejad had said that he did not think a black candidate could be
elected because of racial discrimination.

''I congratulate you for attracting the majority of votes in the election,'' Mr.
Ahmadinejad wrote in his message, an Iranian news agency, ISNA, reported. ''As
you know, opportunities that are bestowed upon humans are short lived,'' he
wrote, adding that he hoped Mr. Obama would make the most of the opportunity.

The delivery of the letter coincided with a move by the Bush administration to
put more pressure on Iran by adding measures that prohibit financial
institutions from helping Iranian banks, the government or others in the
country, the Treasury Department said Thursday.

Previously, American financial institutions were allowed to handle certain money
transfers that might have directly or indirectly helped Iranian interests. But
the action announced Thursday ended what the Treasury Department called ''the
last general entry point for Iranian banks.'' Still, exceptions will be granted
in certain cases, like individual remittances and humanitarian aid.

In his letter, Mr. Ahmadinejad said that people in America and around the world
expected Mr. Obama to make major changes in domestic and foreign policy, and to
limit American interference in other parts of the world.

''People in the world expect war-oriented policies, occupation, bullying,
deception and intimidation of nations and imposing discriminatory policies on
them and international affairs, which have evoked hatred toward American
leaders, to be replaced by ones advocating justice, respect for human rights,
friendship and noninterference in other countries' affairs,'' the letter said,
according to ISNA.

''They also want the U.S. intervention to be limited to its borders, especially
in the sensitive region of the Middle East,'' it said. ''It is expected to
reverse the unfair attitude of the past 60 years to restore the rights of people
in Palestine, Iraq and Afghanistan.''

Mr. Obama has said that he would engage in aggressive diplomacy with Iran, and
that he might offer economic incentives if Iran were more cooperative on issues
like terrorism and nuclear development.

His position has stirred concerns among some world leaders. The Israeli foreign
minister, Tzipi Livni, expressed her concerns on Thursday after Mr. Obama's
victory became clear, saying that he should not talk to Iran because it might
send the wrong signal.

''We live in a neighborhood in which sometimes dialogue -- in a situation where
you have brought sanctions and then switch to dialogue -- is liable to be
interpreted as weakness,'' Ms. Livni said in an interview on Israel Radio.

Iran's foreign policy is decided by the supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali
Khamenei.

It was not clear whether Mr. Ahmadinejad had the ayatollah's approval to send a
message to Mr. Obama, but his letter to Mr. Bush raised speculation that Iran
was trying to open a dialogue with the United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (91%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008
(91%); BANKING & FINANCE (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (88%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (86%); ELECTIONS
(79%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); FOREIGN
POLICY (77%); TERRORISM (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); RACE & RACISM (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (92%); MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (59%);
TZIPORA LIVNI (50%)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); IRAN (88%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); ISRAEL
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             737 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 8, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

China's Prisoner Treatment Scrutinized

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING UNITED NATIONS; Pg.
12

LENGTH: 147 words


China's record on its reatment of prisoners came under intense scrutiny on
Friday, with members of the United Nations Committee Against Torture questioning
the way the government carried out laws barring abusive practices. The review,
which is being conducted at the United Nations in Geneva and is the first in
seven years, focused on numerous detention issues.

Felice Gaer, the investigator for the committee, said there was a serious lack
of information in China's responses to questions that were raised, according to
a summary of the proceedings released to the news media. The Chinese ambassador
to the United Nations in Geneva, Li Baodong, told the committee that his country
had made progress in recent years on banning torture, with law enforcement
officials undergoing training in the rule of law and human rights. The committee
is expected to issue its findings in two weeks.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
RULE OF LAW (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (71%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (95%); SWITZERLAND (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             745 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 14, 2008 Friday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Laura Bush Condemns Taliban Attack on Schoolgirls

BYLINE: By SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 213 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Laura Bush, broadening her reach as a foreign policy spokeswoman for the Bush
administration, condemned the Taliban on Thursday as ''cowardly and shameful''
for this week's attack on eight Afghan schoolgirls who were doused with acid.

''The Taliban's continued terror attacks threaten the progress that has been
made in Afghanistan,'' the first lady said in an official statement released by
the White House, adding, ''These cowardly and shameful acts are condemned by
honorable people in the United States and around the world.''

The girls were assaulted Wednesday by two men on a motorcycle who were
apparently irate that they dared to attend high school. The men drove up beside
them and splashed their faces with what appeared to be battery acid.

Although she has spoken out on other foreign policy matters, notably human
rights abuses in Myanmar, the former Burma, it is unusual for the first lady to
issue an official foreign policy statement in her own name.

But Mrs. Bush has been a passionate advocate for the women of Afghanistan
throughout her husband's tenure. She has visited the war-torn country three
times to spotlight development and women's issues, most recently in June, a trip
that was cloaked in secrecy so she would not become a target of terrorists.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TERRORISM (77%); WOMEN
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); MOTOR VEHICLES (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); MYANMAR (92%); AFGHANISTAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: November 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             746 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 16, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Footnotes: Welcome to My World, Barack

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; Pg. 46

LENGTH: 506 words


1. In the Cedar Revolution, widespread street protests in Lebanon led to the
withdrawal of Syrian forces and the establishment of a new government. Beginning
in the fall of 2004, the Orange Revolution in Ukraine brought about the
annulling of a rigged election and the inauguration of President Viktor
Yushchenko in January 2005. In June 2005, the Rose Revolution in Georgia swept
Mikheil Saakashvili to power.

2. Last month, the European Parliament awarded its Andrei Sakharov prize to Hu
Jia, a Chinese dissident who is currently serving a three-and-a-half-year prison
sentence for his human rights advocacy.

3. A branch of Ikea, in Khimki, a small city just northwest of Moscow, borders
the Tank Trap Monument, which lies on the spot where the Soviet Army repelled
the German advance on Moscow.

4. In 2006, Britain's Parliament passed the Terrorism Act, which criminalizes
statements that are likely to be understood as ''direct or indirect
encouragement'' to commit terrorist acts. In the same year, Parliament also
passed the Racial and Religious Hatred Act, which made it a crime to incite
religious hatred.

5. In November 2007, Condoleezza Rice brought world leaders to Annapolis, Md.,
where they gave their support to the Israeli prime minister, Ehud Olmert, and
the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas. Olmert and Abbas pledged to
work together toward a peace treaty, with the goal of completing negotiations by
the end of 2008.

6. In 2005, Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon resigned from the Likud Party,
his longtime base, and founded the Kadima Party. He did so mainly in order to
carry out his plans for a unilateral withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.

7. Although the United States and Iran do not have normal diplomatic ties, there
is a U.S. ''diplomatic interests'' office in Dubai, where visas can be issued to
Iranian citizens. Earlier this year, some administration officials suggested
that the existing, modest interests section in Tehran be upgraded to offer
visas.

8. In 2006, the United Nations adopted the principle of ''the responsibility to
protect.'' It stipulates that the international community must protect the
rights of people inside a sovereign country if the governmentof that country is
failing to protect them.

9. NATO countries operating in Afghanistan have frequently insisted on
conditions of service, or ''caveats,'' rather than agreeing simply to place
their forces at the NATO commander's disposition.

10. In the NATO Charter, Article 5 decrees that an attack on one member of the
alliance is an attack on all. It was first invoked after the 9/11 attacks.

11. In 2002, President Bush announced his Millennium Challenge initiative. It
emphasized good governance and accountability in the structuring of foreign aid
and resulted in the formation of the Millennium Challenge Corporation in January
2004. Bush also undertook a number of large-scale efforts to fight AIDS, malaria
and tuberculosis, most notably the President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief,
known as Pepfar.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: November 30, 2008



CORRECTION: A footnote for an interview on Nov. 16 with Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice and other Bush administration officials misstated the date of
the Rose Revolution in Georgia, during which President Mikheil Saakashvili came
to power and to which Rice referred. It was November 2003, not June 2005.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: List

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (88%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CORPORATE GOVERNANCE (75%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); ELECTION FRAUD
(73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (72%); JAIL SENTENCING
(70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (70%); SENTENCING (70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(70%); PEACE PROCESS (68%); MALARIA (60%); AIDS & HIV (50%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); VIKTOR YUSHCHENKO (58%); MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI (58%);
CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); EHUD OLMERT (58%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (52%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);
ANNAPOLIS, MD, USA (75%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); MARYLAND USA
(75%)

COUNTRY: UKRAINE (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); ISRAEL (92%); EUROPE (92%); SYRIA
(92%); LEBANON (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); GEORGIA (88%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); GERMANY (79%); IRAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             747 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 19, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Reporters' Group Fights Israeli Prohibition on Entering Gaza

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


An association representing international news organizations is campaigning for
an end to an unusual Israeli policy barring foreign reporters from entering Gaza
that has lasted for almost two weeks.

The local Foreign Press Association, which represents reporters working for
foreign news companies in Israel and the Palestinian territories, asked
presidents of major news organizations on Tuesday to sign a letter to Prime
Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel protesting the policy.  The association said it
was also enlisting the help of a number of foreign governments  and was
consulting with lawyers regarding possible legal action.

Israel has almost sealed the crossing points along its border with Gaza since a
five-month cease-fire with Hamas, which controls the strip, began to unravel on
Nov. 4.

At least 15 Palestinian militants have been killed in clashes with Israeli
forces since, and about 140 rockets and mortar shells have been fired from Gaza
into southern Israel, the Israeli military said.

Although Israel has often closed  border crossings and halted deliveries of
goods and fuel to Gaza in response to rocket fire, foreign journalists have
usually been allowed to cross to report.

This time, all movement in and out of Gaza is being halted, except for essential
humanitarian cases, said Shlomo Dror, a spokesman for the Israeli Defense
Ministry.

''The decision is not directed against journalists,'' Mr. Dror said. ''The
situation in Gaza is clear: There  is daily firing, we have information about
possible attacks on the crossings and we are limiting our activity there as much
as possible.''

Mr. Dror added that he was not ''shedding tears'' over the journalists'
frustration. He said that Israel, in any case, considered much of their previous
coverage from Gaza unfair.

Last week, 20 European consuls who were scheduled to meet with business leaders
and human rights advocates in Gaza were denied entry, on grounds that their
mission was not strictly humanitarian.

On Monday Israel allowed 33 trucks carrying basic food and medical supplies to
enter, as international aid organizations warned that the lack of supplies was
jeopardizing their operations in Gaza. Israel has also allowed one limited
delivery of fuel, and Mr. Dror said that a number of Gazans in need of medical
treatment had been allowed to leave.

He denied that there was a food or fuel crisis in Gaza, and said that the
crossings would reopen after the Palestinians stopped firing.

The truce broke down after an Israeli force entered Gaza to destroy a tunnel
that the military feared Hamas, the Islamic group that took control of Gaza in
2007, might use to abduct soldiers in a cross-border raid.

On Tuesday, Israeli forces conducted what the military called a ''routine
operation'' along the border fence in southern Gaza, searching for explosives,
and, the military said, three rockets were fired from Gaza into southern Israel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (91%); JOURNALISM (90%); NEWS REPORTING
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (89%); WRITERS (89%); HAMAS (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); LITIGATION (75%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); FOOD CRISES & SHORTAGES (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); ARMED
FORCES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (61%);
RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (56%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%)

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             754 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 10, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times, December 10, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1943 words


Foreign

SPAIN ROLLS UP THE WELCOME MAT

Jobs in Spain are disappearing, and the government is encouraging immigrant
workers to return home. Still, the country may become a laboratory for the
strains that emerge when those workers are unemployed, yet stay put.  PAGE A14

NEW LEADER OF CANADIAN PARTY

Michael Ignatieff, a former journalist and director of a human rights center,
became the effective leader of the Liberal Party of Canada.  PAGE A12

BUSH WARNS PAKISTAN

President Bush cautioned Pakistan that ''we will do what is necessary to protect
American troops and the American people'' and defended his principle of military
intervention to shut down potential national security threats before they
mature.  PAGE A10

MUMBAI ATTACKERS PART OF POOL

The 10 men who carried out the terrorist attacks in Mumbai were among 30
recruits selected for suicide missions, and the whereabouts of the other 20 are
unknown, Indian police officials said. PAGE A14

Pakistan Moves Against Militants A6 Sark Journal

Islanders Feud Over the Future

A dispute has poisoned relations among the 600 residents of Sark, an island in
the English Channel, as it prepares for its first democratic election. One side
is somewhat wary of change. The other side supports the development plans of
identical-twin British billionaires. PAGE A22

NOBEL WINNER BACKS KOSOVO STATE

Former President Martti Ahtisaari of Finland, who is scheduled to receive the
Nobel Peace Prize for mediating conflicts, spoke in favor of Kosovo's claim to
independence, saying ''progress there was irreversible.'' As he spoke, United
Nations officials in Kosovo were handing over policing responsibilities to the
European Union and local authorities. PAGE A8

REPORT ON AVOIDABLE CHILD DEATHS

A United Nations report estimated that 830,000 children -- the equivalent of all
the children in Chicago -- are killed by accidents every year. The major types
of fatal injuries are drowning, burns, traffic accidents, falls and poisoning.
PAGE A8

WOULD-BE BOMBER GETS LIFE

One of the two men behind a failed terrorist attack in Germany was sentenced to
life in prison. The man, Youssef Muhammad el-Hajdib, was convicted on multiple
counts of attempted murder for leaving two suitcase bombs on trains in Cologne
in July 2006. The bombs failed to explode. PAGE A22

A New Flotilla to Ward Off Pirates A18

National

PROSECUTORS SAY GOVERNOR

Threatened Tribune for Criticism

The Tribune Company, which filed for bankruptcy yesterday, probably had enough
problems. But federal law enforcement officials said the governor of Illinois,
Rod R. Blagojevich, had been illegally threatening to withhold the state's help
in a business deal unless the company's flagship, The Chicago Tribune, fired
editorial writers who had criticized the governor and called for his
impeachment.  PAGE A33

Prosecutor Is a Chicago Hero A33

BANK MULLS LOAN TO PAY WORKERS

Bank of America said it hoped to provide a limited amount of credit to allow a
shuttered Chicago window and door factory to pay money owed to 250 plant workers
who recently lost their jobs. Many of the workers had been peacefully occupying
the plant for five days to protest losing their jobs and had become a symbol of
resistance for workers laid off across the country. page A23

TESTS SHOW U.S. GAINS IN MATH

An international survey on student achievement found that American fourth- and
eighth-grade students made solid achievement gains in math in recent years. In
Massachusetts and Minnesota in particular, students showed spectacular progress,
outperforming classmates in all but a handful of countries. But on average, the
results also showed that several Asian countries had increased their dominance.
PAGE A23

IOWA JUSTICES HEAR MARRIAGE CASE

In a case that could make Iowa the first Midwestern state to legalize same-sex
marriage, the Iowa Supreme Court pressed lawyers for both sides with sharp
questions on topics like  the 4,000-year-old history of marriage  and whether a
ruling favoring gay couples would open the door to polygamy.   PAGE A26

JUSTICES WEIGH LAWYER MISCONDUCT

The Supreme Court considered arguments over whether Tennessee prosecutors had
overreached in obtaining and defending a death sentence against a man who
murdered a Memphis couple in 1980. It was the third time that the court
considered the case, and the hearing was filled with several testy exchanges.
PAGE A8

APPEAL HEARING FOR EX-GOVERNOR

A lawyer for former Alabama Gov. Don Siegelman appeared before a federal appeals
court panel and urged it to overturn his 2006 bribery conviction. But the judges
focused unexpectedly on a smaller crime for which Mr. Siegelman was sentenced,
which cast doubt on whether the judges would accept the principal claim in his
appeal when it makes its ruling.  PAGE a28

New York

LOBBYING FOR CAROLINE KENNEDY?

Uncle and Paterson Say No

Gov. David A. Paterson and Senator Edward M. Kennedy's office both said that Mr.
Kennedy had not lobbied the governor for his niece Caroline Kennedy to be
selected to fill the seat expected to be vacated by Senator Hillary Rodham
Clinton. ''He hasn't sent any message to me from anyone,'' Mr. Paterson said.
''And no one has even called me and said they've spoken to him.''  PAGE A38

AIDE WORKED FOR ILLINOIS GOVERNOR

Bradley Tusk, the campaign manager for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's re-election
effort, is a former top deputy and trusted adviser to Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich of
Illinois, who was arrested. ''Bradley is an honest, hard-working, competent
guy,'' Mr. Bloomberg said when asked about Mr. Tusk, who he added ''never had
anything to do with parts of that administration.'' Page A37

What New Yorkers Google A33

Business

FIGHTER JET PROGRAM POSES

A Quandary for Obama

The F-22 fighter jet will put two of President-elect Barack Obama's stated goals
-- cutting wasteful spending and saving or creating millions of jobs -- at odds.
Continuing the program for the fighter will preserve thousands of jobs related
to building them. But the jet's critics, who include Secretary of Defense Robert
M. Gates, have said the military should focus its resources more on fighting
insurgencies like those in Iraq and Afghanistan.  PAGE B1

WORRIES ABOUT HOUSING'S STAR

During the subprime boom, the Federal Housing Agency, which helps low-income and
first-time buyers purchase homes, mostly sat out the party as borrowers opted
for conventional loans. Now it's a star of the real estate market,  but some
worry that the agency will be a target of subprime fraud artists.  PAGE B1

KEEPING THEIR HEADS DOWN

In the heated debate over a federal bailout for Detroit's struggling car
manufacturers, foreign car companies have been notably silent. They have even
been pointed to as role models for the Big Three -- a marked contrast to trade
tensions in the nation's capital a generation ago, when Congress threatened to
limit sales of Japanese cars in the United States. PAGE B1

White House Pushes for Bailout B4

KEEPING LENO IS A GAMBLE FOR NBC

When Jay Leno's prime time show has its debut next year, it could have a major
ramifications for the network entertainment business.  PAGE B8

Advertisers Applaud Leno Move B8

Sports

AN UNLIKELY DEFENSE OF THE B.C.S.

Texas Tech was left out of the title game conversation in the Bowl Championship
Series despite a stellar season. Is that another argument for college football
to switch to a playoff format? ''Don't get me started on that soapbox,'' the
father of the team's star quarterback said, before making an eloquent case for
leaving the system pretty much as is. Harvey Araton, Sports of the Times. PAGE
B12

METS SIGN RECORD-SETTER FOR RELIEF

The Mets' relief pitching has been their Achilles' heel for two seasons,
collapsing  each year. On Tuesday, the team signed Francisco Rodriguez, who set
a major league record with 62 saves last season, to a $37 million deal that will
make him the team's new closer. PAGE B14

N.F.L. to Cut 10 Percent of Its Staff B12

arts

SELLING HOPE FOR A SONG

Like every other industry, Broadway is taking its lumps this season. But some
theater veterans are hoping that as portfolios go down, the appetite for
entertainment will go up. Disney is banking on the idea by altering its
marketing to fit the mood. ''We're adjusting the message to include comfort in
addition to escapism,'' the executive vice president of Disney Theatrical
Productions said.   PAGE C1

Film Review

'The Reader'

The film, directed by Stephen Daldry, is a scrupulously tasteful recounting of
an erotic affair that turns to love during the Holocaust, focusing on the
generation of Germans who came of age after that catastrophe. But really it's
about making the audience feel good about a historical disaster that grows
fainter with each new tasteful interpolation, Manohla Dargis writes.   PAGE C1

Music Review

Making It Look All Too Easy

Bradford Cox, the singer and songwriter of Deerhunter, was all efficacy, teasing
and easy professionalism at the Music Hall of Williamsburg, where the band
headlined a concert, Ben Ratliff writes. These musicians have nailed every
corner of their music, with its sequence of guitar solos and mesmerizing
momentum.   PAGE C5

Metal Played Deep Into the Night  C3

Book Review

'Graham Greene: A Life in Letters'

Graham Greene published more than 25 novels, but was committed to yet another
genre: he was among the 20th century's most obsessive letter writers. He dashed
off some 2,000 letters or postcards each year to family, friends, lovers,
editors, agents and a galaxy of fellow writers. Tens of thousands of letters
have been pared down to a tidy 400 in ''Graham Greene: A Life in Letters,''
which reads like brisk, epistolary biography, Dwight Garner writes.  PAGE C8

Obituaries

ARTHUR ROBERT KANTROWITZ, 95

His research into the behavior of super hot gases and fluid dynamics led to
innovations in areas as varied as rocket making and heart-assist pumps. He also
founded and directed the Avco Everett Research Laboratory in Massachusetts,
taught at Cornell and Dartmouth, advised President Gerald R. Ford and served on
the board of the television program ''Nova.''  PAGE A34

Editorial

THE STRANGE TALE OF GOVERNOR BLAGOJEVICH

We have seen a lot of political hubris, scratch-my-back politics and sheer
stupidity over the years. But nothing could prepare us for the charges brought
Tuesday against Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich of Illinois. PAGE A40

ACCOUNTABILITY AND THE COURT

The Bush administration has spent the last eight years undermining the
fundamental ideal that no one is supposed to be above the law. The Supreme Court
has a chance to redress this when it rules on a lawsuit against John Ashcroft,
the former attorney general.  PAGE A40

(GENERIC) DRUG RESISTANCE

Health care reformers have high hopes for replacing brand-name medicines with
cheaper generic equivalents. But so many physicians are so captive of the drug
industry that it would take a huge effort to persuade more patients and doctors
to use generics.  PAGE A40

Op-Ed

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

Someone in Denmark and Tel Aviv is developing a real-world alternative to
Detroit's business model. It's not clear whether this alternative to
gasoline-powered cars will work, but it clearly can be done -- and Detroit isn't
doing it.  PAGE A41

STATE OF SHAME

In an Op-Ed article, Scott Turow, the author of ''Presumed Innocent'' and a
former federal prosecutor, writes that the alleged crimes of Gov. Rod
Blagojevich of Illinois were so brazen that they prompted Patrick Fitzgerald, a
United States attorney, to do something he rarely does: bring charges quickly.
PAGE A41

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); CHILDREN (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (88%); IMMIGRATION (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); JOURNALISM
(76%); MUMBAI TERRORIST ATTACKS (74%); PRISONS (74%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); ELECTIONS (73%); TERRORISM (73%); EUROPEAN
UNION (73%); POLICE FORCES (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); WRITERS (71%); TWINS
& MULTIPLE BIRTHS (70%); NOBEL PRIZES (70%); AWARDS & PRIZES (70%); ARMED FORCES
(70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES (67%); SENTENCING (66%);
LITIGATION (66%); CORRECTIONS (66%); BANKING & FINANCE (63%); BURN INJURIES
(63%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (62%); JAIL SENTENCING (61%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(61%); BUSINESS INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (60%); MURDER (54%); WEALTHY PEOPLE
(51%); INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (50%)

COMPANY: BANK OF AMERICA CORP (50%)

TICKER: BAC (NYSE) (50%); BAC (LSE) (50%); 8648 (TSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (50%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (50%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (93%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (92%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (93%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (93%); KOSOVO (93%); INDIA
(92%); ENGLAND (79%); FINLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (76%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (73%); CENTRAL EUROPE (53%)

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             756 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times, Dec. 11, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2170 words


Foreign

LIKUD TILTS TO RIGHT OF LEADER

Benjamin Netanyahu's candidates for the Israeli Parliament are more hawkish than
he is, making it harder for him to promise a centrist coalition if elected.
Above, an Israeli votes, under a portrait of Mr. Netanyahu, during an internal
Likud party contest to determine their general election candidates.  PAGE A6

SUICIDE TELEVISED IN ENGLAND

On Wednesday night, Britons could watch Craig Ewert, 59 and almost completely
incapacitated by motor neuron disease, die on television. The film, ''Right to
Die?'' was broadcast on Sky Television, and showed how he traveled to a clinic
in Zurich in 2006 and took a fatal dose of barbiturates. It has thrown a new
bomb into an already contentious debate. PAGE A6

Sunni Militants' Chief Missing  A7

French Minister Doubts Rights Push  A8

OPPOSING REPORTS ON PLANE CRASH

A Brazilian report on the collision of an American-owned jet and a Brazilian
airliner over the Amazon in 2006 puts part of the blame on the American pilots.
But a dissenting report by the United States National Transportation Safety
Board blames the Brazilian air traffic control system. PAGE A10

2 MEN CITED AS TRAINING ATTACKERS

The lone surviving gunman of the 10 who laid siege to Mumbai has identified a
second and third man as major planners and coordinator of the plot. In addition
to Zaki ur-Rehman Lakhvi, of Lashkar-e-Taiba, the gunman named Abu Hamza and a
man known only as Khafa. They are also leading members of Lashkar-e-Taiba.  PAGE
A11

Climate Meeting Stalled by Change  A12

Ban Lomtuan Journal

Watching Fire Before It Goes Out

Thousands of fireflies fill the trees along the Mae Klong River in Thailand,
flashing on and off in unison, and even after 200 years of study, the phenomenon
remains a mystery. But synchronous flashing may be disappearing. Like many
creatures, fireflies appear to be suffering as human development spreads. In Ban
Lomtuan, the traffic of motorboats and the riverbank development seem to be
driving the fireflies away. PAGE A20

CHINA DETAINS PROTESTERS

China celebrated International Human Rights Day by sending public security
officials to quell a protest by about 40 people outside the Foreign Ministry.
After about 30 minutes of calling for free elections and demanding a crackdown
on corruption, the demonstrators were herded onto buses and taken away. PAGE A20

Riot-Torn Greece Hit by Strikes  A22

NATIONAL

CHARGES AGAINST THE GOVERNOR,

Scrutiny for the First Lady

Patricia Blagojevich has a deep-rooted political pedigree in Chicago not much on
display in the six years since she became first lady of Illinois. But in a
federal complaint against her husband, Gov. Rod R. Blagojevich, she appears to
be an influential and demanding partner to his schemes to cash in on the Senate
seat vacated by President-elect Barack Obama.   PAGE A40

PRINCETON SETTLES SUIT OVER GIFT

In a settlement of a lawsuit involving a gift in 1961 by heirs to the A.&P.
grocery fortune, Princeton will get to keep the bulk of the endowment, valued at
$900 million in June (and maybe $600 million now). Descendants of the heirs had
argued Princeton was misusing the gift by applying it too broadly.   PAGE A29

A SUIT WITH 9/11 IN THE FOREGROUND

Justices heard arguments in a lawsuit brought by a Muslim man accusing the
former attorney general and the director of the F.B.I. of complicity in
post-9/11 abuses of him, with the issue at hand being a garden-variety question
of civil procedure: How specific must accusations of misconduct be before a
lawsuit can continue?   PAGE A33

DISPARATE VIEWS ON ASTHMA DRUGS

One federal drug official told a panel of experts that more than 14,000 people
may have died since 1994 after taking popular asthma drugs. Another said even
more might have died without the medicines. On Thursday, an advisory board will
have to vote for one view or the other.  PAGE A41

EXECUTIONS IN U.S. DECLINE

Executions in the United States fell to a 14-year low, an anti-death penalty
advocacy group says, with a total of 37. The number of people sentenced to death
was the lowest number in three decades, the group said. ''Revelations of
mistakes, cases reversed by DNA testing, all of these things have put a dent in
the whole system and caused hesitation,'' the group's director said.   PAGE A42

A SCIENCE FICTION LESSON

It was a gathering to prove that two alien cultures can reach out and touch each
other: on the one hand, science, on the other, Hollywood. It just happened that
a Hollywood representative, Keanu Reeves, plays a space creature in his coming
movie, above, with Jaden Smith. So he got questions like this: ''How could an
alien being grow so fast without violating standard mass- and
energy-conservation laws?''   PAGE A29

A SIGN OF LIFE THAT ISN'T

Astronomers have detected carbon dioxide in the atmosphere of a planet 63
light-years away. But life there is not considered a possibility, unless it has
evolved to withstand temperatures of 1,700 degrees Fahrenheit.   PAGE A41

NEW YORK

EXPECTED MEDICAID CUTS PROMPT

Broader Discussion on Spending

Gov. David A. Paterson's expected cuts to the state Medicaid program that
reimburses hospitals and doctors for services to low-income patients has
generated the expected warnings f of dire consequences. But the pending cuts
have also set up a broader philosophical discussion  over whether state spending
on Medicaid is efficient.   PAGE A45

SENATE AGAIN LEADERLESS

The power-sharing agreement by Democrats promoted last week as the answer to who
would run the State Senate (them, for the first time in decades) has fallen
apart. The collapse, which comes as the state faces perhaps its most severe
fiscal crisis in decades, may also mean that the Senate could have a new leader
who is not a Democrat.   PAGE A43

THE FOUNTAIN OF YOUTHS

In Kiryas Joel, N.Y., the average family has 8.33 children, and recent census
figures showed that the median age  makes it the youngest community in the
country with 20,000 or more people. But there are almost no parks and no ball
fields. ''They're all too busy studying and making progress intellectually,''
said the village administrator. Peter Applebome, Our Towns.  PAGE A45

SPORTS

YANKEES HOPE SABATHIA

Brings a Ring With Him

Perhaps one of these days a Yankees free-agent signing will deliver a World
Series championship, Harvey Araton writes. And perhaps that signing will be C.
C. Sabathia. But it is worth noting that, to date, Jason Giambi, Mike Mussina,
Alex Rodriguez and assorted others have not turned the trick. Sports of The
Times.   PAGE B13

BASEBALL SECOND NOW FOR TORRE

For the last 13 years or so, Joe Torre has avoided baseball's winter meetings,
choosing instead to visit Las Vegas for a bit of golf and craps and betting on
the horses with a group of friends. His ''guys' weekend,'' he called it. But
this year the meetings came to him in Las Vegas, and so he decided he could mix
a little business with pleasure. But mostly pleasure.   PAGE B14

OBITUARIES

A. BERNARD ACKERMAN, 72

A founding figure in the field of dermatopathology.  PAGE B12

ROBERT PROSKY, 77

A gruff desk sergeant in  ''Hill Street Blues.''  PAGE B12

BUSINESS

EUROPE'S APPROACH ON EMISSIONS

Illustrates Potential Problems

Europe's struggles with its system of creating a market for emissions permits
point up the problems in the task for the United States. Four years in, the
system has produced little noticeable benefit to the climate but has generated a
multibillion-dollar windfall for some of the continent's biggest polluters.
Above, ethnic Albanians work at an open lignite mine in the village of Mirash,
Kosovo.   PAGE B1

CAMERAS: BETTER AND CHEAPER, TOO

David Pogue found some keepers in his annual survey of digital cameras, with
optical image stabilizers and face recognition. And maybe it's the economy, but
they seem to be cheaper, too. State of the Art.   PAGE B1

Computing Without That Whir   B9

CONCERNS OVER HEART DEVICE

An electrical component for implantable heart devices should be tested on
patients, a prominent cardiologist warned. The F.D.A. is requiring mechanical
stress tests and animal studies.   PAGE B2

ACTORS BALK AT STRIKE

The Screen Actors Guild is asking members to authorize a strike, normally an
automatic step. But a cautious membership -- perhaps wary of current economic
difficulty -- is not falling in line.   PAGE B11

TWO UP, ONE DOWN

Of three start-ups that were profiled last December, an online T-shirt store has
failed; a bakery-cafe is still going; and a property management software company
has been rejuvenated.   PAGE B7

Cuts at Public Radio   B11

Russia Backs Oil Output Cut    B9

HOME

WHEN DOWNSIZING HITS

Inside the Household

Working professionals feeling economic pressure might cut expenses for domestic
help. But because the connections tend to be close, and the workers may have few
financial buffers, the changes can be difficult for all.   PAGE D1

THE HOME AWAY

Thoreau's cabin was 10 feet by 15 feet. Lou Ureneck's in Western Maine will be
30 by 16, but similarly off the grid. And he will build it largely by himself --
along with his brother, Paul -- using materials he scrounged.   PAGE D1

FESTIVE AND SAFE

A good way to put the holiday focus on children is to make sure your house is
safe for them.   PAGE D2

Nature in Full Glory   D10

styles

THE GREAT SALE OF 2008

Guys. Feeling down, or poor (or both)? A trip to your department store may be a
cure. There you have a good chance of happening on a harmonic convergence that
occurs maybe once in a generation. An unrelenting Christmas cheer in the voices
of salespeople, and unthinkable prices on the sales tags.  PAGE E1

Skin Deep

Not Sharp Enough for the Razor

Shaving with a straight razor is not as easy as a barber may lead you to
believe. Just ask one of the students in the appropriately named class, Cut
Throat 101.  PAGE E3

Are Modern Shavers Really Better?  E3

HIGHLIGHTS AT A DISCOUNT

Who wouldn't like a $950 haircut for a fraction of the price, which is seen all
too often at stylist parties? And although they have been around for years,
salons are not thrilled about the idea.  PAGE E1

Critical Shopper  E4

Letters to the Styles Editor  E12

arts

MENORAHS AND MARACAS

Some music aficionados hope to expand a budding new category of Jewish music --
built from folk tunes and religious chants, and upgraded with modern-day beats
and instruments. The genre is one that resonates especially with younger
listeners who seek this music in rediscovering their own Jewish heritage.   PAGE
C1

Music Reviews

'Lightning at Our Feet'

Michael Gordon's new multimedia work is built around Emily Dickinson's poems.
His aim was not to reach back to Dickinson as most composers who set her poetry
do, but to imagine Dickinson as a 21st-century voice, spiritual and earthy in
roughly equal parts.   PAGE C1

Variations on an Acoustic Theme   C6

Young Cellist Engages Ears and Eyes  C3

Book Review

'Shakespeare and Modern Culture'

An esteemed and apparently unstoppable scholar, Marjorie Garber's latest of her
many Shakespeare-centric academic treatises is out to assert that ''Shakespeare
makes modern culture, and modern culture makes Shakespeare.''   PAGE C9

Dance Review: 'Danses Concertantes'  C5

Film Review: 'Herbert'  C9

Editorial

DARFUR, ANOTHER YEAR LATER

It took years of political wrangling to get the United Nations Security Council
to approve a strengthened peacekeeping force for Darfur, with deployment set for
Jan. 1. More than 11 months later, the Security Council has managed to send only
10,000 of the promised 26,000 peacekeepers. PAGE A48

NOW THEY SAY THEY CAN DO IT

Detroit's struggling automakers could do themselves and everyone else a favor by
dropping their increasingly untenable legal assault on California's efforts to
regulate and reduce greenhouse gas emissions from cars and light trucks.  PAGE
A48

MR. RANGEL'S PROBLEMS ROLL ON

There can be no clean start until the ethics panel answers all of the questions
about Representative Charles Rangel of Harlem. With huge fiscal and tax issues
looming for the new Congress, there can be no doubts about the leadership's
priorities.  PAGE A48

Op-Ed

GAIL COLLINS

These are troubled times, when people yearn for diversion. Then, suddenly, there
was Rod, seeking bids for Barack Obama's Senate seat with all the subtlety of a
tobacco auctioneer.  PAGE A49

NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

When Barack Obama chooses his secretary of agriculture, we need more than a bold
reformer. We need the position renamed secretary of food.  PAGE A49

THE PAUSE THAT DEPRESSES

As the economy worsens, the wait until Barack Obama's swearing-in grows ever
more frustrating. In 1916, when he seemed destined to lose his re-election bid,
Woodrow Wilson had the same worries about a long interregnum, explains the Op-Ed
contributor John Milton Cooper Jr. So Wilson drew up a secret plan to ensure an
immediate transfer of power to his opponent.  PAGE A49

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); GOVERNORS
(78%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (73%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (73%); AIRLINES (73%); ASSISTED
SUICIDE (72%); MOTOR NEURON DISEASES (71%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (71%); AIR
TRAFFIC CONTROL (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); CORRUPTION (65%); BLAGOJEVICH
CORRUPTION SCANDAL (64%); NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS & INJURIES (56%)

ORGANIZATION: LASHKAR E TAYYABA (54%); NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
(55%)

PERSON: BENJAMIN NETANYAHU (88%); BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); BRAZIL (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%);
ENGLAND (91%); SWITZERLAND (79%); FRANCE (79%); THAILAND (68%)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             759 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 14, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Terror' Is The Enemy

BYLINE: By PHILIP BOBBITT.

Philip Bobbitt, a law professor at Columbia and the author of ''Terror and
Consent: The Wars for the 21st Century,'' is a former senior director at the
National Security Council.

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR TRANSITIONS;
Pg. 10

LENGTH: 872 words


GENERALS are not the only ones who prepare to fight the previous war. Our
experience with 20th-century nation-based terrorists -- the I.R.A. in Ireland,
the P.K.K. in the Kurdish areas of Turkey, ETA in Spain's Basque country, the
F.L.N. in Algeria and others -- still dominates much of our thinking about how
to deal with 21st-century global terrorists. Indeed, the lack of new concepts
may well be as deadly to our national security as any lack of vaccines.

New approaches to dealing with global terrorism must first be integrated into
our foreign security policies generally. Allies in Europe must be reassured that
the United States will not violate the human rights accords to which we are a
party. We must also devise  a policy that aligns the interests of Afghanistan,
India and Pakistan while isolating the terrorists that threaten them all. We
must seek common ground with many states around the world against our universal
threats -- global terrorists and pirates, the proliferation of nuclear and
biological weapons and civilian catastrophes -- even if, in other contexts,
these nations are our adversaries.

The ''war on terror'' is not a nonsensical public relations slogan, however
unwelcome this conclusion may be to Pentagon planners or civil-liberties
advocates. The notion of such a war puzzles us -- after all, who would sign the
peace treaty? -- because we are so trapped in 20th-century expectations about
warfare. But success in war does not always mean the capitulation of an enemy
government (as we have seen in Iraq); rather, it varies with the war aim.

In a war against terror, the aim is not the conquest of territory or the
advancement of ideology, but the protection of civilians. We are fighting a war
on terror, not just terrorists. That is evident from the list of targets in the
attacks in Mumbai, India, in which national liberation terrorists from Kashmir
were apparently the outsourced operational arm of a global network with far more
ambitious, and more anti-Western, objectives. The Mumbai terrorists did not even
bother to issue demands; what they sought was terror itself.

Mexico is potentially our Pakistan -- a failing state on our border that can
provide  haven for our adversaries, at least some of whom will be privatized
terrorists. Imagine a poorer, less-democratic Mexico; then imagine it harboring
extortionists with a small arsenal of deliverable nuclear or biological weapons.
This may be a long-term threat, but it requires immediate assistance and
cooperation.

But Pakistan is our Pakistan, too, and not just India's or Afghanistan's
problem. ''Homeland security'' is a dangerous solecism when we are fighting a
global adversary that moves easily across borders. If terror is our adversary,
then our own health system, for example, is only as secure as the most
vulnerable health system overseas that might spawn an epidemic that could
quickly reach our shores.

We must use available international institutions -- like the International
Criminal Court, to which pirates and other terrorists could be rendered --
whenever possible. Yet we must not shrink from augmenting them, for example, by
creating a global body similar to NATO including other democracies, by enlarging
the United Nations Security Council to include other great states, and by giving
new security responsibilities to the Group of Eight.

Our legislators need more foresight, stockpiling laws for emergencies just as we
stockpile vaccines. Perhaps the most obvious would be a provision to replace
members of Congress who might be killed or disabled in such numbers that the
House of Representatives itself is unable to act. This could easily have
occurred on 9/11 if the fourth plane had struck the Capitol, which would have
plunged the country into months of martial law.

Finally, the Obama administration can have no higher priority than forging links
with the private sector to protect  what has become the electronic foundation
for contemporary life. Unless the government, perhaps through insurance
mandates, can persuade private companies to harden themselves to cyber-attacks,
the deregulated and fragmented owners of our digital backbone will inevitably
underfinance such protection.

This last observation points to the interrelation between the three arenas of
the war on terror: 21st-century terrorists, the commodification  of weapons of
mass destruction, and the increasing vulnerability of highly developed nations
like our own. Educating our public about this new tripartite threat will place
enormous demands on our political leadership.

The presidential election was  the end of the first phase of the war on terror.
Preventing any attacks on the United States since 9/11 is something for which
the Bush administration must be given credit, but credit must also go to the
American public, which decisively rejected  offshore penal colonies, spurious
rationalizations for warfare, secret torture chambers and contempt for the
constitutional and international  laws that would forbid such practices. Indeed,
by selecting a former law professor as its new president, the country has
thoroughly dismissed the notion that law is an obstacle rather than a guide to
achieving security.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY KATHERINE STREETER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (89%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); BASQUE HOMELAND &
FREEDOM (78%); PRIVATIZATION (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(70%); PEACE PROCESS (70%); MARITIME PIRACY (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%);
EXTORTION (68%)

CITY: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (71%)

STATE: BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN (88%); KASHMIR (79%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (71%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); SPAIN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); TURKEY
(92%); ALGERIA (92%); ASIA (79%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             762 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeking the Truth About Torture

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTERS; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 844 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Torture Report'' (editorial, Dec. 18):

If we are to comply with the Geneva Conventions, political considerations will
not relieve the president of his obligation to undertake prosecutions of top
officials  for the authorization of torture. The conventions themselves require
adherents to hold such prosecutions.

This is a question of law, not politics; and those who try to politicize it are
rightly dismissed as outlaws.

If defendants have legal defenses, they can raise them. Our legal system will
address them, as it does all defenses raised by the accused. The country and the
world can then judge the validity of those defenses and our judiciary's
decisions on them.

This is the only way to restore our reputation as law-abiding citizens of the
world. It has the added virtue of being the right way.

Vincent J. Canzoneri  Newton, Mass., Dec. 18, 2008

The writer is a lawyer.

To the Editor:

The new president could try a different approach: a Truth and Reconciliation
Commission, like South Africa's. Officials like former Defense Secretary Donald
H. Rumsfeld could come forward and tell the whole truth in exchange for amnesty,
or face prosecution. For the future of our country, the whole truth is far more
valuable than vengeance. And such a commission would fit President-elect Barack
Obama's style.

Nancy Ellen Abrams  Santa Cruz, Calif., Dec. 18, 2008

To the Editor:

Any investigations of the government's authorization of torture and abuse must
include the ''extraordinary rendition'' program, in which foreign nationals were
abducted and flown to foreign or United States-run prisons overseas where they
were tortured and abused.

In the case of Khaled El-Masri, our client, the government grabbed the wrong
person, devastating an innocent man's life.

Unfortunately, any hope of meaningful accountability for rendition and other
abuses could be dashed if the departing president issues pardons to protect
officials from future prosecution. This would be an unprecedented misuse of the
pardon power and send an intolerable message.

Pre-emptive pardons would violate the fundamental American value that no one --
no matter how powerful -- is above the law.

Jamil Dakwar New York, Dec. 18, 2008

The writer is director of the A.C.L.U. Human Rights Program.

To the Editor:

Re ''Out of Sight'' (Op-Ed, Dec. 14):

Reuel Marc Gerecht's defense of torture as appropriate national policy starts
off by assuming the answer (torture will save thousands of civilian lives) and
then goes on with flawless logic from there.

He avoids practical questions like ''Is it the president of the United States
who will personally determine with complete certainty that torturing a
particular person will produce the information that will save the lives? Or will
it be a C.I.A. field officer at the operational level who determines torture's
expediency?'' ''Did torture ever produce misleading information that in fact
cost lives?'' ''Were innocent persons ever tortured in the reasonable but
erroneous belief they had information that would save lives?'' I think questions
like these demonstrate some of the practical flaws in Mr. Gerecht's argument.

Isn't it further possible that, aside from the damage to what we consider our
values as a free, democratic society, the disclosure of some of our actual
practices (Guantanamo, waterboarding and so on) has done more to promote
sympathy for anti-American terrorism than whatever the net gain, if any, has
been in valuable intelligence information?

Carroll D. French   Langdon, N.H., Dec. 14, 2008

The writer served with United States Army Counterintelligence in the Korean War.

To the Editor:

Reuel Marc Gerecht presents extraordinary rendition as a ''satisfactory
compromise.'' He suggests, incredibly, that ''deniable torturous interrogations
by foreigners acting on behalf of the United States'' are preferable to acting
within the bounds of American and international law.

Not so. Extraordinary rendition is not the ''sensible, moral thing to do.'' It
is an illegal and immoral practice that has real costs on real people, including
my client, Maher Arar.

Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen, was rendered to Syria, where he was detained in a
grave-like cell for 10 months and tortured. He has suffered physically and
mentally. He lost one year of his life, a year without his wife and his
children, because United States officials opted not to employ traditional law
enforcement techniques to assess claims of a purported link to terrorism.

Mr. Arar's name has been cleared in Canada, while the Bush administration
refuses to acknowledge its ''mistake,'' continues to keep Mr. Arar on a watch
list and rebuffs his calls for justice. The only way to ensure that this does
not happen to anyone else is for the United States to renounce this failed,
flawed, illegal practice once and for all.

Katherine Gallagher  New York, Dec. 17, 2008

The writer, a staff attorney at the Center for Constitutional Rights, is on the
legal team representing Maher Arar in Arar v. Ashcroft.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING IGOR KOPELNITSKY)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); TORTURE (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); WRITERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(78%); AMNESTY (77%); POLITICS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(75%); PARDONS (66%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (54%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             764 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 20, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Weary of Violence, Kashmiris Fight Back With Their Votes

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: BOTHOO, Kashmir


More than a decade before last month's attacks in Mumbai, fighters from
Lashkar-e-Taiba showed up here, turning this pine-ringed village in the
Indian-administered part of Kashmir into a lair that became known as ''the cat's
attic.''

Local residents immediately recognized that the men were different from the
Kashmiri guerrillas who came before them. These fighters were mostly from the
Punjab Province in Pakistan. They were well armed and well trained as well as
ruthless. They introduced suicide bombings to Kashmir in 1999. The next year,
they attacked a nearby Indian Army camp, recording the screams of the soldiers
holed up inside and then playing them back to villagers, who delighted in the
soldiers' suffering.

But today, after years of being caught in the middle of an insurgency that was
brutally crushed by Indian forces, Kashmiris are weary of the fighting. Lashkar
fighters still make the treacherous passage over the hills from Pakistan, people
here say, though fewer of them come. The mostly Muslim valley is quieter than it
has been in years.

In recent weeks, Kashmiris have even reached a watershed: channeling local
grievances into polling booths and turning out in record numbers to vote in
staggered state elections, which began Nov. 17 and end Wednesday.

Overall turnout figures have soared above 60 percent, according to the state
election office, and by Kashmiri standards the voting has been notably free of
violence and coercion. This time, the fighters, in what apparently was a
concession to Kashmiri fatigue, did not threaten those who took part in the
vote. In this district, turnout was 59 percent.

But the fact that Kashmiris are turning out to vote does not mean that they have
embraced Indian rule, as weeks of massive demonstrations this summer amply
demonstrated. They continue to chafe under the restrictions of the Indian
security forces, whose record on human rights in Kashmir has come under
international criticism for years. Kashmiris are voting to demand ordinary
things: roads, electricity, jobs. ''The main problem here is unemployment,''
Shafqat Shabir, 18, a first-time voter in the nearest town, Bandipur, said last
month on the day he cast his ballot.

He and his friends had taken part in the anti-Indian demonstrations, shouting
azadi, or freedom. Freedom from Indian rule, said his friend Afaq Hussain Mir,
22, is ''our birthright.''

That cause remains essential to Lashkar, and it is still the group's most
effective recruiting tool. Formed more than two decades ago with the help of
Pakistani intelligence agencies, Lashkar originally had the mission of
challenging India's hold on this fertile valley.

As India-Pakistan peace talks progressed in recent years, Lashkar sharply
decreased its attacks in Kashmir. At the same time, it moved on to bigger,
higher-profile targets across India.

Its targets are believed to have included a science center in southern
Bangalore, a Hindu temple in eastern Varanasi and, the most audacious of all,
Mumbai, the financial capital, where a three-day siege killed 163 people and 9
gunmen. While Lashkar has denied any link to the Mumbai attacks, the one
surviving gunman, from among at least 10, said he belonged to the group and
named known Lashkar commanders as his trainers.

The link to Kashmir remains strong. The man who the Indian authorities say was
the mastermind of the Mumbai attacks, Zaki ur-Rahman Lakhvi, once served as a
commander here in Indian-controlled Kashmir. Residents say his son, known as
Qasim, was among the Lashkar fighters who have more recently trickled over the
border. In October 2007, Qasim was killed in an all-night gun battle with Indian
soldiers on the outskirts of Bandipur.

Sympathy for the guerrillas coexists with fear and frustration. When Lashkar
fighters first came here, residents trekked down to the bazaar and bought
provisions for them. Though they were brazen killers, people here said, the
Lashkar cadres were well-behaved guests.

They did not interfere in village disputes, as members of some of the other
guerrilla groups did. They did not harass women. They never ordered the men and
women of Bothoo to stop praying at the shrine of a female Sufi saint, as other
radical Islamist groups did, even if they never prayed there themselves.

But the people paid a dear price for the cadres' presence. As Lashkar
established itself here, Indian security forces fought back, turning this remote
village into a war zone. Women lost their husbands. Men lost limbs. For years,
no one was safe.

After the Indian Army set up a camp in the middle of Bothoo, the village chief
said, he begged the local Lashkar commander not to attack. If Lashkar did
attack, the village chief said, he feared that the army would retaliate by
burning the whole place down, as it had done elsewhere.

The village chief spoke on the condition of anonymity, for fear of making
enemies; his brother had been taken by Lashkar fighters who accused him of being
an informant, and the man's skeleton was found 21 days later.

Even today, loss hovers over these tin-roofed houses perched on the hill.
Memories are raw. A woman in the village, Rosha Begum Reshi, said she lost her
husband after Indian soldiers accused him of being a militant. They dragged him
out of the house and shot him dead.

A man, Nazir Ahmad Reshi, lost a leg when members of another Pakistani militant
group, Jaish-e-Muhammad, shot him as he tried to save a neighbor from their
wrath. Today, at 28, he hobbles on crutches in and around his house. He cannot
work. He cannot leave the village.

His father, Ghulam Reshi, spoke bitterly about the fighters who crossed the
border from Pakistan. He no longer cared which group they belonged to. They were
not welcome. ''They wasted my son's life,'' he said. ''Our own people didn't
commit these atrocities. It was as though they started sending convicted
murderers from the other side.''

Despite such frustration, many still fear that without a political solution soon
to the Kashmir conflict, Kashmiris, especially the young, will grow impatient
and support insurgency once again.

For Kashmiris like Manzoor Ahmad Reshi, a carpenter, the prospect of more
fighting inspires dread. In 1995, the army shot him in the right arm, he said.
In 2002, the Jaish fighters shot him, he said, this time in the left ankle. He
said he had been interrogated by the army eight times in the past 20 years.

The village has been quiet lately, but the Lashkar fighters still come to the
woods around the notorious cat's attic, villagers said. They carry satellite
phones and are never without a full magazine of ammunition. They are fearless to
the point of recklessness.

''The problem will not go away,'' Manzoor Reshi said. ''Unless there is a
political solution, it will diminish; it will not go away.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Nazir Ahmad Reshi, with crutches, lives with his family in the
village of Bothoo, in Kashmir. He lost a leg when members of a Pakistani
militant group shot him.
 A Kashmiri woman casting her vote last month in state elections, as young
separatists in another village confronted police officers.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY RUTH
FREMSON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)  MAP: Lashkar-e-Taiba fighters were in Bothoo
over a decade ago. Map details area of JAMMU AND KASHMIR.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); ARMIES (76%);
ARMED FORCES (74%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%);
BOMBINGS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%); PEACE PROCESS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LASHKAR E TAYYABA (92%)

CITY: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (90%)

STATE: KASHMIR (98%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (90%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ASIA (98%); INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             774 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peace Group Is Leaving Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 462 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka


Nordic cease-fire monitors began concluding their six-year mission to Sri Lanka
on Friday after the government scrapped a truce with the Tamil Tigers amid a
chorus of international concern.

President Mahinda Rajapaksa's administration formally notified Norway, the lead
peace mediator, late on Thursday that it was giving a stipulated 14-day notice
to end the truce. Foreign Minister Rohitha Bogollagama said Friday that the
government would need to ''redefine'' Norway's role in light of the end of the
truce, but did not specify how.

The move means the gloves finally come off on Jan. 16, and analysts and
diplomats expect an intensification of the fighting that resumed almost as soon
as Mr. Rajapaksa took power in late 2005 as the truce effectively broke down on
the ground.

The Nordic Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission, which kept a tally of violations of the
truce agreement, was initially seen as a deterrent to human rights abuses by
both sides, but it became increasingly ineffective as its access to areas of
conflict was hampered. Its role ends with the cease-fire.

''We're beginning to move towards'' a pullout, a spokeswoman for the monitors
said. ''It's not far, it's only a few days. We of course have offices and
personnel all over the place, so yes, we're definitely moving towards that.''

The end of the truce dashes hopes of resurrecting  peace talks any time soon.
Analysts expected the death toll from the 25-year-long civil war, which now
stands at 70,000, to continue to rise.

Fighting continued Friday, with the military saying that troops killed five
rebels in the  districts of Mannar and Polonnaruwa. On Thursday, both the
military and the Tigers said they killed around a dozen people.

The government decided to cancel the cease-fire after a series of deadly
bombings for which the Tamil Tigers, or Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, were
blamed. The Tigers are fighting for an independent state in north and east Sri
Lanka. It said the rebels, widely outlawed as a terrorist group, had simply used
the pact to regroup and rearm.

Hard-line majority-Sinhalese nationalists on Friday called on the government to
reimpose a ban on the Tigers, which Mr. Rajapaksa warned last month he might do.
The government says  the door to talks remains open if conditions change or the
Tigers lay down their arms, which the guerrillas have vowed  not to do. The
Tigers said Thursday that they were reserving judgment until Norway officially
notified them of the end of the truce.

The government's move drew widespread international criticism. In Washington, a
State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, said the United States was troubled
by a decision that would ''make it more difficult to achieve a lasting, peaceful
solution to Sri Lanka's conflict.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); DISARMAMENT (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); BOMBINGS (64%); TERRORISM (63%); ARMED
FORCES (63%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             777 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jorge I. Anaya, 81, Admiral During Falklands War

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 241 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES


Adm. Jorge Isaac Anaya, a former Argentine Navy chief who was the leading
proponent of Argentina's ill-fated 1982 invasion of the Falkland Islands, died
at home late Wednesday. He was 81.

The cause was complications of heart problems, his family said.

Admiral Anaya was the chief proponent of the campaign to take the Falklands, a
remote archipelago in the South Atlantic that  was held by the British. The
invasion started a 10-week war that claimed hundreds of lives and hastened the
end of the dictatorship governing Argentina.

Admiral Anaya, the junta leader Leopoldo F. Galtieri and other top officers were
prosecuted after the end of the 1976-83 dictatorship on charges of negligence in
leading the war.

In 1986 a military tribunal ordered Admiral Anaya to serve 14 years in prison
and be stripped of his rank. He was pardoned a few years later  along with other
top former officers by President Carlos Menem.

In 2005 Argentina's Supreme Court annulled amnesty laws from the 1980s, freeing
investigators to reopen cases of suspected human rights abuses during military
rule.

In November 2006, he was summoned back to court to testify before a federal
judge investigating hundreds of cases of kidnapping and torture at the former
Navy Mechanics' School, which had been the chief clandestine torture center of
the dictatorship.

He had a heart attack before he was to testify, and the authorities said he had
been in declining health since.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Military

PERSON: Jorge I. Anaya

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(88%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); MILITARY RULE (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
LITIGATION (74%); HEART DISEASE (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(69%); NEGLIGENCE (69%); JAIL SENTENCING (68%); AMNESTY (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (67%); SUPREME COURTS (67%); JUDGES (67%)

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (79%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); FALKLAND ISLANDS (MALVINAS) (94%); UNITED KINGDOM
(90%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             781 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 436 words


INTERNATIONAL 3-12

Jpn's Txt Best Sellers

Five of Japan's 10 best-selling novels last year were originally cellphone
novels, mostly love stories written in the terse abbreviations characteristic of
text messaging.   1

Iran's Radical Left

Political protest has been harshly suppressed under the current Iranian
government, especially dissent linked to the West. But the radical left until
now has been permitted relative freedom because, analysts say, it rejects the
liberal reform movement and also attacks the West.  3

An Elephantine Problem

Elephants are not supposed to saunter down the streets of Bangkok. But each
night, the giant gray beasts are driven into red-light districts and tourist
areas by handlers who peddle novelty items, causing traffic jams and property
damage.  4

15 Killed in Northern Iraq

A rocket attack and several bombings killed at least 15 people in central and
northern Iraq and sporadic violence continued in the southern cities of Basra
and Nasiriya, Iraqi officials said.9

Gaza Strikes Kill Two

An Israeli airstrike killed two members of Hamas in the northern Gaza Strip, and
two Qassam rockets fired by militants from Gaza landed in an Israeli border town
and a village, causing no casualties.  14

Hezbollah Leader Speaks

Hezbollah's leader made his first public appearance in Beirut since the end of
the 2006 war with Israel .  14

Suharto Avoids an Accounting

As former President Suharto of Indonesia ails in a Jakarta hospital, it seems
that he will die without having to answer for crimes on a monumental scale that
include severe human rights abuses and corruption. 10

NATIONAL13-29

Wins for McCain and Clinton

Senator John McCain staved off a challenge by Mike Huckabee to win the South
Carolina primary, exorcising the ghosts of the primary that derailed his
presidential hopes eight years ago.1

Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton won the vote in the Nevada caucuses, capturing
strong support from women and injecting fresh momentum into her candidacy.1

Money Is Tight for Hopefuls

Just as the most expensive phase of the 2008 presidential race is about to
begin, the three remaining Democrats and the five most viable Republicans all
find their bank accounts depleted.  16

Insurer's Government Niche

When officers of the Central Intelligence Agency get in legal trouble,  they
often turn to a small Virginia insurance company to cover legal costs.  29

NEW YORK/REGION32-33

Flexibility on Tolls

Gov. Jon S. Corzine has signaled a willingness to negotiate with the Legislature
over details of his plan to drastically raise New Jersey highway tolls. 33

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (90%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); BESTSELLERS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); TEXT MESSAGING (78%); MOBILE & CELLULAR
TELEPHONES (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); CAUCUSES (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%);
POLITICAL PROTESTS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%);
LIBERALISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); TOLL
ROADS & TURNPIKES (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); HAMAS (72%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (70%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(69%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (68%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (68%); VEHICLE TRAFFIC
(54%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%); HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); JOHN MCCAIN (57%); JON CORZINE (57%);
MICHAEL HUCKABEE (57%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%);
IRAQ (93%); ISRAEL (93%); JAPAN (92%); INDONESIA (79%); LEBANON (79%); THAILAND
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             783 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Canadian Military Has Quit Turning Detainees Over to Afghans

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 529 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


The Canadian military secretly stopped transferring prisoners to Afghanistan's
government in November after Canadian monitors found evidence that they were
being abused and tortured.

The suspension, which began Nov. 5, was disclosed in a fax sent by government
lawyers to Amnesty International and the British Columbia Civil Liberties
Association, which are seeking to block the prisoner transfers.

The government's internal concerns about detainees is also at odds with Canadian
officials' repeated public statements that the Afghan government does not engage
in systematic torture.

''The denials and political posturing and name-calling that have gone on over
this at various points is very disheartening when all along there's been this
information,'' said Alex Neve, the head of Amnesty International's Canadian
branch.

Despite the suspension, Mr. Neve and Jason Gretl, president of the British
Columbia association, said their lawyers would appear at the Federal Court of
Canada in Ottawa on Thursday to seek an injunction blocking more transfers.

''The government's recognition that the transfers have ceased raises more
questions than it answers,'' Mr. Gretl said from Vancouver, British Columbia. He
said the Canadian forces ''may have transferred them to some third country, and
we don't know under what conditions the Canadian government would resume
transfers.''

Sandra G. Buckler, the spokeswoman for Prime Minister Stephen Harper, sent an
e-mail message in which she quoted the foreign affairs minister, Maxime Bernier,
speaking to Parliament on Nov. 14: ''During a recent visit, Canada's officials
did see a Taliban prisoner with conditions that concerned them. Our officials
are following up on media reports that the Afghan government has announced an
investigation. The allegation has come to light because we have a good agreement
with the Afghan government.'' She declined to comment on the status of the
transfer program or the number of prisoners affected.

Until the end of 2005, Canada turned over prisoners it detained in Afghanistan
to the United States military. After that practice led to objections in Canada,
it began transferring prisoners to the Afghan government.

Since last May, Canadian diplomats have been allowed access to Afghan prisons to
interview prisoners who were originally detained by Canadian troops.

A series of secret, e-mailed reports from Canadian monitors led to the
suspension. Heavily censored versions were provided last week to the rights
groups as a result of their legal action.

The reports show that the monitors found that several detainees had been beaten
and threatened during Afghan interrogations. In one report, the  monitors said
one prisoner told them he had been beaten with cables and wires and received
electrical shocks. ''He showed us a number of scars on his legs which he said
were caused by the beating,'' they wrote.

Another detainee, who said he was beaten and who had signs of injury, told the
diplomatic visitors to look under a chair in the room in which they were
meeting. ''Under the chair we found a large piece of braided electrical cable as
well as a rubber hose,'' the report said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 28, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on Thursday  about the Canadian military's secret action
to stop transferring prisoners to Afghanistan's government after Canadian
monitors found evidence that they were being abused and tortured misspelled the
surname of the leader of the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association, one
of the groups seeking an injunction to block more transfers. He is Jason Gratl,
not Gretl.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(77%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); CENSORSHIP
(72%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (70%); INJUNCTIONS (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (61%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (84%)

PERSON: STEPHEN HARPER (58%); MAXIME BERNIER (52%)

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (88%); VANCOUVER, BC, CANADA (79%)

STATE: BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (90%); ONTARIO, CANADA (88%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             792 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

German Students Confront the Holocaust

BYLINE: By JOSEPH BERGER.

E-mail: joeberg@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section WE; Column 0; Westchester Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 788 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS


THERE are probably few places in this country where lessons on the Holocaust
touch as exposed a nerve as they do at the German School here.

Not many people in its Westchester backyard know about the German School, which
serves children of Germans and other German speakers posted in this country by
companies like Lufthansa or Mercedes-Benz.

Most of the 375 students know in their marrow that grandparents and
great-grandparents were German citizens when six million Jews were murdered. But
they do not want to go through life ashamed of being German.

''It's something we always have to deal with, that our country did something
like that,'' said Julia Vogt, a 10th grader. ''I feel proud to be German, but we
can't say it that way because of what happened.''

So the arrival last month of a traveling exhibit on Anne Frank's life and
accompanying programs, all sponsored by the school and by Westchester's
Holocaust and Human Rights Education Center, in Purchase, was a moment that
required finesse on everybody's part.

''The kids are not responsible, but it's their legacy, so how to do it in a way
that it's not shoved down their throats so they don't feel guilty,'' is the way
the challenge was stated by Donna Cohen, the center's executive director.

German School students and visitors like those from Rye Country Day School were
touched by photographs of Frank before she went into hiding, including one of
her poised on a beach with her sister Margot. Such commonplace experiences made
it all the more shattering for the students to learn she died of typhus in
Bergen-Belsen when she was 15.

The students were also spellbound by a talk given by Selmar Hubert, 82, of Rye
Brook, who described the brutality he experienced  growing up in the 1930s in
the Bavarian village of Cronheim. He told of the day his schoolmates pounced on
him and his sister, cursing and spitting at them, while the teacher, a Nazi,
egged them on. The school forced him to shout slogans like ''Kill all Jews.''

''Imagine what it feels like to shout 'Kill all Jews' when you're Jewish,'' Mr.
Hubert said.

Mr. Hubert held the students riveted, like a counselor telling a ghost story
around a campfire. On Kristallnacht in 1938, Nazi vandals ransacked his home;
his father was taken to Dachau, then  released as inexplicably as he had been
arrested. Finally, his father put the boy  -- just 13 --on a train that would
take him to England in the Kindertransport program that saved 10,000 Jewish
children.

''I looked in his eye and he looked in mine and we both knew we would never see
each other again,'' Mr. Hubert said. In fact, they did not.

But Mr. Hubert also wanted students to know about the English people who
safeguarded him and his sister and about  his return seven years ago to
Cronheim, where he was warmly greeted by children from  the very village that
had once scorned him.

He echoed Anne Frank.

''You have to have faith in the goodness of people,'' Mr. Hubert said.  ''I
would not be sitting here if not for that.''

The program set off a tumult of feelings in the students.  They told of American
youngsters who ask them, when they identify themselves as German, ''Isn't that
the country Hitler was from?''

''I had nothing to do with it, my parents had nothing to do with it, so it's
unfair that we have to hear these remarks,'' said Hanna Streck.

But Julia Litzkow countered: ''It's not a burden. It's a responsibility. We
can't deny it happened. But we have to make sure it doesn't happen again.''

Udo Bochinger, the headmaster, said that some restless students have complained,
''Why can't we stop talking about the Holocaust?'' His response is to find
more-arresting ways of imparting the story, including discussions of
contemporary failures to stop genocide in Rwanda and Darfur.  It is important to
note, he suggests, that even today, people are acquiescing to mass slaughter.

Still, Gunter Zloch, a history teacher, pointed out that Germany's genocide was
unique in its bureaucratic, industrial thoroughness. ''Everyone has the
potential to become this evil, so it's not history for me,'' Mr. Zloch said.

That's why Lukas Litzkow, Julia's twin, was pleased that the exhibit highlighted
the story of Mies Giep, a Gentile who helped hide the Franks while they were in
hiding in Amsterdam.

''It shows that not all people were Nazis, that there were people who stood up
and said this was wrong,'' he said.

Mr. Hubert like to tells young Germans troubled by guilt over atrocities they
did not perpetrate that he suffers from survivors' guilt. ''Neither your
feelings nor my feelings make any sense,'' he will say. ''How can we overcome
that guilt? That's one of the things we do here -- help each other.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: WITNESS: Selmar Hubert discusses being a Jewish boy in '30s
Germany. (PHOTOGRAPH BY G. PAUL BURNETT/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%);
CHILDREN (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); MURDER (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); ARRESTS
(50%)

COMPANY: DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AG (58%)

TICKER: LHA (FRA) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS481112 SCHEDULED FREIGHT AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); NAICS481111
SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION,
SCHEDULED (58%)

STATE: BAVARIA, GERMANY (79%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (93%); ENGLAND (67%)

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             805 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Battle Company Is Out There

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH RUBIN.

Elizabeth Rubin, a contributing writer, has reported extensively on Afghanistan,
most recently in a two-part series for the magazine on the revival of the
Taliban.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 7969 words


WE TUMBLED OUT of two Black Hawks onto a shrub-dusted mountainside. It was    a
windy, cold October evening. A half-moon illuminated the tall pines and peaks.
Through night-vision goggles the soldiers and landscape glowed in a blurry
green-and-white    static. Just across the valley, lights flickered from a few
homes nestled in    the terraced farmlands of Yaka China,    a notorious village
in the Korengal River valley in Afghanistan's    northeastern province of Kunar.
Yaka China was just a few villages south and    around a bend in the river from
the Americans' small mountain outposts,    but the area's reputation among the
soldiers was mythic. It was a known    safe haven for insurgents. American
troops have tended to avoid the place since    a nasty fight a year or so
earlier. And as Halloween approached, the soldiers    I was with, under the
command of 26-year-old Capt. Dan Kearney, were predicting    their own Yaka
China doom.

The Korengal Valley is a lonely outpost of regress: most of the valley's people
practice Wahhabism, a more rigid variety of Islam than that followed by most
Afghans, and about half of the fighters confronting the U.S. there are
homegrown. The rest are Arabs, Pakistanis, Chechens, Uzbeks; the area is close
to Pakistan's frontier regions where Osama bin Laden, Ayman al-Zawahiri and
other Al Qaeda figures are often said to be hiding out. The Korengal fighters
are fierce, know the terrain and watch the Americans' every move. On their
hand-held radios, the old jihadis call the Americans ''monkeys,'' ''infidels,''
''bastards'' and ''the kids.'' It's psychological warfare; they know the
Americans monitor their radio chatter.

As far as ''the kids'' are concerned, the insurgents are ghosts -- so the
soldiers' tactics often come down to using themselves as bait. The insurgents
specialize in ambushes, harassing fire and hit-and-run attacks. NATO's military
advantage in such a war is air power. The soldiers don't hesitate to call in Big
Daddy (who, in today's military, often flies in with the voice of a female
pilot). But while these flying war machines are saviors to the soldiers, they
cannot distinguish between insurgents and civilians.

I went to Afghanistan last fall with a question: Why, with all our technology,
were we killing so many civilians in air strikes? As of September of last year,
according to Human Rights Watch, NATO was causing alarmingly high numbers of
civilian deaths -- 350 by the coalition, compared with 438 by the insurgents.
The sheer tonnage of metal raining down on Afghanistan was mind-boggling: a
million pounds between January and September of 2007, compared with half a
million in all of 2006.

After a few days, the first question sparked more: Was there a deeper problem in
the counterinsurgency campaign? More than 100 American soldiers were killed last
year, the highest rate since the invasion. Why were so many more American troops
being killed? To find out, I spent much of the fall in the Korengal Valley and
elsewhere in Kunar province alongside soldiers who were making life-and-death
decisions almost every day -- decisions that led to the deaths of soldiers and
of civilians.

Subduing the Valley

OVER THE LAST two years, the Americans have steadily increased their presence
in Kunar province, fanning out to the small platoon-size outposts that have
become the signature of the new counterinsurgency doctrine in both Afghanistan
and Iraq.    The Korengal Outpost, nicknamed the KOP, was built in April 2006 on
the site    of a former timber mill and motel. The soldiers of Battle Company of
the 173rd    Airborne Brigade Combat Team live there in dusty tents and little
wooden huts.    They now have hot food and a small chow tent with an Internet
linkup and a few    phones for calling home. But the place was protected by not
much more than concertina    wire and sentries. Nearly every time I arrived at
the KOP our helicopter was    greeted by sniper fire or the dushka -- a
Russian-made antiaircraft    gun.

Dan Kearney was essentially lord of the Korengal Valley. A self-described
Georgia army brat, he grew up idolizing his warrior dad, Frank Kearney, and
wanted to move in his father's world of covert and overt operations. (His father
is now a lieutenant general in Special Operations command.) Kearney often calls
himself a dumb jock, playing the crass, loudmouthed tough guy with his soldiers.
He had been in Iraq and told me he had gone emotionally dead there with all the
dying and killing, and stayed that way until the birth of his son a year ago.
His hardest day in Iraq was when a close friend, Rob Shaw, was severely wounded
by an improvised explosive device that killed his first sergeant and a bunch of
their friends -- and the next thing he knew their colonel was asking Kearney to
step in for Shaw and lead the company.

But as hard as Iraq was, he said, nothing was as tough as the Korengal. Unlike
in Iraq, where the captains and lieutenants could let down their guard in a
relatively safe, fortified operating base, swapping stories and ideas, here they
had no one to talk to and were almost as vulnerable to enemy fire inside the
wire as out. Last summer, insurgents stormed one of the bases in a nearby valley
and wounded 16.

And unlike every other place I've been in Afghanistan -- even the Pech River
valley, just an hour's drive away -- the Korengal had no Afghan police or
district leaders for the Americans to work with. The Afghan government, and
Afghans down the valley, seemed to have washed their hands of the Korengalis. As
Kearney put it to me one day at the KOP, the Korengal is like a tough Los
Angeles neighborhood, ''and we're the L.A.P.D. kicking in the door, arresting
guys, demanding information about the gangs, and slowly the people say, 'No, we
don't know anything, because that guy in the gang, he's with my sister, and that
other guy, he's my uncle's cousin.' Now we've angered them for so many years
that they've decided: 'I'm gonna stick with the A.C.M.' '' -- anticoalition
militants -- '' 'who are my brothers and I'm not gonna rat them out.' ''

So what exactly was his job out here? To subdue the valley. It's a task the
Marines had tried, and then the soldiers of the Army's 10th Mountain Division --
a task so bloody it seemed to drive the 10th Mountain's soldiers to a kind of
madness. Kearney's soldiers told me they'd been spooked by the weird behavior of
their predecessors last May: near the end of their tour, many would sit alone on
the fire base talking to themselves. Privates disobeyed their sergeants, and
squad leaders refused to step outside the wire to show the new boys the terrain.
No one wanted to be shot in the last days of his tour.

Kearney kept his soldiers on a tight leash at first. Col. John Nicholson, a
brigade commander with the 10th Mountain Division, had promised the Afghans he
would not bomb their homes. When Kearney and the 173rd Airborne Brigade Combat
Team officially took over from the division's 3rd Brigade Combat Team on June 5,
they kept that promise. ''My guys would tell me they didn't know which houses
they're shooting from, and I'd tell them they can't shoot back into the
villages,'' Kearney recalled. ''They hated me.'' The insurgents were testing the
new captain, he suspected, by deliberately shooting from homes. On July 10, the
Korengalis ambushed his soldiers from one house they often used -- a three-story
mansion on a fertile outcropping, with balconies overlooking the valley, that
belonged to Haji Matin, a timber baron turned insurgent leader. It had been the
scene of fighting in the past.

When Kearney's moment of decision came, two of 2nd Platoon's sergeants, Kevin
Rice and Tanner Stichter, had been shot, and the fight was still going on.
Kearney could see a woman and child in the house. ''We saw people moving weapons
around,'' Kearney told me. ''I tried everything. I fired mortars to the back
side to get the kids to run out the front. I shot to the left, to the right. The
Apache'' -- an attack helicopter -- ''got shot at and left. I kept asking for a
bomb drop, but no one wanted to sign off on the collateral damage of dropping a
bomb on a house.'' Finally, he said, ''We shot a javelin and a tow'' -- both
armor-piercing missiles. ''I didn't get shot at from there for two months,''
Kearney said. ''I ended up killing that woman and that kid.''

Kearney could often sound cold-blooded, like when he'd march into the mess tent
in shorts, improvising rap lyrics about killing bad guys. But then he'd switch
to counselor, trying to salvage a soldier's marriage, or he'd joke with a
Korengali elder about arranging a marriage between his own infant son and the
elder's daughter to make peace. The performances steeled him against shouldering
so much mortality. As he put it, ''The only reason anyone's listening to me in
this valley right now is 'cause I'm dropping bombs on them.'' Still, he wasn't
going to let himself shoot at houses every time his unit took fire: ''I'd just
create more people that hate me.''

A Blood Feud

IN LATE 2001, the B-52 symbolized, for many Afghans, liberation from Taliban
rule. They wove images of the plane into their carpets. Urban legends sprang
up about the B-52's power, how the planes glided along unscathed, even    as the
Taliban barraged them with antiaircraft fire. Kabulis spread the story    that
the B-52s had dropped thousands of leaflets saying, ''Hit us if you    can!'' --
and afterward the Taliban didn't waste their bullets    on the B-52s.

But the jets that defeated the Taliban were wiping out innocent families as
well. In July 2002, Special Forces in the mountains of Oruzgan thought they were
destroying a high-value Taliban target, but instead they rocketed and bombed an
engagement party. About 40 Afghans were killed and nearly 100 were wounded.

Such mistakes have continued, though the causes can change. The insurgents
regularly use civilians as shields, children as spotters and women as food
suppliers. NATO killing civilians is great propaganda for the Taliban. At the
same time, to Afghans with little technological sophistication, the scale and
impersonality make the accidents seem intentional. Many are convinced the
Americans are deliberately bombing them and even deliberately aiding a Taliban
comeback. The reality is that bombs are only as accurate as the intelligence on
the ground -- and since 9/11, the U.S. and NATO have used air power as a
substitute for ground troops.

By now, seven years of air strikes and civilian casualties, humiliating house
searches and arbitrary detentions have pushed many families and tribes to
revenge. The Americans then see every Afghan in those pockets of recalcitrance
as an enemy. If you peel back the layers, however, there's always a local
political story at the root of the killing and dying. That original
misunderstanding and grievance fertilizes the land for the Islamists. Whom do
you want to side with: your brothers in God's world or the infidel thieves?

In the case of the Korengal Valley, the story began about a century ago, when
the tribesmen now known as Korengalis were kicked out of the province of
Nuristan (immediately north of Kunar province) and settled in the Korengal,
which was rich with timber forests and farmland. Over time they made an alliance
with one branch of the large Safi tribe, which once dominated Kunar politics.
But down the road along the Pech River valley, the rest of the Safis opposed the
Korengalis.

As the Afghans tell the story, from the moment the Americans arrived in 2001,
the Pech Valley timber lords and warlords had their ear. Early on, they led the
Americans to drop bombs on the mansion of their biggest rival -- Haji Matin. The
air strikes killed several members of his family, according to local residents,
and the Americans arrested others and sent them to the prison at Bagram Air
Base. The Pech Valley fighters working alongside the Americans then pillaged the
mansion. And that was that. Haji Matin, already deeply religious, became
ideological and joined with Abu Ikhlas, a local Arab linked to the foreign
jihadis.

By 2007, the Americans understood what happened. Last year, the governor of
Nuristan even sat them down with the Korengali elders to try and mediate between
the two sides. Nothing came of it. Kearney tried to dig deeper, sending e-mail
messages to anthropologists and Afghan experts to get their guidance. He spent
hours listening to Haji Zalwar Khan -- who acted as the valley's representative
to the Americans and the government -- talk about history and grievances. Haji
Zalwar, a jihadi veteran of the anti-Soviet fight, bore the valley's burden
almost alone and had the grim demeanor to prove it. Kearney met as many
villagers as possible to learn the names of all the elders and their families.
But he inherited a blood feud between the Korengalis and the Americans that he
hadn't started, and he was being sucked into its logic.

''Serious P.T.S.D.''

LAST AUTUMN,, after five months of grueling foot patrols up and down the
mountains,    after fruitless encounters with elders who smiled in the morning
and were host    to insurgents in the evening and after losing friends to enemy
fire, Captain    Kearney's men could relate to the sullen, jittery rage of their
predecessors    in the 10th Mountain Division. Many wondered what they were
doing out there    at all.

Kearney refused to entertain that thought. He would tell his visitors, whether
generals or reconstruction teams, that his campaign plan was clear, if modest:
''It's World War II Pacific-island hopping, turning one village at a time.''
Over five months, he had gained about 400 yards of terrain. When some generals
and colonels had flown in for a quick tour, and Kearney was showing them the lay
of the land, one officer said to another, as Kearney later recalled it, ''I
don't know why we're even out here.'' Another officer jumped in to talk up the
logic of the operation. Kearney told me he thought: Sort your stuff out before
you come out here. My boys are sucking it up and dying. . . . For besides being
lord of the valley, he had another role to play -- motivator, disciplinarian and
confidant to his soldiers. ''It's like being in charge of a soap opera,'' he
told me. ''I feel like Dr. Phil with guns.''

One full-moon night I was sitting outside a sandbag-reinforced hut with Kearney
when a young sergeant stepped out hauling the garbage. He looked around at the
illuminated mountains, the dust, the rocks, the garbage bin. The monkeys were
screeching. ''I hate this country!'' he shouted. Then he smiled and walked back
into the hut. ''He's on medication,'' Kearney said quietly to me.

Then another soldier walked by and shouted, ''Hey, I'm with you, sir!'' and
Kearney said to me, ''Prozac. Serious P.T.S.D. from last tour.'' Another one
popped out of the HQ cursing and muttering. ''Medicated,'' Kearney said. ''Last
tour, if you didn't give him information, he'd burn down your house. He killed
so many people. He's checked out.''

As I went to get some hot chocolate in the dining tent, the peaceful night was
shattered by mortars, rockets and machine-gun fire banging and bursting around
us. It was a coordinated attack on all the fire bases. It didn't take long to
understand why so many soldiers were taking antidepressants. The soldiers were
on a 15-month tour that included just 18 days off. Many of them were
''stop-lossed,'' meaning their contracts were extended because the army is
stretched so thin. You are not allowed to refuse these extensions. And they felt
eclipsed by Iraq. As Sgt. Erick Gallardo put it: ''We don't get supplies,
assets. We scrounge for everything and live a lot more rugged. But we know the
war is here. We got unfinished business.''

For sanity, all they had was the medics' tent, video games and movies --
''Gladiator,'' ''Conan the Barbarian,'' ''Dogma,'' Monty Python. Down the road
in the Pech Valley, soldiers played cricket with Afghan kids and had organized
boxing and soccer matches. Lt. Kareem Hernandez, a New Yorker running a base on
the Pech River, regularly bantered over dinner with the Afghan police. Neighbors
would come by with tips. But here in the Korengal, the soldiers were completely
alienated from the local culture. One night while watching a scene from HBO's
''Rome'' in which a Roman soldier tells a slave he wants to marry her, a soldier
asked which century the story was set in. ''First B.C. or A.D.,'' said another
soldier. The first shook his head: ''And they're still living like this 800
meters outside the wire.''

At the end of the summer, Kearney told his dad, ''My boys are gonna go crazy out
here.'' The army sent a shrink, and Kearney got a wake-up call about his own
leadership. He discovered that half his men thought he was playing Russian
roulette with their lives and the other half thought he stuck too closely to the
rules of engagement. ''The moral compass of the army is the P.L. and the C.O.''
-- the platoon leader and the commanding officer, Kearney told me. ''I told
every one of my P.L.'s that they have to set that moral standard, that once you
slip to the left, you can't pull your guys back in.''

Operation Rock Avalanche

ON OCT. 19, Kearney and Battle Company were air assaulted into the insurgents'
backyard for a mission that many thought insane. It was called Rock Avalanche
and would last about six days. One of its main targets was the village of Yaka
China.

Kearney, being the good soldier, tried to pump up his boys with the promise that
they would be going after insurgents who had killed their friends and whose
grizzled faces were plastered on their bad-guy family-tree wall at the KOP. They
would upset the guerrillas' safe haven and their transit routes from Pakistan.
They would persuade the villagers to stop harboring the bad guys by offering an
$11 million road project that had just been approved by NATO and Kabul and would
be built by the Kunar Provincial Reconstruction Team. And they'd complete the
''human terrain mapping'' that is part of the new counterinsurgency doctrine --
what families dominate, who's married, who's feuding, are there divisions to be
exploited?

It was a lot to ask of young soldiers: play killer, cultural anthropologist,
hearts-and-minds winner and then killer again. Which is why, just hours before
the mission was to begin, some soldiers were smearing black-and-green war paint
on their faces when their sergeant shouted: ''Take it off. Now!'' Why? They'd
frighten the villagers.

It seemed a moot point as Rock Avalanche got under way. Apache gunships were
scanning the ridges for insurgents. Other helicopters were dropping off more
soldiers. An unmanned drone was whining overhead as it sent infrared video feeds
to a large screen back at the battalion's headquarters, Camp Blessing, six miles
north of the KOP.

Almost immediately, high on a mountainside looking down on Yaka China, Kearney
had to play God. In a ditch to his left, Jesse Yarnell, a young intelligence
officer, along with John, an Afghan interpreter, were intercepting insurgents on
their two-way radios saying, ''We see them, we're going to wait.''

''They're right down there!'' said Kevin Caroon as he gazed out of his night
vision. Caroon, from Connecticut and a father of two, was an Air Force JTAC --
the joint terminal attack controller who talks the combat pilots onto their
targets. ''See that? Two people moving south 400 meters away from us,'' Caroon
said, pointing down the mountain face. More insurgents were located nearby.

''Sir, what do you want to do?'' Caroon asked Kearney.

''I want them dead,'' Kearney said.

''Engage them?''

''Yes. Take 'em out.''

Caroon radioed the pilot his instructions, ''On-scene commander's intent is to
engage.'' And that was it.

A sudden wail pierced the night sky. It was Slasher, an AC-130 gunship, firing
bullets the size of Coke bottles. Flaming shapes ricocheted all around the
village. Kearney was in overdrive. The soldiers back at the KOP were radioing in
that the drone was tracking 10 men near the tree line. Yarnell was picking up
insurgent radio traffic. ''They're talking about getting ready to hit us,''
someone said. The pilot could see five men, one entering a house, then, no, some
were in the trees, some inside, and then, multiple houses. He wanted
confirmation -- were all these targets hostile? Did Kearney have any
collateral-damage concerns? Cursing, Kearney told them to engage the men outside
but not to hit the house. The pilots radioed back that men had just run inside.
No doubt there would be a family. Caroon reminded Kearney that Slasher had only
enough fuel to stay in position for 10 more minutes.

''What do you want to do, sir?'' Caroon asked him.

Kearney radioed his soldiers back at the KOP to contact his boss, Lt. Col. Bill
Ostlund. Ostlund, a Nebraska social scientist who could switch effortlessly from
aggressive bomber to political negotiator talking family values with Afghan
tribal elders, was in the crowded tactical-operations room at Camp Blessing
watching the drone's video feed and getting the same intelligence. He signed off
on collateral damage, and Kearney turned to Caroon: ''Take out the compound. And
anyone that comes out.''

Flaming rockets flashed through the sky. Thunder rumbled and echoed through the
valley. Then there was a pause. Slasher asked Caroon whether the insurgents were
still talking. Kearney shouted over to Yarnell in his ditch, ''You picking
anything up?'' Nothing. More spitting rockets.

The night seemed incomprehensible and interminable. Slasher departed and
Gunmetal -- an Apache helicopter -- swept in. Radio communication kept breaking
down. At one point the crew of Gunmetal, sensing no hostile intent, refused
Kearney's orders to fire. Then suddenly Gunmetal was rocketing at figures
scattering for cover. Then Slasher was back in the sky doing more ''work.'' In
the predawn light Bone -- the nickname for the B-1 bomber that seemed to be the
soldiers' favorite -- winged in and dropped two 2,000-pound bombs above the
village. Finally, around dawn, a weary Kearney, succumbing to gallows humor,
adrenaline and exhaustion, said: ''O.K., I've done my killing for the week. I'm
ready to go home.''

Kearney estimated that they killed about 20 people, adding: ''I'm not gonna lie.
Some are probably civilians.''

In the logic of war, the best antidote for the menacing ghostliness of the
ambushing enemy is killing and knowing you've killed them. The soldiers in the
Korengal almost never had that kind of satisfaction. Any insurgents, if they
were killed, would be buried fast, and all that was left in their wake were
wounded civilians. That morning, after a long night of fighting, was no
different. Within an hour or so, Lt. Matt Piosa, an earnest, 24-year-old West
Point grad, and his patrol were in Yaka China. They radioed that the village
elders were asking to bury their dead. They'd also collected wounded civilians.
The tally was bad -- 5 killed and 11 wounded, all of them women, girls and boys.

Kearney radioed Camp Blessing the bad news and dropped his head between his
knees. Killing women and children was tragedy enough. But civilian casualties
are also a political issue. If he didn't manage to explain his actions to the
Yaka China villagers and get them to understand his intentions, he could lose
them to the enemy. Meanwhile, Yarnell and his team were intercepting radio
messages like: ''Be very quiet. Move the things over here. Pray for us.'' At
least some of the insurgents from the previous night's fight had survived to
fight again. The planes were tracking them hiding along a creek. But after the
civilian casualties of the night before, senior commanders were refusing to give
Kearney clearance to bomb or rocket them.

The short day was fading. The sun dropped behind the peaks. The cold winds
rattled our bones. The soldiers tried to make light of their conviction that
they'd be attacked by those insurgents dissolving into the villages. Their fears
were realized.

Hearts and Minds

TO TRY TO ACQUIRE allies, Kearney and some of his men flew down the next day
to Yaka China. With nowhere else to land, the Black Hawk helicopters descended
on the roof of a house not far below the compound that Slasher, the AC-130,
had rocketed the night of the 19th. Dust and dried grass whipped across the
house and the villagers' faces. Just to endear themselves even more, the
soldiers from Battle Company had to step on harvested corn as they climbed down;
it was drying on the second story.

The adversaries faced off in the courtyard as chickens sprinted in and out. On
one side were Kearney, Ostlund and Larry LeGree, a naval nuclear engineer and
head of the Provincial Reconstruction Team, together with their entourage,
including interpreters, all in futuristic high-tech gear. On the other side were
the Korengali elders, who looked as if they stepped out of ''Lord of the Rings''
with their crooked walking sticks, beards dyed red and blue eyes framed by kohl.
With no Afghan government out here, the elders are the only channel for
communication. The younger men sat on the ground, wrapped in shawls and bold
indifference.

Kearney squatted and told the Korengalis that when he came to this region he
hoped to walk into Yaka China and find out what the villagers needed. Instead,
he found that there were some 50 insurgents in and around the village. He
pointed to the evidence -- military radio batteries that his men had found,
binoculars, rockets, an old pistol, a small pamphlet titled, in Arabic, ''How to
Kill,'' and one in Pashto, ''The Concise Book on the Virtues of Jihad'' -- that
had been collected in the general area by Afghan soldiers and Americans. It was
not a very incriminating haul, and everyone knew it.

The day before, a U.S. medevac had airlifted out the wounded civilians from the
village. Humanitarian assistance was air-dropped in, including concrete for
retaining walls, rice and blankets for winter. The provisions were not
compensation, Kearney told the elders. ''It's what the government does for their
people when there is security here,'' he said. He asked them to tell him where
in the mountains the insurgents were hiding their supplies. ''That way I don't
have to come in here and shoot at you and identify the good guys from the bad
guys,'' he said.

To keep his bearings amid the hostile faces, Kearney kept appealing to Haji
Zalwar Khan, the leading go-between among the valley's elders. He made his
fortune in the timber trade and blamed the Americans for shutting it down. He
tried to placate both the Americans and the insurgents. He was not about to side
with Kearney in public. ''How can I know where you found these things?'' he
asked, referring to the jihadi items. ''In the mountain? The house? How do I
know whom they belong to?''

Kearney smiled. He was getting used to the routine between the Americans and the
villagers -- miscommunication and deception. The encounter felt as much
performative, a necessary part of the play, as substantive. And I wondered how
Kearney was going to keep his sanity for 10 more months.

Just a week or so earlier, I had been at the KOP when villagers from Aliabad --
a mile south of the KOP, and the home village of Haji Zalwar Khan -- complained
to Kearney that some ordinance had hit a house. Later they sent up the
homeowner's teenage son to wrest compensation from Kearney. As we walked to the
KOP's entrance to meet the boy, a shot rang out, then another. The bullets
smacked the dirt in front of us. Kearney shoved me into a shack where an Afghan
was cooking bread. A few more shots were fired. It was ''One-Shot Freddy,'' as
the soldiers refer to him, an insurgent shooter everyone had a theory about
regarding the vintage of his gun, his identity, his tactics -- but neither
Kearney's scouts nor Shadow the drone could ever track him. I accidentally
slashed my forearm on a nail in the shack and as I watched the blood pool I
thought that if I had to live with Freddy and his ilk for months on end I, too,
would see a forked tongue in every villager and start dreaming of revenge.

Kearney was angry. ''Taliban shot your house?'' he asked the boy from Aliabad.
An interpreter translated.

No, said the boy, Americans did.

''What'd we shoot with?''

''I don't know the weapon, but there's little holes and two big holes.''

''I didn't shoot into Aliabad,'' said Kearney, adding that if one of his
soldiers had, it was because insurgents were firing from the village.

''No one shoots from the village,'' said the boy, though everyone knew
insurgents had wounded several of Kearney's soldiers by shooting from the
mosque, the cemetery, the school. . . .

The boy changed course, ''God knows better than me,'' and that sent Kearney on a
riff: ''Yes. God does and God talks to me and told me they do.'' And by the way,
hadn't the boy noticed that the bad guys always start shooting first?

''O.K., then shoot them, not our house,'' the boy said.

''Then tell me where the bad guys are,'' Kearney said. The boy said he didn't
know. What he knew was that the Americans were always shooting at the village.

This went on for some time. When the boy again protested that no one shoots from
his village, Kearney interrupted him. ''Aminullah does,'' he said. Aminullah was
a native of Aliabad and a rising figure in the valley's insurgency.

The boy smiled.

''You're smiling because you know I'm right,'' Kearney said.

''You're right,'' the boy said. ''So shoot the cemetery, not our house.''

Kearney moved closer to him. ''Look, if you want help with your house, all you
have to do is ask. But don't accuse us every time something goes wrong.''

The boy laughed and repeated that he didn't know where the bad guys were.

''It's crazy, man. They must be ghosts!'' Kearney said, laughing.

''Aminullah doesn't come to Aliabad anymore,'' the boy said, perhaps trying to
give Kearney a bone.

Kearney leapt at it. ''So Aminullah is bad?''

''Yes.''

''Ah! Finally! We're getting somewhere.'' Kearney took off his helmet and
squeezed his hands together and rocked as he sat on a wall. ''What about
Mohammad Tali, he's a good guy isn't he?'' Kearney asked.

Smiling again, the boy looked at the dirt: ''No. You already told us he's a bad
guy.''

''Ah!'' Kearney said, throwing up his hands. ''So you were down there in the
village when I gave radios and food. But instead you say I shoot at you all the
time?'' Kearney swung his legs back and forth. ''Hey dude, ask yourself. Why
would I bring you radios and food and shoot at you? Does Aminullah? No. What
happened that day after I left?'' The boy said all he knew was that the
villagers went home and ''they'' started shooting. ''Where?'' Kearney asked,
''from your village?''

''What can I say? The Americans were in my village.''

''Yeah, so I was doing good stuff for you guys and they shot at me. And what I'm
trying to say is they could have shot at you again. And if I shoot at your house
I'll help. We'll fix up that wall. I'm not here to hurt you.''

Everyone was getting restless in the little check post. Kearney tried to lighten
up a bit. He asked the boy what he thought about the Americans.

''You build roads and clinics and schools and are here to help,'' the boy said.

''Cop out,'' Kearney shouted, chuckling. ''Easy answer. Hey dude, you can say
we're rotten and messing up your lumber trade.'' The boy laughed. Kearney
laughed. Pfc. Michael Cunningham, the radio operator, and Sgt. Taylor White, who
always manned the check post, both laughed.

''See, I knew it,'' Kearney said. ''That's what you really think. Think I want
to be here?''

''Yeah,'' the boy said. ''I think so.''

''Dude. I got a wife and son. I came here to help you out. If you give me as
much help as possible I'll get out of here a hell of a lot faster.''

Kearney told him to enjoy Ramadan, and then shouted, ''Where's my fuzzy
friend?'' as he looked about for Jericho, the puppy whose ears were chopped off
by an Afghan worker: it was pre-emptive preparation for dog fighting -- the ears
would just give an enemy dog something to grab onto. ''I need someone to make me
happy. Jericho, I need some love.'' Jericho appeared, leaping about. Kearney
picked him up. ''Hey, what's up buddy? You're a good boy. You smell like dirt.''

Kearney turned to Cunningham and White and said, ''Well, he's the first to admit
Aminullah's bad.'' And give or take a little unreliable information shared here
and there, that was the Korengal routine.

Fight Time

THE DAY AFTER the meeting with the elders of Yaka China, Yarnell and John could
hear insurgents trying to pinpoint where Kearney and his men were. The
helicopters    had moved us to a ridge line, about 8,400 feet high, straddling
the Korengal    and Shuriak Valleys. The insurgents used the deep caves,
boulders and forests    as hideouts and transit routes between Pakistan and
Afghanistan. We could hear    someone who called himself Obeid saying he'd do
whatever the Yaka China    elders decided -- whether to cooperate with the
Americans or take revenge.    By evening the elders had apparently reached their
verdict. It was fight time.

Kearney, too, had reached a verdict. He would fool the insurgents, feigning a
troop extraction when the helicopters came for resupply and pushing out his best
guys in small ''kill teams.'' We heard the insurgents say, ''We have wolves on
them,'' meaning spotters. A hoarse, whispering insurgent had eyes on either Sgt.
Larry Rougle and his scouts or on Lieutenant Piosa and his rear guard. There was
joking that Rougle and Piosa should dance and see which one the whisperer was
spying on. Then nothing happened for almost 24 hours.

Rougle -- who was called Wildcat -- was on his sixth deployment since Sept. 11,
2001. He was with the first group of Rangers in Afghanistan. Even his rough
background was something of a legend; he would tell how he grew up in a South
Jersey gang, shot a guy, went to ''juvie,'' and there taught himself Russian
(though he was estranged from his Russian father), taught himself politics,
history, zoology. At night out in the woods, he'd tell his fellow scouts, ''You
know penguins are monogamous?''

I hung out with Piosa and his crew. His white skin, red hair and blue eyes
belied the months of constant warfare he and his platoon had scraped through. It
was a beautiful autumn afternoon and the soldiers were joking around, heating up
Meals Ready to Eat, spitting gobs of Copenhagen and then, in a moment, recess
was over. The insurgents were on them. Bullets ricocheted all through the woods.
A strange silence fell as everyone scrambled for cover. Three of us crouched
behind a skinny pine tree. And the silence broke: curses, shouting.

''Where's it coming from?''

''Where are my guys?''

''Jones, are you seeing things?''

More bullets. Cracks against the tree trunks. Bits of confusing information were
coming in on Piosa's radio.

''They're comin' up the low ground at 2-4'' -- Sergeant Rice's call sign.

''One W.I.A. hit in the arm.'' Then there was panic and screaming.

''The enemy's overtaken the hill,'' bellowed Pvt. Sterling Dunn from further
down the trees.

''2-4 is hit'' -- that was Rice.

''Wildcat is run over the hill'' -- that was Rougle.

''Get a team to run up there and take that hill. They pushed Wildcat over the
hill!'' Piosa shouted, trying over and over to reach Rice and Rougle, but
getting no answer. The battalion surgeon, Capt. Joel Dean, and a sergeant
sprinted up the hill to get to the wounded. As the first Americans neared Rice
and Rougle's positions they were fired on from those same positions. What was
going on?

I followed Piosa through the brush toward the ridge. We came upon Rice and
Specialist Carl Vandenberge behind some trees. Vandenberge was drenched in
blood. The shot to his arm had hit an artery. Rice was shot in the stomach. A
soldier was using the heating chemicals from a Meal Ready to Eat to warm
Vandenberge and keep him from going into shock.

Piosa moved on to the hill where the men had been overrun. I saw big blue-eyed
John Clinard, a sergeant from North Carolina, falling to pieces. He worshiped
Rougle. ''Sergeant Rougle is dying. It's my fault. . . . I'm sorry. . . . I
tried to get up the hill. . . .'' Sergeant Rougle was lying behind him. Someone
had already covered him with a blanket. Only the soles of his boots were
visible.

''There's nothing you could do,'' Piosa said, grabbing Clinard's shoulder. ''You
got to be the man now. You can do it. I need you to get down to Rice and
Vandenberge and get them to the medevac.'' Clinard wiped his face, seemed to
snap to and headed off through the trees.

Two of Rice's squad mates appeared, eyes dilated. They couldn't believe they'd
seen, up close, the ghosts they'd been fighting for the last five months. ''I
saw him in the eyes,'' Specialist Marc Solowski said. ''He looked at me. I shot
him.'' He and Specialist Michael Jackson had crawled up the hill twice trying to
retake it. Each time the insurgents in ''manjammies'' whipped them back with
machine-gun fire. There was blood on the stones around us. Some thought they saw
blood trailing down toward the village of Landigal, where they were sure an
insurgent had dashed into a cottage.

''We're not losing this hill again,'' Piosa shouted. ''This hill is ours!'' He
wanted bombs to be dropped immediately.

''There's women praying in that house,'' Dunn shouted back.

I was fixating on Rougle's black hat, lying by the bloodied rock patch where
Dunn was sitting, when Sergeant Stichter, Dunn's senior, appeared, out of breath
and shaking, back from tending to Vandenberge. He needed water. The F-15 known
as Dude was en route, the Apaches were chasing men and Kearney -- who had bolted
down the mountain, throwing grenades in caves -- was barking orders. Kearney was
badly shaken. He adored Rougle, and he'd broken down when he saw his big old
buddy Rice bleeding at the landing zone. Rice comforted him and then lumbered to
the helicopter, just asking to talk to his wife before they put him under.

The insurgents had run off with some of Rougle, Rice and Vandenberge's stuff --
ammunition, communication equipment, night vision goggles, machine guns. Kearney
wanted the equipment back. He wanted to punish the valley. Stichter had his eyes
on a guy pacing a rooftop in Landigal and wanted to blow his head off.
Specialist Mitchell Raeon, whose uniform was now soaked in Rougle's blood, had
the guy in his scope but couldn't range that far. ''That's a female,'' Dunn
said.

Kearney had identified insurgents who'd dashed into a house and wanted to hit
them, but Stichter got back word from Camp Blessing saying the target was too
close to other houses. Kearney sent back a reminder -- you let some guys get
away the other night. It was impossible to know for sure, but Kearney believed
they were the guys who had killed Rougle, and now, he said, you're going to let
another group get away?

Someone cursed, then said, ''They're all leaving the house.''

Kearney radioed down to one of his lieutenants at an observation post. ''Where
are they going?'' Yarnell heard the insurgents say they were coming back for the
rest of the equipment. And then, with no warning, an F-15 dropped a bomb on
Landigal, but off target, or so it seemed. Kearney was furious. He was sure
headquarters had intentionally missed the house he had wanted hit.

I noticed Raeon was packing and unpacking Rougle's things. Rougle's scouts were
in disarray, rudderless, and admitting it. Raeon said he kept seeing in his mind
Rougle's face alert and then dead, switching back and forth; he wanted it to
stop.

The next day brought another brief firefight, and Rougle's scouts rallied
swiftly. They said they felt him watching and proud. There were more bomb drops
and refusals to drop bombs, and then Becky, everyone's favorite Apache pilot,
swept in. Not only did she offer the comforting voice of a woman seeping right
into their ears, but Becky was one of the most aggressive shooters. She flew up
and down the canyon walls seeking out and rocketing insurgents. We heard them on
the radio again boasting about retreating to safety under fire. They talked
about the strike in Landigal that they thought might have killed Azizullah --
''a real bad guy,'' the radio operator told me.

Kearney was watching a crow flying above us. ''Taliban are right,'' he said.
''Like they said yesterday, follow the birds, they follow the Americans. I wish
I was made as strong as haj'' -- their nickname for insurgents. ''They were
balls to do what they did. And guess what? I'm not gonna lie. They won.''

Killing Together

AS WE WAITED for dusk to get back to the KOP, we all knew the insurgents were
nearby, eyes on Kearney, eyes on the soldiers down in the valley. Even nightfall
was no comfort because the full moon was floodlighting the Korengal. I returned
to the KOP by helicopter with Kearney, while 1st and 2nd Platoons had to make
the long trek back on foot. As soon as 1st Platoon set off, the insurgents
struck    with a devastating L-shaped ambush. All Kearney could do, back at the
KOP, was    calm his boys on the radio, get in the medevac and invoke the gods
of war. The    Apaches, Slasher and Bone dropped bombs all night. The soldiers
and insurgents    were so close that when Slasher, the AC-130, flew in, the
pilot coordinated    not with the JTAC but with Sgt. Roberto Sandifer, the
platoon's forward    observer, who at that moment was under fire watching one of
his guys die.

Around midnight, 1st Platoon filed into the KOP, eyes bulging, drenched in
sweat, river water and blood. They were hauling the belongings of Mohammad Tali,
a high-value target. Specialist Sal Giunta had killed him.

The next day I climbed up to the KOP and found Specialist Giunta, a quiet Iowan
lofted into a heroism he didn't want. His officers were putting him up for a
medal of honor. Giunta told me the story of that night, how they'd barely moved
300 yards before they were blasted. Giunta was fourth in the file when it
happened, and he jumped into a ditch. He couldn't figure out why they were
getting hit from where Joshua Brennan and baby-faced Franklin Eckrode should
have been leading up ahead. He knew it must be bad, but as he leapt up to check
he got whacked with a bullet in his armored chest plate. It threw him down. They
were taking fire from three sides. He grabbed some grenades: ''I couldn't throw
as far as Sergeant Gallardo. We were looking like retards and I decided to run
out in front of the grenades.'' He found Eckrode with gunshot wounds. ''He was
down but moving and trying to fix his SAW'' -- a heavy machine gun -- ''so I
just kept on running up the trail. It was cloudy. I was running and saw dudes.
Plural.''

He couldn't figure out who they were. Then he realized they were hauling Brennan
off through the forest. ''I started shooting,'' he recalled. ''I emptied that
magazine. They dropped Brennan.'' Giunta scrambled up to Brennan. He was a mess.
His lower jaw was shot off. ''He was still conscious. He was breathing. He was
asking for morphine. I said, 'You'll get out and tell your hero stories,' and he
was like, 'I will, I will.' ''

They were still taking fire. No one was there to help. Hugo Mendoza, their
platoon medic, was back in another ditch, calling: ''I'm bleeding out. I'm
dying.'' Giunta saw Brennan's eyes go back. His breathing was bad. Giunta got
Brennan to squeeze his hand. A medic showed up out of the sky. They prepared
Brennan to be hoisted to the medevac in a basket. Soon he would be dead.

As the medevacs flew out, Sergeant Sandifer had talked in air cover: Slasher,
the AC-130. The pilot was a woman and, Sandifer later told me, ''It was so
reassuring for us to hear her voice.'' She spotted guys hiding and asked if she
was clear to engage. '' 'You're cleared hot,' I told her. And we killed two
people together.'' But, at this point, the killings were no consolation to
Sandifer.

As Giunta said, ''The richest, most-trained army got beat by dudes in manjammies
and A.K.'s.'' His voice cracked. He was not just hurting, he was in a rage. And
there was nothing for him to do with it but hold back his tears, and bark -- at
the Afghans for betraying them, at the Army for betraying them. He didn't run to
the front because he was a hero. He ran up to get to Brennan, his friend. ''But
they'' -- he meant the military -- ''just keep asking for more from us.'' His
contract would be up in 18 days but he had been stop-lossed and couldn't go
home. Brennan himself was supposed to have gotten out in September. He'd been
planning to go back to Wisconsin where his dad lived, play his guitar and become
a cop.

Sandifer was questioning why they were sticking it out in the Korengal when the
people so clearly hated them. He was haunted by Mendoza's voice calling to him:
''I'm bleeding out. I'm dying.'' He worried that the Korengal was going to push
them off the deep end. In his imagination it had already happened. One day an
Afghan visited their fire base, Sandifer told me. ''I was staring at him, on the
verge of picking up my weapon to shoot him,'' he said. ''I know right from
wrong, but even if I did shoot him everyone at the fire base would have been
O.K. We're all to the point of 'Lord of the Flies.' '' And they still had 10
months to go in the Korengal.

I wondered how Kearney was going to win back his own guys, let alone win over
the Korengalis. Just before I left, Kearney told me his biggest struggle would
be holding his guys in check. ''I've got too many geeking out, wanting to go off
the deep end and kill people,'' he said. One of his lieutenants wanted to shoot
every Afghan in the face. Kearney shook his head. He wished he could buy 20
goats and let the boys beat and burn them and let loose their rage. He tried to
tell them the restraints were a product of their success -- that there was an
Afghan government with its own rules. ''I'm balancing plates on my goddamn nose
is what I'm doing,'' he said. ''All it's gonna take is for one of these guys to
snap.''

But leave the Korengal, as the colonel had suggested, and let some other company
deal with it? No way. He'd spent five months learning the valley, getting
involved in it; he couldn't just pull out. At least he would keep the insurgents
busy here so the other companies could do hearts and minds unimpeded down along
the Pech river. ''I lost seven dudes here,''he told me. ''It's too much blood. I
don't want to give this up. This is mine.''

To Be Continued

COLONEL OSTLUND and his officers, and the governor of Kunar and his officials,
held an all-day meeting with the Korengali elders. The elders wanted to talk
about Rock Avalanche and the devastation that had rained down on them. Colonel
Ostlund told them, ''If anything should happen to Captain Kearney, pain    and
misery will knock on many doors in the Korengal.'' He gave them 10    days to
pick sides -- the insurgents or the government. Only then would    he consider
going ahead with the road project. Their answer came back. They    would leave
the valley altogether. But they didn't, and 10 days later    insurgents pulled
off another ambush of a platoon from the 173rd. The entire    patrol went down,
either wounded or killed. Kearney told me recently that they    had wounded Abu
Ikhlas and killed some other bad guys. He said he was pretty    sure that Haji
Matin, the embittered timber lord, had been killed, too. But    the dialogue
with the Korengalis was pretty much the same as it had been. Only    the winter
snows have brought some minor respite to the valley.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: February 26, 2008



CORRECTION: A front-page picture caption on Saturday with the ''This Weekend''
summary  carried an erroneous credit in some editions. The photograph of a
wounded soldier in Afghanistan was by Lynsey Addario for The New York Times, not
by Joshua Lott.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: EYES IN THE SKY: At Camp Blessing, battalion members -- led by
Lt. Col. Bill Ostlund, far right -- watch a monitor showing Capt. Dan Kearney's
troops six miles away
IN THE VALLEY: From left, Capt. Dan Kearney
elders in a village after it was bombed
Sgt. Tanner Stichter tends to a wounded Specialist Carl Vandenberge
 HOSTILE FIRE: U.S. troops carry the body of Staff Sgt. Larry Rougle, who was
killed when the insurgents ambushed their squad in the Korengal Valley.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); NIGHT VISION DEVICES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MOUNTAINS
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); TERRORISM (74%); RIVERS
(71%); HALLOWEEN (68%); RELIGION (52%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             812 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 5, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chavez Employs Colombia Feud As Flashpoint for Feud With U.S.

BYLINE: By SIMON ROMERO; Jenny Carolina Gonzalez contributed reporting from
Bogota, Colombia, Uta Harnischfeger from Zurich and Ginger Thompson from
Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1490 words

DATELINE: CARACAS, Venezuela


In the four days since Colombian forces crossed into Ecuador and killed a
guerrilla leader taking refuge there, tensions between Colombia -- Washington's
top regional ally -- and its leftist neighbors have erupted, highlighting the
fact that Colombia and its policies are increasingly viewed here as American
proxies.

President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela called Colombia the ''Israel of Latin
America'' saying both countries bombed and invaded neighbors by invoking ''a
supposed right to defense'' that he said was ordered by the United States. He
has sent troops to the border and expelled Colombia's ambassador. His
agriculture minister said Tuesday that the frontier with Colombia would be
closed to stop commerce.

In turn, Colombia said it would file charges against Mr. Chavez with the
International Criminal Court, accusing him of assisting Colombia's largest rebel
group.

Meanwhile, President Bush fiercely defended Colombia, which receives $600
million a year in American aid to fight the leftist rebels and drug trafficking.
He used the diplomatic crisis to push Congress to approve a Colombia trade deal
that has languished for more than a year because of concerns among senior
Democrats over human rights abuses there.

Mr. Bush, who telephoned Colombia's president, Alvaro Uribe, on Tuesday morning,
told reporters at the White House, ''I told the president that America fully
supports Colombia's democracy, and that we firmly oppose any acts of aggression
that could destabilize the region.''

Employing a new strategy to portray the trade agreement with Colombia as an
issue of national security, Mr. Bush used the occasion to call on Congress to
ratify the deal as a way of countering leaders like Mr. Chavez who had emerged
as scourges of American policies in the region.

''If we fail to approve this agreement, we will let down our close ally, we will
damage our credibility in the region and we will embolden the demagogues in our
hemisphere,'' Mr. Bush said.

Although Colombia violated the sovereignty of Ecuador, not Venezuela, in its
raid, Mr. Chavez, an ally of Ecuador, has taken the lead in accusing Colombia of
being an American stooge. That has been a favorite theme of his, especially
since November, when Colombia abruptly withdrew support for Mr. Chavez's
mediation with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.

Adding to the tensions on Tuesday, Colombia's vice president, Francisco Santos,
said Colombian forces had found evidence that the FARC had been seeking the
ingredients to make a radioactive dirty bomb.

Material found on a laptop computer recovered in the raid into Ecuador provided
the basis for Mr. Santos's accusations about a dirty bomb, a weapon that
combines highly radioactive material with conventional explosives to disperse
deadly dust that people would inhale.

''This shows that these terrorist groups, supported by the economic power
provided by drug trafficking, constitute a grave threat not just to our country
but to the entire Andean region and Latin America,'' Mr. Santos said at a United
Nations disarmament meeting in Geneva, in a statement that was posted in Spanish
on the conference's Web site. The rebels were ''negotiating to get radioactive
material, the primary base for making dirty weapons of destruction and
terrorism,'' he said.

It was unclear from Mr. Santos's statement with whom the rebels were
negotiating.

Mr. Santos made his claim based on information provided Monday in Bogota by
Colombia's national police chief about the FARC's negotiations for 110 pounds of
uranium, obtained from the laptop computer of Raul Reyes, the senior FARC
commander killed Saturday in Ecuador.

Colombia's government also said this week that it had obtained information on
the computer showing that Mr. Chavez was channeling $300 million to the FARC.
The information is the basis for its plan to file charges against Mr. Chavez in
the International Criminal Court, Mr. Uribe said Tuesday in Bogota.

The tensions produced a heated diplomatic exchange during an emergency meeting
convened Tuesday by the Organization of American States in Washington, during
which several countries denounced Colombia's actions as a violation of
Ecuadorean sovereignty.

Foreign Minister Maria Isabel Salvador of Ecuador demanded that the O.A.S.
formally condemn the actions by Colombia, dispatch a fact-finding mission to
investigate the events on its border, and call a meeting of regional foreign
ministers to consider further action.

''Ecuador rejects any effort by Colombia to avoid responsibility for violating
its sovereignty, which is a right that secures the peaceful coexistence of all
nations,'' Ms. Salvador said. ''Diplomatic apologies are not enough.''

An apology was not all she got. Ambassador Camilo Ospina of Colombia strongly
denied accusations that Colombian troops used military force on Ecuadorean
territory, saying that aircraft fired into Ecuador from the Colombian side of
the border.

He acknowledged that after the bombing, Colombian forces entered Ecuador to
examine the FARC camp. And what they found, he said, was evidence that Ecuador
had been harboring members of the FARC.

Mr. Ospina said that, in addition to the alleged payment by Mr. Chavez, the
information found on the laptops that Colombian troops seized indicated that
President Rafael Correa's government had met several times with the FARC and
allowed them to set up permanent bases in Ecuadorean territory. He said Colombia
would seek charges against President Chavez at the International Criminal Court.

''There is not the least doubt that the governments of Venezuela and Ecuador
have been negotiating with terrorists,'' Mr. Ospina said. ''Allowing terrorist
groups to keep camps on their territory border for the planning and execution of
terrorist acts is a crime and a clear violation of international treaties.''
Television in Venezuela also broadcast images of tank battalions heading to the
border, following a threat by Mr. Chavez on Sunday that Colombia would be
inviting war if it carried out an incursion in Venezuela similar to the one on
Saturday in a remote Amazonian province of Ecuador that killed 21 guerrillas.

Mr. Chavez's threat, which included a taunt that Venezuela would use its
Russian-made Sukhoi fighter jets to attack Colombia, has been interpreted here
as a sign that Mr. Chavez stands ready to defend the FARC, a group classified as
terrorists in the United States and Europe that is reported to operate without
hindrance along Venezuela's porous 1,300-mile border with Colombia.

Contrasting the FARC's image in Colombia as a group that finances itself through
cocaine trafficking and abductions and still plants land mines in rural areas,
documentaries on state television here in Venezuela portray the FARC as an
insurgency born out of efforts to combat Colombia's moneyed elite.

On his Sunday television program, Mr. Chavez went further by calling for a
minute of silence to mourn for Mr. Reyes, the fallen guerrilla leader whose real
name was Luis Edgar Devia.

''Chavez is effectively supporting narcoterrorists who take refuge in Venezuela
and Ecuador while saying a democratically elected leader of Colombia cannot
fight back,'' said Diego Arria, a former Venezuelan ambassador to the United
Nations who is a vocal critic of Mr. Chavez.

Still, Mr. Uribe, Colombia's president, is struggling to convince other
countries in the region of Colombia's need to carry out the foray into Ecuador.
Even if they might agree with Mr. Uribe in private, leaders are hesitant to
publicly back him, given sensitivities over territorial sovereignty.

''Uribe hasn't developed much of a foreign policy strategy beyond depending on
the United States,'' said Michael Shifter, vice president for policy at
Inter-American Dialogue, a research group in Washington. ''This puts him into a
bit of a bind.''

Indeed, few places can profess such longstanding support for the United States
as Colombia, which sent battalions to fight alongside American troops in the
Korean War.

Despite remaining the largest supplier of cocaine to the United States, Colombia
has emerged as a top ally of the Bush administration, with hundreds of American
military advisers welcomed there to assist Colombian security forces in
counterinsurgency and antinarcotics operations.

But just as Mr. Uribe may be suffering because of his close ties to the United
States, he may also be fortunate to have Mr. Chavez as his main adversary. Other
countries in the region are increasingly uncomfortable with Mr. Chavez's
belligerence as concern emerges over Venezuela's intervention in a matter
involving Colombia and Ecuador.

''South America is not prepared for conflicts, and we do not want conflicts,''
Brazil's president, Luiz Inacio Lula da Silva, told reporters in Brazil on
Tuesday, explaining that his government would try to negotiate a solution to the
dispute along with other countries.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Venezuelan National Guard members searched cars Tuesday at the
Colombian border. A Venezuelan official said the border would be closed to halt
commerce. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RODRIGO ARANGUA/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 At a meeting in Washington, Foreign Minister Maria Isabel Salvador of Ecuador,
right, asked for condemnation of Colombia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEX WONG/GETTY
IMAGES) MAP: Colombian forces crossed into Ecuador over the weekend.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%);
LIBERALISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); DIRTY BOMBS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (89%); NARCOTERRORISM (87%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (85%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);
US PRESIDENTS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(76%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); TERRORISM (73%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (73%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); ARMED FORCES (70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (68%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%); EXPLOSIVES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%)

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (76%); ALVARO URIBE (58%)

CITY: CARACAS, VENEZUELA (79%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(95%); ECUADOR (94%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); ISRAEL (92%); VENEZUELA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             813 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 7, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Top Jobs Open, One Filled

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING UNITED NATIONS; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 154 words


Jean-Marie Guehenno, the under secretary general for peacekeeping, and Louise
Arbour, the Geneva-based high commissioner for human rights, have told their
staffs that they will be leaving their posts in July. Ms. Arbour, a former
Canadian Supreme Court justice and United Nations war crimes prosecutor, said
she would not run for a second four-year term, and Mr. Guehenno, a French career
diplomat who has been peacekeeping chief for eight years during which the number
of soldiers abroad rose to a record 100,000, said he would depart after his
contract expired at the end of June. In another move, Secretary General Ban
Ki-moon told the Security Council that he was naming Kai Eide, a former
Norwegian ambassador to NATO, as his new envoy for Afghanistan. He replaces Tom
Koenigs of Germany and became a candidate after Hamid Karzai, the Afghan
president, rejected Mr. Ban's reported first choice, Paddy Ashdown of Britain.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(71%); SUPREME COURTS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (71%); HAMAD KARZAI (51%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (91%); GERMANY (72%); NORWAY (67%)

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             845 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 29, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spain: Extradition of Isabel Peron To Argentina Is Rejected By Court

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 116 words


Spain's National Court has decided against extraditing the former Argentine
president Maria Estela Martinez de Peron, 77, to Argentina, where she is wanted
on charges of human rights abuses during her presidency in the 1970s. In two
rulings, the court said that the charges did not constitute crimes against
humanity and that the statute of limitations for the offenses of which Ms.
Peron, known as Isabelita, is accused expired after 20 years. The rulings may be
appealed. Ms. Peron was the third wife of Gen. Juan Domingo Peron and vice
president when he died in 1974. She then led the country for two tumultuous
years before being deposed in a military coup. She has lived in Spain since
1981.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (93%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); TESTIMONY (88%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(84%); COUPS (82%); ARMED FORCES (50%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); ARGENTINA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             853 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 8, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2201 words


INTERNATIONAL

FORMER GUANTaNAMO DETAINEE

Tied to Suicide Attack in Iraq

A former Kuwaiti detainee at the United States prison camp at Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba, was one of the bombers in a string of deadly suicide attacks in the
northern Iraqi city of Mosul last month, the American military said. Dozens of
former Guantanamo detainees are suspected of having resumed hostility against
the Americans, and several have been killed, but this is the first publicly
confirmed instance of one having become a suicide bomber.  PAGE A8

COURT SAYS GROUP IS NOT TERRORIST

After a seven-year legal battle, Britain's Court of Appeal ruled that the
British government was wrong to include an Iranian resistance group, the
People's Mujahedeen of Iran, on its list of banned terrorist groups. Spokesmen
for the group said the ruling appeared to mean that Parliament must strike the
group from the list. The group has roots that go back to the mid-1960s.  PAGE A6

CHINESE PRESIDENT VISITS JAPAN

The leaders of China and Japan pledged to make their nations partners instead of
rivals as the Chinese president, Hu Jintao, began a goodwill mission to Tokyo
aimed at improving the often-tense relations between the Asian powers. The
visit, the first by a Chinese leader in a decade, is expected to yield few if
any concrete diplomatic breakthroughs, but both sides called the trip progress.
PAGE A10

CHINESE ORCHESTRA PLAYS FOR POPE

The China Philharmonic Orchestra performed Mozart's Requiem with the Shanghai
Opera House Chorus for Pope Benedict XVI, a concert that could signal a thaw in
the historically chilly relations between the Vatican and the Chinese
government. ''Music, and art in general, can serve as a privileged instrument
for encounter and reciprocal knowledge and esteem between different populations
and cultures,'' the pope said.  PAGE A6

ACQUITTAL IN KILLING OF NUN

A Brazilian jury acquitted Vitalmiro Bastos, the man accused of being behind the
murder of Dorothy Stang, an American Catholic nun. The trial was criticized by
human rights advocates and by the Brazilian government. A brother of Ms. Stang
said family members were crushed. ''That guy was offered up as a sacrificial
lamb,'' he said. ''But the darker forces that created him have been allowed to
go free.''  PAGE A17

NATIONAL

GOING ONLINE TO CHANGE

The Public Face of Islam

Ali Ardekani, a 33-year-old Web designer, is among a new wave of young American
Muslim performers and filmmakers trying to change the public face of Islam. One
of his offerings in this daunting task is ''Who Hijacked Islam?'' which has
garnered more than 350,000 hits on YouTube, one of the arenas of choice for the
campaign.   PAGE A20

THE SLIPPERY SIGN SLOPE

When a mural painted on a barn urging passing drivers to ''See Bellows Falls,''
was ruled in violation of Vermont's billboard law, legislators took notice and
have now passed an exemption. But critics worry that the exemption will put the
state on the road to just the type of mammoth highway billboards that most
Vermonters are proud not to have.   PAGE A20

COMPROMISE ON JUDGES

Senate Democrats and the White House moved ahead with a compromise to break a
years-long impasse over approving judges for the federal appeals court based in
Ohio. One effect of the plan would be to cement Republican conservative control
of the court for the foreseeable future no matter who is elected president in
the fall. Nevertheless, Senate Republicans seemed unenthused.   PAGE A25

Video of Beatings by the Police   A21

BUSINESS

ANSWERING THE CALL

When the Fed Beckons

Laurence D. Fink is reluctant to talk about his money management company's role
managing $30 billion of troubled assets from Bear Stearns, and with good reason:
If the company does a good job, the Fed, and by extension American taxpayers,
could actually make money from the controversial deal. But if it stumbles,
taxpayers could lose billions.  PAGE C1

WORSE AND WORSE FOR TV GUIDE

If you remember when TV was black and white, you probably remember when TV Guide
was a weekly must-buy at the grocery store checkout. Distant memories indeed:
This week, days after getting new owners and new editors, the long-troubled TV
Guide is back on the block.   PAGE C3

WHAT COLOR INK?

Shades of Maxwell Smart, if not James Bond: Inside its sleek, anodized aluminum
barrel, it has a camera, microphone and speaker. It also has a black-and-white
screen that displays messages, menu commands and even cramped little animations.
There's a nonremovable, rechargeable battery, a headphone jack and contacts for
a U.S.B. charging cradle. ''Oh,'' David Pogue adds in his column, ''and it's
also a ballpoint pen.''   PAGE C1

HAPPY BIRTHDAY, CASIO G-SHOCK

Calling your robotic lawnmower, a less complicated home theater system that
simulates surround sound, a slimmer laptop, and a nerd's timepiece turns 25.
Circuits.  PAGE C9

Stocks Tumble  C6

Questions for Aviation Agency  C1

Sundance Channel Sold   C3

NEW YORK REPORT

FROM EXEMPLARY CHILD

To Conviction as Stalker

Jack Jordan was the president of his senior class at a prestigious magnet
school, a competitive swimmer and diver, then an aspiring neurosurgeon on
scholarship at the University of Chicago. But his mother says that, at 25, he
went through a sudden transformation, which culminated in his search for the
love of the actress Uma Thurman, and his conviction this week on stalking and
aggravated harassment charges.  PAGE C14

CAREFULLY PLANNED ARRESTS

More than 200 people protesting the acquittal of three detectives in the
shooting death of Sean Bell were arrested at carefully orchestrated
demonstrations that halted traffic at busy intersections in Manhattan and
Brooklyn, the police said. The demonstrations played out as boisterous displays
of civil disobedience in which people signed up in advance to be arrested,
assuring organizers and lawyers that they were carrying proper identification to
show the police. PAGE C13

OBITUARIES

MORGAN SPARKS, 91

He made critical contributions to developing the second-generation transistor,
which became a building block of modern electronic devices.  PAGE C16

CLAUDE ROSENBERG, 80

He made a fortune managing other people's money and then began convincing the
rich that they could significantly increase their charitable giving while also
shrinking their tax bill. After retiring from the RCM Corporation he founded the
New Tithing Group, a nonprofit organization that, among other things, created a
Web site where users at any income level and with any amount of assets -- though
it was particularly directed at the affluent -- could calculate how much they
might prudently donate. PAGE C16

SPORTS

WHY FIND A NEW TRICK

If the Old One Still Works

Mariano Rivera of the Yankees prefers the simple approach. He throws his cut
fastball about 70 percent of the time, and expects it to do the job for him. It
usually does. And this year, he is outdoing himself, outdoing a glossy career
filled with more than a decade of dominance. Rivera has not allowed a run in 13
innings, which ties his longest scoreless streak to begin a season.   PAGE C19

A MOTHER'S TRIBUTE

The United States has had athletes in service die before, George Vecsey notes in
Sports of The Times. ''But Pat Tillman's death was different because of the way
he was used, posthumously, blatantly,'' he adds. Mary Tillman's book about her
son Pat, ''Boots on the Ground by Dusk,'' recounts some of those ways, and
''Some of the details in Tillman's book ought to make us sick,'' Vecsey says.
PAGE C17

HOME TO AFRICA

After that initial broadside -- bang! -- by a truck, the trip to Nigeria went
well for the four N.F.L. players. College scholarships were established at 10
Nigerian universities. H.I.V. testing kits were distributed to clinics. Water
wells were dug in a village that had none. A popular youth soccer team was
outfitted. ''We're from there; that's what it boils down to,'' Osi Umenyiora
said in a phone interview. ''You can come to America and lose sight of where
you're from.''  PAGE C21

A REASON TO DRIVE FAST

Lloyd Moore is 96, and Nascar says he's its oldest living driver. He drove from
1949 to 1955 in the Grand National series, a predecessor of the Sprint Cup. Most
of his career earnings of $10,493 went to the car owner. He often paid for his
meals on the road. That was Nascar in its infancy, when many stock car racers
made a living as moonshiners delivering illegal booze. And oh, he has some
stories to tell.   PAGE C17

HOUSE & HOME

WHEN THE TREAD UNDERFOOT

Leaves You a Bit Queasy

They can add a light, airy touch to houses in need of them, like that
three-story Victorian you've always dreamed of having. And of course they're
designed to be perfectly safe. But glass staircases also pose a challenge for
those of us accustomed to having something a little more opaque underfoot.
PAGE D7

CHANGE AND SACRIFICE

Duke Farms, the 2,740-acre country estate in Hillsborough, N.J., is shifting its
focus to ecological restoration and education, a move that is winning praise.
But among the casualties are the indoor gardens, designed by Doris Duke, the
heiress who turned the greenhouses her father built in the early 1900s into the
Gardens of Nations.   PAGE D6

STYLES

CELEBRATING POLITICS,

Or Politicizing Celebrity

Politics used to be anathema to People and other celebrity magazines, but that
was before this year's presidential race. Now, with one explanation that
''People are craving it,'' the entertainment press is turning its eyes toward
the presidential contenders, and of course the contenders are batting their eyes
and looking right back.   PAGE E1

3 IS HARDER THAN 1

Triathletes swear by the training and discipline and competitions involved in
their three-event event, but they also face a question: Is it possible to train
optimally for all three at the same time? A coach and author of 10 books,
including ''The Triathlete's Training Bible,'' says it isn't easy. PAGE E1

GOING EASY ON THE GRAY

You've seen those bad dye jobs, when a guy's head looks as if somebody dunked
him into a giant bottle of liquid shoe polish. Covering the gray these days is
no longer a matter of applying a single color. Improved salon treatments and
at-home kits promise to deliver subtlety.   PAGE E3

STRIPES WITHOUT PRISON

The stripped-down striped shirt, in simple oxford or broadcloth, is back. ''This
is totally the look for spring,'' said Tommy Fazio, the men's fashion director
at Bergdorf Goodman. Which is of course a mixed blessing for those confirmed
non-fashionistas among us who have been wearing them all along.  PAGE E15

All-Access Passwear   E4

A Green Approach Falters row  E4

ARTS

STARKLY SOVIET POLITICS

In an Old-School Russia

Before learning to full effect what the title of ''Child 44'' means, a reader
must make it through 275 pages. ''This book is much too densely, ingeniously
plotted for its secrets to be accessible via shortcut,'' Janet Maslin writes in
her review. And, given that the book ''is looking like this summer's most hotly
promoted thriller,'' it seems likely that a lot of readers will get to that
secret.   PAGE B1

ON THE VERGE OF FAME

For now, at least, Ben Barnes is still living a semblance of his previous life
of a struggling actor. Crashing at a friend's apartment, driving himself around,
no publicist in tow. But things are bound to change on May 16, when ''The
Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian'' arrives in theaters. He is, after all,
Prince Caspian.  PAGE B1

CASTING CALL, NO HYBRIDS ALLOWED

Vehicles have been enjoying an on-screen heyday. Universal Pictures is preparing
the fourth movie in its ''Fast and the Furious'' series. The Walt Disney
Company's Pixar unit is at work on a follow-up to ''Cars.'' And Warner Brothers
is collaborating with Clint Eastwood on ''Gran Torino.'' But the Prius -- the
world's best-selling hybrid -- has remained something of a novelty act on the
big screen.   PAGE B1

EDITORIAL

TOWARD BETTER STUDENT LENDING

President Bush showed good sense on Wednesday when he signed legislation to
ensure an uninterrupted flow of federal student loans during the credit crunch.
Now comes the test of leadership.  PAGE A30

AT TAMMANY . . . ERR . . . CITY HALL

The City Council needs to remember two things: slush funds are not their money
and Speaker Christine Quinn's proposed reforms of those ''member items'' are
just a start.  PAGE A30

THE TAX TRICKERY SPREADS

Americans must find ways to curb their use of fossil fuels. That will require
higher, not lower, prices for gas -- even during a presidential campaign.  PAGE
A30

OP-ED

NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

With Hillary Clinton trailing by 700,000 votes in the cumulative popular vote
and behind in pledged delegates and number of states won, she just doesn't have
a plausible route to the nomination. In contrast, she does stand a chance of
winning the election for Mr. McCain.  PAGE A31

GAIL COLLINS

The question on everyone's lips currently is whether Hillary Clinton will quit
now that her chances of winning the Democratic nomination are extremely remote.
She is strong. She is invincible. Or, at minimum, extremely hard to discourage.
PAGE A31

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); RELIGION (89%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (86%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (86%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (76%); ACQUITTAL (75%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (75%); JURY
TRIALS (75%); VERDICTS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
WEB DEVELOPMENT (70%); APPEALS COURTS (70%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (69%); MUSIC (69%);
PEACE PROCESS (69%); VISUAL ARTISTS (68%); INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (60%);
MURDER (58%)

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (58%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (58%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (58%)

PERSON: HU JINTAO (66%); POPE BENEDICT XVI (50%)

CITY: SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%); TOKYO, JAPAN (76%)

STATE: EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHINA (95%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
JAPAN (92%); BRAZIL (92%); KUWAIT (92%); CUBA (90%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%); HOLY SEE (69%)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             872 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 4, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mayor Performs Greece's First Same-Sex Marriages

BYLINE: By ANTHEE CARASSAVA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 568 words

DATELINE: ATHENS


Defying governmental wrath, the mayor of a remote Greek island performed the
country's first same-sex marriages on Tuesday, wedding two men and two women.

The civil ceremonies, held at sunrise in the nondescript town hall of Tilos, a
tiny island in the eastern Aegean Sea, defied statements by a senior Greek
prosecutor last week that such unions were illegal.

''It's done, now,'' the mayor, Anastassios Aliferis, said in a telephone
interview. ''The unions have been registered, and the licenses have been issued.
It's a historic moment.''

With its abundance of glamorous gay bars and summer island resorts like Mykonos,
Greece has long drawn thousands of gay tourists annually. But gay men and
lesbians in this European Union nation of 11 million people frequently complain
of discrimination. Public displays of affection are widely frowned upon. The
country's military bars gay men and lesbians from joining its ranks, and in 2003
a private Greek television network, Mega Channel, was fined $116,000 by the
National Radio and Television Council for showing men kissing in a weekly drama.
Greece's powerful Orthodox Church has also denounced homosexuality as a sin and
''defect of human nature.''

On Tuesday, however, a bubbling just-married Evangelia Vlami emerged from the
Tilos town hall, telling the BBC that the unions would help end discrimination.
''We did this to encourage other gay people to take a stand,'' she said.

About two dozen people attended the no-frills ceremony, held under the watchful
eyes of police officers and dumbfounded locals.

''I couldn't believe it,'' said Sofia Kamma, a resident contacted by phone. ''I
know they're people too, but couldn't they have gone on doing what they were
doing without getting our community involved?''

Greek gay rights groups have noted a loophole in a 1982 law that does not
specify that a civil union must involve a man and woman.

But last week, as the gay couples made plans to tie the knot, taking out a
wedding notice in a local newspaper, Greece's top prosecutor, Giorgos Sanidas,
warned that any same-sex marriage  would be ''automatically nullified and
considered illegal.''

He said the decree was founded in the spirit of the Constitution, which defines
marriage as matrimony between a man and a woman with the intent of forming a
family.

But Mr. Aliferis, a Socialist foe of the ruling conservative government,
insisted otherwise. ''There is no court in Europe that will side by this arcane
reading of the Constitution,'' he said. ''What happens if a couple cannot
reproduce and have a family? Is their marriage null and void?''

Gay activists have warned that they may now begin to sue any of the country's
municipalities if civil authorities resist requests for similar same-sex unions.

The Netherlands was the first European Union country to offer full civil
marriage rights to gay couples, in 2001. Belgium did so in 2003, followed by
Spain, despite fierce opposition from the Roman Catholic Church.

Most other European Union countries have varying forms of civil unions.

''It's ludicrous for Greece, the cradle of democracy and human rights, to deny
homosexuals equal rights and privileges,'' Mr. Aliferis said. ''Officials should
take the time and reassess their views.''

Gay activists have vowed to seek recourse with the European Court of Justice if
authorities in Greece continue to challenge same-sex marriages.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (95%); MARRIAGE (91%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS
(91%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (91%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT
(90%); COHABITATION (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); ANNULMENT (78%); LGBT RIGHTS
(78%); CONSERVATISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(76%); RESORTS (73%); INTERVIEWS (71%); FINES & PENALTIES (70%); FAMILY (70%);
EUROPEAN UNION (69%); RELIGION (51%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (56%)

CITY: ATHENS, GREECE (79%)

COUNTRY: GREECE (96%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (71%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             886 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 29, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Help on Four Legs, Sometimes Followed by Confusion

BYLINE: By GREGORY BEYER

SECTION: Section CY; Column 0; The City Weekly Desk; NEW YORK UP CLOSE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 506 words


THE incident occurred about two years ago. Laura Damone, a 56-year-old resident
of Gramercy Park who suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder, anxiety and
panic attacks, walked into the Union Square subway station with Buddy, who was
her service dog at the time.

The dog, who wore a vest, attracted the attention of two transit workers, who,
Ms. Damone says, humiliated her by backing her into a corner, demanding proof of
her disability and giving her a ticket.

The confrontation exemplifies problems that can arise from what Assemblywoman
Deborah Glick thinks is a vague city law.

Unlike state and federal law, which explicitly prohibits asking about or
demanding proof of a disability, city law declares only that establishments
provide ''reasonable accommodation'' to people with service animals. According
to Bethany Jankunis, Ms. Glick's chief of staff, this subjects people like Ms.
Damone, who use service animals and whose disabilities are not plainly evident,
to discrimination and embarrassment.

''That's no way to write policy,'' said Ms. Jankunis, referring to the use of
the what she considers the murky word ''reasonable,'' and who submitted the
issue to Community Board 1 in Manhattan as part of a continuing attempt to
clarify the law.

There are 200 to 250 licensed service dogs in New York, according to Jessica
Scaperotti, a spokeswoman for the health department, which licenses service
dogs.

In the opinion of Cliff Mulqueen, a deputy commissioner at the city's Human
Rights Commission, the city's current, case-by-case approach, as opposed to the
widespread policy Ms. Glick is seeking, is the only possible approach to service
animal accommodation.

When a person is clearly blind, Mr. Mulqueen said, a restaurant owner, for
example, knows not to say anything. In the case of a person with epilepsy who
depends on a service dog to predict seizures, ''that's an individual that looks
like any other individual,'' he said.

''Now all of the sudden the individual walks into the restaurant with a dog,''
Mr. Mulqueen said. ''What is that restaurant owner supposed to do?''

In response, Ms. Jankunis argued that this interpretation left too much room for
discrimination and embarrassment, adding: ''A lot of businesses want to do the
right thing. They just don't know what the right thing is.''

Cissy Stamm, a friend of Ms. Damone's who suffers from post-traumatic stress
disorder as a result of childhood  abuse and who is partly deaf, said she had
been unfairly treated in the more than 10 years she has used a service dog.

''We're the last minority that it's permissible to treat this way,'' she said,
referring to users of service dogs and citing humiliations that include long
waits, questions about her disability and, occasionally, shouts of ''You're not
blind!''

''You never know when someone's going to look at you,'' Ms. Stamm said, ''and
make a decision that you're a criminal and you don't belong where you are, or
they have to double-check to see if you're a real person with rights.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Cissy Stamm, center, with Wargas, and Laura Damone with Maddy,
her current service dog. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ROB BENNETT FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MENTAL ILLNESS (90%); POST TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER (90%); DOGS (90%);
ANXIETY DISORDERS (90%); RESTAURANTS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); ANIMALS (88%);
HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); EPILEPSY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%);
CHILD ABUSE (50%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             892 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 4, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suspect In 1999 Plot On Airport Is Released

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 988 words

DATELINE: LONDON


A 45-year-old Algerian described by American prosecutors as the mastermind of an
abortive plot to bomb Los Angeles International Airport during millennium
celebrations in 1999 has been released on tight bail conditions after seven
years in British jails, court officials said Thursday.

The release of the unnamed Algerian is the second time in a little more than two
weeks that a suspect named by prosecutors as having close ties to Osama bin
Laden, but not charged, has been let out on bail in Britain pending a final
court ruling on government deportation proceedings.

In June, a 47-year-old Palestinian with Jordanian citizenship, described as
having had a major ideological influence within Al Qaeda's European ranks, was
released after seven years in jail. That suspect, known by the alias Abu Qatada,
was placed under house arrest for 22 hours a day.

British officials said the bail conditions for the Algerian would be similar. In
addition to being allowed to leave his home for only two hours a day, mainly for
mosque visits, Abu Qatada is required to wear electronic monitoring devices, and
barred from having guests, access to the Internet or a mobile phone. He is also
forbidden to receive guests or to meet with people outside his home.

In some instances, terrorist suspects held in Britain without being charged have
the right not to be named publicly. In the Algerian's case, this has meant that
he has been identified by court officials only by a code name, ''U.''

But American prosecutors previously identified him in court papers by an alias,
Abu Doha. British newspapers have said he was born in Algeria in 1963 and
captured in 2001 at Heathrow Airport in London while trying to board a flight to
Saudi Arabia with a false passport.

The release of the two men has highlighted the problems the British authorities
face as they try to curb what they have acknowledged as a large and growing
Islamist terrorist underground in Britain. Despite volumes of intelligence
information implicating the Algerian and Abu Qatada amassed by British and
American investigators, and by the authorities in their own countries, British
officials say that attempts to build indictments against them have been
frustrated by a lack of detailed evidence that would stand up in court.

The other option, seeking to deport the two men to their homelands, has been
blocked by British judges on the grounds that the men may be subjected to
torture at home, or to prosecution based on evidence obtained by torture, in
violation of Europe's human rights charter.

In both cases, appeal court judges also ruled that their rights were being
violated by indefinite detention, and ordered their release.

In a ruling last year, the Special Immigration Appeals Commission in Britain
described the Algerian suspect as having had ''direct links'' with Mr. bin Laden
and of having held a ''senior position'' at a Qaeda camp for Islamic extremists
in Afghanistan in the late 1990s. In their bid to deport the Algerian, the
British authorities described him as the leader of an abortive plot to attack a
Christmas market in the French city of Strasbourg in 2000, in addition to the
role he is alleged to have played in the planned Los Angeles attack.

The protections afforded the Algerian and Abu Qatada, including the decision to
release them while lawyers battle the government over their deportation, have
caused growing dismay on both sides of the Atlantic. Bush administration
officials have pressed Britain to adopt tighter antiterrorism laws that reduce
the courts' discretion in terrorism cases, and opinion polls have shown
increasing concern among British voters about the scope of the terrorism threat.

The frustration was mirrored in a commentary published after Abu Qatada's
release in The Sun, the hell-raising tabloid that is Britain's most widely sold
newspaper.

''Poor old Osama bin Laden, scuttling around the war-torn Afghan mountains to
avoid death or capture,'' the newspaper said. ''But hope is on the horizon for
the world's most wanted terrorist. There's one place on Earth where he would be
perfectly safe. Britain. Here, we throw nobody out. Bin Laden has every chance
of ending his days among peace and plenty.''

British newspapers have chronicled the steep costs of years of court proceedings
against those suspected of being terrorist leaders, and what British
commentators have described as overly generous welfare payments to them and
their families. After Abu Qatada was released, the newspapers said, he was
granted a $300-a-week disability payment because a bad back made it impossible
for him to work, even though the release order prevented him from seeking
employment.

Officials have estimated the cost of maintaining surveillance on Abu Qatada in
the four-bedroom Edwardian house in west London where he is confined with his
wife and five children at $2 million a year. Welfare payments to his family
amount to an additional $90,000 a year, according to news accounts. Similar
figures have been calculated for the family of a man with the alias of Abu Hamza
al-Masri, a 51-year-old Egyptian-born cleric with steel prosthetics for hands
who once ran the main Qaeda Web site in Britain, now serving a seven-year prison
term for incitement to murder.

The Hamza case is cited by British officials as one in which the legal system
here has effectively stifled an Islamic extremist leader. The British government
has agreed to his extradition to the United States, where he faces a possible
life sentence on charges that involve being part of a global conspiracy to wage
holy war against the United States, and trying to set up a Qaeda training camp
in Oregon.

Last month, the Court of Appeal in London upheld the extradition order, and
officials have said he could be flown to the United States within a month unless
the country's highest court, the Law Lords, agrees to review the appeal court
ruling.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); BAIL (90%); AIRPORTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); DEPORTATION (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
ARRESTS (78%); ELECTRONIC MONITOR SENTENCING (78%); PRISONS (77%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); JUDGES (77%); APPEALS COURTS
(77%); IMMIGRATION LAW (77%); HOUSE ARREST (77%); MILLENNIUM (73%); IMMIGRATION
(73%); CITIZENSHIP (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); INVESTIGATIONS (65%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (63%); TORTURE (63%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (51%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (55%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); EUROPE (77%); JORDAN (72%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (71%)

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             897 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 11, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times July 11, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2252 words


International

IRANIAN MISSILE LAUNCHING PHOTO

Apparently Altered, Agency Says

A photo showing four Iranian missiles heading skyward that appeared on the front
pages of major newspapers and on many news Web sites was ''apparently digitally
altered'' by Iranian state media, according to the news agency Agence
France-Presse. Agence France-Presse retracted its original image, saying the
fourth missile ''has apparently been added in digital retouch to cover a
grounded missile that may have failed during the test.''  PAGE A8

CHINESE ACTIVIST DETAINED

A Chinese human rights activist has been detained on suspicion of illegally
possessing state secrets. The activist, Huang Qi, wrote an article on the
concerns about shoddy construction expressed by bereaved fathers whose children
died during the earthquake in Sichuan Province.

PAGE A6

FREED CAPTIVE DEALS WITH PAIN

A week after her sudden rescue from more than six years of captivity in the deep
Colombian jungle, Ingrid Betancourt spoke in an interview of her deep Roman
Catholic faith, and of her fragility. She fears the collapse she knows is
coming. ''It's like the roaring of the waves, I know it's coming, and it's
getting closer,'' she said.  PAGE A6

BOOK OFFERS DETAILS ON DETENTIONS

Red Cross investigators concluded in a secret report that the Central
Intelligence Agency's interrogation methods for high-level Qaeda prisoners
constituted torture and could make the Bush administration officials who
approved them guilty of war crimes, according to ''The Dark Side: The Inside
Story of How the War on Terror Turned Into a War on American Ideals,'' a new
book by Jane Mayer on counterterrorism efforts since 2001.  PAGE A9

ZIMBABWE'S RIVALS BEGIN TALKS

Zimbabwe's ruling party began preliminary discussions with the opposition in an
effort to settle a political crisis in which both sides have staked a claim to
the nation's presidency. But Morgan Tsvangirai, the opposition leader, stated
that the talks could not lead to genuine negotiations until state-sponsored
violence stopped and 1,500 of his detained supporters were freed.  PAGE A7

COURTS TEST THAI GOVERNMENT

Just five months after a military junta handed back power through a
parliamentary election, Thailand's latest try at democracy is being severely
tested by street demonstrations and a barrage of court cases. The foreign
minister was forced to resign after a nationalist furor over a centuries-old
dispute with Cambodia over a temple on the border.  PAGE A10

Compensation for Iraqis  A9

Report on Canadian Detainee  A9

Jockey's Rise in Mongolia  A10

NATIONAL

CANDIDATES LEARN THE PITFALLS

Of Talking Without Props

Senators John McCain and Barack Obama have gotten themselves in hot water this
week by speaking off the cuff. For some people, Mr. Obama's talk about the
advantages of being bilingual actually meant that ''Americans should be forced
to learn to speak Spanish.'' Mr. McCain, meanwhile, attached the word
''disgrace'' to Social Security in a way that led to some backtracking.   PAGE
A15

OIL AS DIVIDING LINE

Oil continued as a political dividing line in Washington, with House Democratic
leaders taking a hard line against Republican efforts to open up restricted
areas to oil production and the White House rejecting a Democratic call to
release gasoline from national reserves in an effort to lower prices by
increasing supply.   PAGE A15

AN UNADVISED REMARK

Senator John McCain has been trying of late to demonstrate empathy for people's
economic pain. But one of his top economic advisers, former Senator Phil Gramm
of Texas, was quoted as saying that the United States was only in a ''mental
recession'' and that it had become a ''nation of whiners.'' Mr. McCain was not
happy to hear of it. Senator Barack Obama seemed pleased, though.  PAGE A15

MAYOR INDICTED IN MISSISSIPPI

Mayor Frank Melton of Jackson, Miss., was indicted Wednesday on federal civil
rights charges related to the unannounced demolition of a duplex that he said
was a crack house. Mr. Melton, who ran for office on an anticrime platform and
has been known to wear a badge and raid nightclubs in pursuit of that goal, was
acquitted of state felony charges related to the same event in 2007.  PAGE A11

THE JACKSON IMPACT

Jesse Jackson was quick to apologize after a microphone recorded his vulgar
criticism of Senator Barack Obama. But there is some question about whether
being on the bad side of Mr. Jackson is a disadvantage for Mr. Obama, who, by
all appearances, does not seem overly concerned. Could it be that Mr. Jackson
has lost relevance?   PAGE A14

OBITUARIES

GERALD TSAI JR., 79

A fund manager and financier, he pioneered the creation of performance funds in
the 1950s and '60s and later turned a canning company into the financial
services giant Primerica. Primerica and another company Mr. Tsai led, Smith
Barney, were eventually sold to become building blocks of Citigroup.  PAGE C10

Metro

CITY WORKER TOOK BRIBES

For Rent Aid, Officials Say

A former city housing agency supervisor has been arrested on charges that she
took bribes from tenants to provide them with federal rent subsidy vouchers that
should have gone to needy families. ''This is certainly the worst case I've seen
in my seven years here'' involving the city's voucher program, said the
commissioner of the Department of Investigation.  PAGE B1

AN INSIGHT INTO CAPTIVITY

The humans were in cages at the Bronx Zoo -- 37 of them, anyway -- after a wheel
on one of the Skyfari gondolas slipped off the overhead cable, shutting down the
system and stranding the passengers for up to five hours. ''I could feel their
pain,'' said Meiki Pang, 26, of the winged and slithering animal brethren below.
PAGE B1

SPINNING RECORDS COURTSIDE

Who knew it would take Jay-Z's ''Dead Presidents'' to get Ron Artest, a Queens
native who plays for the Sacramento Kings, going? Deejay J.U. knew, and that's
why he's one of the most sought after D.J.'s in street basketball. The flashy
version of playground basketball draws big crowds. PAGE B1

SPORTS

YANKEES AND METS LOSE OUT

On Final All-Star Voting

Alas for Nick Ferraro, a lifelong Phillies fan who with three partners spent 53
straight hours at a computer trying to put outfielder Pat Burrell in the
All-Star game, his efforts fell short. As did various other campaigns, including
fake mustaches. Milwaukee's Corey Hart earned the last National League slot
while Tampa Bay rookie Evan Longoria took the final American League opening.
David Wright and Jason Giambi both missed the cut.  PAGE C14

ASSIGNING CREDIT FOR METS' RISE

Various factors might be cited as the spark for the Mets' resurgence of late,
including the departure of a manager and the fortunate awakening of previously
slumbering bats. ''But these things tend to run deeper than the obvious,''
Harvey Araton writes in Sports of The Times, ''tracing to a development that
probably didn't seem terribly important at the time.'' And of course he has a
particular one in mind.  PAGE D1

DIPLOMA, CHECK. OLYMPICS, CHECK.

Jake Deitchler graduated from Anoka High School in Anoka, Minn., last month, and
plans something of a senior trip to Beijing. That is, if you can call competing
in the Olympics in Greco-Roman wrestling a senior trip. At 18, Deitchler is the
fifth such wrestler from Anoka High and the youngest United States Olympic
wrestler since Mike Farina in 1976.   PAGE D1

BUSINESS

TRYING TO TRACK MARKET FEAR,

And Fearing a Possible Result

The ''why's'' behind the tumbling shares of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are still
unclear. ''There wasn't really any new news to set offthis crisis,'' one
consultant said. ''The stocks just started falling, and didn't stop.'' Beyond
the mystery is the fear that investors will lose so much confidence that the
companies will be unable to function.   PAGE C1

A PUSH FOR BETTER PENSION NUMBERS

The thinking is that no one would knowingly create a pension plan like the one
Vallejo, Calif., did, which pushed the city into bankruptcy this year through
costly police and firefighters' benefits. So accounting rule-makers have kicked
off an effort to force state and local governments to issue better numbers for
their pension promises.   PAGE C8

SHEDDING LIGHTS

Further proof that there is no room for sentimentality in business: General
Electric may be willing to dispense with the business from which it sprang, the
light bulb, in its efforts to cut costs and increase its flagging share price.
It hopes to spin off its consumer and industrial units, which includes the
appliance business it has tried to sell for the past two months.   PAGE C2

A WARNING ON OIL PRICES

A military conflict involving Iran would bring an ''unlimited'' increase in the
price of oil, the head of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
warned, saying the group's members would be unable to make up the lost
production. Even mentioning the possibility helped push up the price $5.60, to
$141.65 a barrel.   PAGE C4

RETHINKING MONEY MARKET FUNDS

Putting cash in a money market fund is supposed to pretty much be the financial
equivalent of betting on the sun rising in the east. But lately some of the
financial companies that run them have found themselves at risk and have been
paying up billions of dollars to ensure the funds stay on an even keel.   PAGE
C8

SALES FAIL TO STIR INVESTORS

A combination of price reductions, government stimulus checks and warm weather
helped retailers to better than expected sales in June. But investors responded
with a big So What?, sending a number of stocks down. ''They don't trust the
numbers,'' one analyst said. ''They don't trust that 2008 is the recovery
year.''   PAGE C4

Dow Chemical Buying Rival   C7

Weekend

BOGART WITH CIGAR AND GUN,

But Also Red Skin and Horns?

''Hellboy 2: The Golden Army'' is awash in pulp undertones, noirish sensibility,
a cigar-chomping hardboiled hero, unrequited love and a giant homicidal plant.
What's not to love? At 110 minutes of mayhem, this second film adaptation of
Mike Mignola's ''Hellboy'' comic franchise occasionally loses itself in the
details, but comic-book fans and theatergoers alike may well rejoice, A.O. Scott
writes. Oh, did we mention the feuding elves?  Page B1

WHISPERS COULD BE ONLY FOR YOU

You could assume that the play exists only for you, as you don your headphones
and sit. Peter S. Petralia's ''Whisper,'' at Performance Space 122, ''starts
dark and gets darker.'' Let the narrator unfold the story, and accept the tricks
played by the lighting and sound as actors behind a gauzy scrim evoke the ''feel
of a psychological thriller,'' Anita Gates writes.  Page B5

MYRIAD PARTICLES GIVEN VOICE

Whether melted for glass, used to measure time or irritably from car seats and
hair, sand is there. A new exhibition at the Parrish Art Museum in Southhampton,
N.Y., offers an artistic meditation. ''Works that evoke time, impermanence and
innumerability are the heart of the show,'' Ken Johnson writes.  Page B30

TENSION WAVERS IN SOFT LIGHTING

There are gunshots, terrorists, flak jackets and flashing lights. There are
tensions and banter and a Croatian-speaking negotiator. All things one expects
from a grown-up police show, but ''Flashpoint,'' a new show  about a group of
special-ops officers, often seems to be about crisis that ''refuses to make you
anxious,'' Ginia Bellafante writes. Page B21

ESCAPES

ECHOES OF AN EARLIER TIME

Even Before Baseball

If someone mentions Cooperstown, N.Y., and your first thought is not the
Baseball Hall of Fame but instead James Fenimore Cooper, congratulations on your
literary and historical chops. The fact is, in addition to that worthy sports
museum, the region has attractions that are literary, cultural, recreational and
still, despite the depredations of the centuries, naturally beautiful.   PAGE D7

CHANGING PERSPECTIVES

The older you get, so the saying goes, the smarter your parents become. And as
some parents are discovering, the older their children get, the better they like
that vacation home that they whined about being taken to when they were younger.
It's all a matter of perspective. The message: If you keep it, they will come.
PAGE D1

Editorial

THE TALIBAN'S RISING TIDE

The swelling forces of Taliban and Al Qaeda fighters in Pakistan's border region
pose a grave threat to American and NATO troops in Afghanistan. They also pose a
grave threat to the people of Pakistan.  PAGE A18

HELP CLOSER TO HOME

One way to prevent borderline youthful offenders from becoming serious criminals
is to treat them in community-based counseling programs instead of shipping them
off to juvenile facilities hundreds of miles away from home.  PAGE A18

A POINTLESS DEPARTURE

The head of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, John
Howard, has been a champion of health programs for workers who were sickened at
ground zero. The Bush administration, in its waning days, decided not to
reappoint him.  PAGE A18

Op-Ed

PAUL KRUGMAN

On Wednesday, thanks to Ted Kennedy, Senate Democrats won a huge victory on
health care. It's a good omen for the future of universal health care.  PAGE A19

BLIND TO SLAVERY

President Bush helped forge a coalition to fight human trafficking, the slavery
of our time. In an Op-Ed article, John R. Miller, the administration's former
ambassador-at-large for modern slavery, writes that the president's Justice
Department is now undermining one of his legacies.  PAGE A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008
(84%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ELECTIONS
(77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); MULTILINGUALISM (75%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); TORTURE (75%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (75%); TERRORISM (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS
(70%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (70%); COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); WAR ON TERROR
(69%); EARTHQUAKES (69%); US PRESIDENTS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (69%);
SICHUAN EARTHQUAKE (68%); MILITARY RULE (67%); RELIGION (67%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (67%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (52%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (50%)

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (58%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (58%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (77%); MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (50%); JOHN MCCAIN (50%)

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (77%); SICHUAN, CHINA (77%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); THAILAND (90%); CHINA (79%);
MONGOLIA (79%); IRAQ (79%); CANADA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             916 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Guantanamo Detainee's Trial Opens, Ending a Seven-Year Legal Tangle

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON and ERIC LICHTBLAU; William Glaberson reported from
Guantanamo Bay, and Eric Lichtblau from Washington,

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1434 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


In a hushed courtroom here on Monday, a military judge opened the first American
war crimes trial since World War II, culminating a nearly seven-year effort by
the Bush administration to try some of the hundreds of terrorism suspects held
in the detention camp.

At a few minutes after 9 a.m. in an improvised courthouse under the simmering
sun, a military judge uttered words the Bush administration has been working
toward through a tangle of legal and practical obstacles: ''We will proceed to
trial. This military commission will come to order in the case of Salim Ahmed
Hamdan.''

Even as Mr. Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's former driver, faced trial, Attorney
General Michael B. Mukasey, in Washington, called for legislation the
administration says it needs to control the scores of legal cases from terrorism
suspects challenging their detention at the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in federal
courts. Among his requests is a law barring the suspects from ever setting foot
in the United States because of the ''extraordinary risk'' they pose.

Mr. Mukasey's speech reflected the administration's difficulty in dealing with
Guantanamo, which has become a magnet for international criticism, partly
because no detainee had been tried for any offense.

As Mr. Hamdan's trial began, the military judge, Capt. Keith J. Allred of the
Navy, quickly seated a panel of six senior military officers to act as a jury.
The military panel was one of a number of stark differences between the
proceedings here and those in American courts, where, critics have argued,
civilian jurors would not be members of the same armed forces that are running
the accused man's trial.

Mr. Hamdan, a Yemeni, pleaded not guilty to charges of taking part in a
conspiracy by Al Qaeda and providing material support for ism.

Opening statements are scheduled for Tuesday.

Judge Allred created last-minute uncertainty when he ruled against prosecutors
and decided to bar them from introducing as evidence some of the confessions Mr.
Hamdan made in the six years he has been held.

Among the barred statements were those made when Mr. Hamdan was held at Bagram
Air Base in Afghanistan in 2001. The judge found Mr. Hamdan's hands and feet
were restrained 24 hours a day, he was always alone and a soldier put his knee
in Mr. Hamdan's back and demanded that he ''speak.''

But Judge Allred declined a defense motion that suspects held at Guantanamo had
a broad right against self-incrimination.

As a result, he said the military prosecutors could introduce some statements
Mr. Hamdan made at Guantanamo. The judge rejected a defense assertion that
Guantanamo was inherently coercive, ruling, for example, that he found no
evident linkage between Mr. Hamdan's access to medical care and his willingness
to cooperate with interrogators.

The ''apparent correlation,'' Judge Allred wrote, was ''not a sinister attempt
at coercion, but the natural consequence of agents seeking to help detainees in
order to build rapport.''

Critics have long asserted that the military commission system was designed
partly to permit prosecutors to use confessions obtained through coercion and
without giving detainees any opportunity to assert a right against
self-incrimination, as they might if they were prosecuted by civilian
authorities.

But if the seating of the panel members at Guantanamo appeared to be a milestone
for the administration, Mr. Mukasey's legislative proposals showed that the
policy debate about Guantanamo -- where 265 men are now held -- remained
snarled. The proposals were intended as a response to a Supreme Court ruling in
June that granted detainees the right to contest their detentions in federal
court.

As part of a six-point initiative, Mr. Mukasey said the administration wanted
Congress to ''reaffirm'' nearly seven years after the Sept. 11 attacks that the
United States ''remains engaged in an armed conflict with Al Qaeda.''

The administration used Congress's original affirmation of an armed conflict,
three days after the Sept. 11 attacks, not only to invade Afghanistan and to
conduct wiretaps on Americans without a court warrant, but also to hold men it
defines as enemy combatants indefinitely.

Mr. Mukasey said he was asking for reaffirmation of the government's authority
to detain enemy combatants.

''I am suggesting that it would do all of us good to have that principle
reaffirmed,'' he said, ''not that the principle itself is in doubt.''

Democrats and civil liberties groups said the proposal was unnecessary. Senator
Harry Reid, the majority leader, said in response to Mr. Mukasey's speech that
''the courts are well equipped to handle this situation, and there is no danger
that any detainee will be released in the meantime.''

But in calling for Congressional action, Mr. Mukasey said the federal courts
would become clogged with inconsistent and unwieldy appeals from the detainees
unless Congress set clear rules for the process.

He said all the appeals should be consolidated in a single court, probably the
District Court in Washington. Prisoners should not be allowed to physically
attend the appeals hearings in the United States, he said.

Rather, Mr. Mukasey said, they could view the proceedings from a secure video
link from Guantanamo Bay -- a comment that appeared to signal that the
administration plans to keep the base open for the time being.

The courts should also not be allowed to release a prisoner into the United
States if he is cleared, Mr. Mukasey said. And the proceedings should not be
allowed to delay the military commission trials at Guantanamo Bay, with some 20
prisoners now facing trial for war crimes and others expected later. Only after
those trials are completed should prisoners be able to appeal their detentions
to the civilian courts, the attorney general said.

Mr. Mukasey's proposals dealt mainly with the cases brought by detainees to
contest the administration's determination that they are unlawful enemy
combatants.

Mr. Hamdan's case, as both sides acknowledged, did not focus on that
determination, but instead on whether he violated the international law of war.
Prosecutors assert that he was not only Mr. bin Laden's driver, but also part of
an elite bodyguard force and an arms courier for Al Qaeda. They said he was
captured in Afghanistan in 2001 with shoulder-fired missiles that could only
have been meant for American aircraft.

If convicted, he could face a possible life term. But because of the
administration's claim that it can hold unlawful enemy combatants indefinitely,
even an acquittal would not mean release. It would simply mean he would return
to his status as a detainee being held indefinitely -- until, according the
administration, the end of the war of terrorism.

Mr. Hamdan's lawyers, some of whom have worked on his case for years, describe
him as a low-level employee with a fourth-grade education who was little more
than a powerful man's subordinate.

The selection of the panel of six members and one alternate at times sounded
like jury selection in an American civilian court. Lawyers on both sides and
Judge Allred asked a sprinkling of questions about such issues as whether the
panel members could follow instructions from the judge.

Half of the potential jurors said they had personal connections to the events of
Sept. 11, 2001, which prosecutors described as a product of the sweeping Qaeda
conspiracy in which they say Mr. Hamdan was an enthusiastic participant.

One panel member who was selected, an Army colonel, said she had been anxious
that day because her college roommate was at the Pentagon.

Another, an Army pilot, said he had been later deployed to Iraq and had been
attacked by ground fire there. When Mr. Hamdan's military lawyer, Lt. Cmdr.
Brian L. Mizer, asked what the impact might be on the pilot's ability to judge
the case fairly, the pilot answered, ''I'm not sure of the answer to that,
sir.''

Aaron Zisser, an observer at Guantanamo for Human Rights First, said he had
found the selection of the panel members troubling. American federal courts, he
said, ''are equipped to address both national security concerns and the
fundamental rights of the accused.''

But the chief military prosecutor, Lawrence J. Morris of the Army, said he had
confidence in the independence of the military panel members.

One interview report the judge was considering barring prosecutors from using
included an interview at Guantanamo in which federal agents said Mr. Hamdan said
he had sworn an oath of loyalty to Mr. bin Laden and expressed ''uncontrollable
enthusiasm'' for him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey asked Congress on Monday to
reaffirm the authority to detain enemy combatants. (PHOTOGRAPH CHIP
SOMODEVILLA/GETTY IMAGES)(A12)
 Salim Ahmed Hamdan (PHOTOGRAPH BY NEAL KATYAL/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A13)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); MILITARY BASES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); NAVIES (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); LAWYERS (75%);
LEGISLATION (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (70%)

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (54%)

PERSON: MICHAEL MUKASEY (88%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (87%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             917 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                                National Edition

Madness And Shame

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 801 words


You want a scary thought? Imagine a fanatic in the mold of Dick Cheney but
without the vice president's sense of humor.

In her important new book, ''The Dark Side: The Inside Story of How the War on
Terror Turned Into a War on American Ideals,'' Jane Mayer of The New Yorker
devotes a great deal of space to David Addington, Dick Cheney's main man and the
lead architect of the Bush administration's legal strategy for the so-called war
on terror.

She quotes a colleague as saying of Mr. Addington: ''No one stood to his
right.'' Colin Powell, a veteran of many bruising battles with Mr. Cheney, was
reported to have summed up Mr. Addington as follows: ''He doesn't believe in the
Constitution.''

Very few voters are aware of Mr. Addington's existence, much less what he stands
for. But he was the legal linchpin of the administration's Marquis de Sade
approach to battling terrorism. In the view of Mr. Addington and his acolytes,
anything and everything that the president authorized in the fight against
terror  --  regardless of what the Constitution or Congress or the Geneva
Conventions might say  --  was all right. That included torture, rendition,
warrantless wiretapping, the suspension of habeas corpus, you name it.

This is the mind-set that gave us Abu Ghraib, Guantanamo and the C.I.A.'s secret
prisons, known as ''black sites.''

Ms. Mayer wrote: ''The legal doctrine that Addington espoused  --  that the
president, as commander in chief, had the authority to disregard virtually all
previously known legal boundaries if national security demanded it  --  rested
on a reading of the Constitution that few legal scholars shared.''

When the constraints of the law are unlocked by the men and women in suits at
the pinnacle of power, terrible things happen in the real world. You end up with
detainees being physically and psychologically tormented day after day, month
after month, until they beg to be allowed to commit suicide. You have prisoners
beaten until they are on the verge of death, or hooked to overhead manacles like
something out of the Inquisition, or forced to defecate on themselves, or
sexually humiliated, or driven crazy by days on end of sleep deprivation and
blinding lights and blaring noises, or water-boarded.

To get a sense of the heights of madness scaled in this anything-goes
atmosphere, consider a brainstorming meeting held by military officials at
Guantanamo. Ms. Mayer said the meeting was called to come up with ways to crack
through the resistance of detainees.

''One source of ideas,'' she wrote, ''was the popular television show '24.' On
that show as Ms. Mayer noted, ''torture always worked. It saved America on a
weekly basis.''

I felt as if I was in Never-Never Land as I read: ''In conversation with British
human rights lawyer Philippe Sands, the top military lawyer in Guantanamo, Diane
Beaver, said quite earnestly that Jack Bauer 'gave people lots of ideas' as they
sought for interrogation models.''

Donald Rumsfeld described the detainees at Guantanamo as ''the worst of the
worst.'' A more sober assessment has since been reached by many respected
observers. Ms. Mayer mentioned a study conducted by attorneys and law students
at the Seton Hall University Law School.

''After reviewing 517 of the Guantanamo detainees' cases in depth,'' she said,
''they concluded that only 8 percent were alleged to have associated with Al
Qaeda. Fifty-five percent were not alleged to have engaged in any hostile act
against the United States at all, and the remainder were charged with dubious
wrongdoing, including having tried to flee U.S. bombs. The overwhelming majority
--  all but 5 percent  --  had been captured by non-U.S. players, many of whom
were bounty hunters.''

The U.S. shamed itself on George W. Bush's and Dick Cheney's watch, and David
Addington and others like him were willing to manipulate the law like Silly
Putty to give them the legal cover they desired. Ms. Mayer noted that Arthur
Schlesinger Jr., the late historian, believed that ''the Bush administration's
extralegal counterterrorism program presented the most dramatic, sustained and
radical challenge to the rule of law in American history.''

After reflecting on major breakdowns of law that occurred in prior
administrations, including the Watergate disaster, Mr. Schlesinger told Ms.
Mayer: ''No position taken has done more damage to the American reputation in
the world  --  ever.''

Americans still have not come to grips with this disastrous stain on the
nation's soul. It's important that the whole truth eventually come out, and as
many of the wrongs as possible be rectified.

Ms. Mayer, as much as anyone, is doing her part to pull back the curtain on the
awful reality. ''The Dark Side'' is essential reading for those who think they
can stand the truth.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR ON TERROR (90%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (86%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); PRISONS (69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); HABEAS
CORPUS (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (51%); SUICIDE (50%); WIRETAPPING (50%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             918 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice and Sex Trafficking

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 176 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Justice Department, Blind to Slavery'' (Op-Ed, July 11):

We take issue with John R. Miller's characterization of the Department of
Justice's work in the fight against sex trafficking and the department's
commitment to rescuing victims of this horrendous crime.

The department has convicted hundreds of sex traffickers for prostituting
children and forcing women into prostitution. We have rescued hundreds upon
hundreds of victims. And we strongly support Congressional reauthorization of
the Trafficking Victims Protection Act, which made these successes possible.

But we oppose provisions in the bill passed by the House of Representatives that
would divert our focus away from the worst of the worst cases by making all
prostitution a federal crime.

Dozens of law enforcement agencies, women's and immigrants' groups, crime
victims' rights organizations and policy experts have written Congress sharing
the department's concern.

Elisebeth C. Cook

Assistant Attorney General

Department of Justice

Washington, July 11, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); SEX TRAFFICKING (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (87%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (86%);
LEGISLATION (86%); PUBLIC POLICY (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (73%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             919 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Behind the Madness

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; MAN IN THE NEWS; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1321 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, England


With his arrest on Monday after more than 12 years on the run, Radovan Karadzic
seems virtually certain to face trial in the Hague -- and the prospect of life
imprisonment -- for his role in masterminding massacres that war crimes
prosecutors have described, in indictments drawn up against him, as ''scenes
from hell, written on the darkest pages of history.''

But in his own mind, at least until he vanished from view in  1996 and became
one of the most hunted men in Europe's history, Mr. Karadzic saw himself as a
sophisticated intellectual, a psychiatrist and poet with an intuitive
understanding of his people, the Bosnian Serbs, and of the challenge to their
survival, as he saw it, that came with the breakup of the former Yugoslavia in
the early 1990s.

It was in his intellectual guise that he liked to present himself to visitors at
the height of his power, when he ruled as president of the self-styled Srpska
Republic and supreme commander of its armed forces, in the mountain redoubt of
Pale, above the besieged city of Sarajevo.

At the Panorama, the converted ski hotel he used as his headquarters, he liked
to hold court, of an evening, and make a show of his grasp of culture, politics
and history.

It was a Lilliputian scene, at once absurd and menacing. Only a few miles away,
artillery guns under his command were shelling Sarajevo into rubble, filling its
soccer fields with graves, with a toll of more than 10,000 killed before the
siege ended. Further afield, murderous paramilitaries working in the Serbian
nationalist cause were driving tens of thousands of Muslims and Croats from
their homes, making refugees of 1.5 million people, in the process known as
''ethnic cleansing.''

Still ahead, in those first two years of the war that lasted from 1992 to 1995,
was the worst atrocity of all, the one that came to define the madness that
seized Mr. Karadzic and his partner in the Bosnian slaughter, the army commander
Gen. Ratko Mladic, who remains uncaptured even as the government in Belgrade
prepares to hand Mr. Karadzic over to the tribunal in The Hague: the genocidal
massacre in 1995 of nearly 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica.

One night in the late spring of 1992, brandishing a Cuban cigar and downing
successive glasses of French cognac, Mr. Karadzic admonished a reporter from The
New York Times for a dispatch from eastern Bosnia in which the reporter
described terrified groups of Muslim women and children fleeing across the
mountains from towns overrun by Serbian paramilitaries, who had gone house to
house rounding up Muslim men, and killing them. This, the reporter had written,
was the reality of ''ethnic cleansing.''

''No, no, no,'' Mr. Karadzic said, leaning forward intently at his desk. As
though correcting an errant pupil, he said the reporter had failed to understand
ethnic cleansing, presenting it as an abomination to those taking to the
mountains, whereas it was, in reality, quite the reverse. Far from being forced
from their homes, he said, the fleeing Muslims were being given an opportunity
for which they should be grateful -- the chance to ''return'' to the only place
they could ever truly be at home, in towns and villages elsewhere where they
could live with other Muslims, away from Serbs.

As a rationale for genocide it was dizzying, but at the same time wholly in
character for the quixotic Mr. Karadzic, who seemed to have been forged by the
vicissitudes of his past to become the principal architect of an  attempt to
reengineer Bosnian history.

Born to a poor rural family in Montenegro on June 19, 1945, he carried in his
bones much of the tortured history of the region during World War II, when his
father, Vuk, was a member of the Chetniks, Serbian nationalist guerrillas who
fought the Nazi occupiers of Yugoslavia and the communist partisans of Tito.

When the Chetniks lost to Tito, his father went to jail, and he had a lonely
childhood in the care of his mother, Jovanka, learning from her the romantic
legends that have sustained Serbian nationalism for centuries.

In 1960, he moved to Sarajevo, and graduated from the university there in
medicine, specializing in psychiatry. He concentrated on paranoia, but developed
a reputation among colleagues at the university, where he taught, and among
patients, for a quirkiness of character and professional lapses that made him,
among the city's intelligentsia, something of a figure of fun.

At the same time, he wrote and published his own poetry, hiring halls at the
university for public readings of work that critics in Sarajevo tended to
belittle for its dark and often obscurantist themes, many of them rooted in
Serbian legend.

In his personal style he was florid, given to double-breasted suits and a
carefully coiffed shock of hair. Later, as a war leader, he liked to don
camouflage fatigues, and have his photograph taken with the gun crews shelling
Sarajevo. He was a celebrated gourmand, becoming heavily overweight by the time
that he made his mark in politics.

He began as a liberal, but as the strains on Yugoslavia's survival grew after
Tito's death in 1980, he moved to the right, helping to found, in 1990, the
Serbian Democratic Party that became the vehicle for hardline Serbian
nationalism in Bosnia, and a handmaiden in the cause of a Greater Serbia that
found its principal champion in Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian leader in
Belgrade.

In April 1992, after the Muslim leader in Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, declared
the republic's independence, Mr. Karadzic, declaiming against what he described
as a plan to implant an ''Islamic republic'' in Bosnia, left Sarajevo for his
Pale redoubt and declared the foundation of the separate Serbian republic.

The grandiose manner he developed in the years of conflict was encouraged, many
who knew him then believed, by the willingness of the United Nations and the
Western powers, primarily the United States and Britain, to negotiate with him,
in Pale and at diplomatic encounters across Europe.

Talks with emissaries like Cyrus R. Vance, the former United States secretary of
state, and David Owen, the British foreign secretary at the time, took place
even as the paramilitaries enlisted in the Serbian cause were laying waste to
much of Bosnia. The death toll from the 43 months of war has been estimated at
between 150,000 and 200,000, and United Nations investigators have concluded
that the deaths were accompanied by as many as 20,000 rapes.

Fearing arrest under United Nations war crimes warrants following the 1995
Dayton agreement that ended the war, Mr. Karadzic and General Mladic quit their
posts and went into hiding.

Despite numerous raids by NATO troops, many led by American units, both men
remained at large until the announcement on Monday.

Successive chief prosecutors at the Hague tribunal belabored NATO commanders in
Bosnia, and their political superiors,  for being, as they implied,
insufficiently zealous in their pursuit of the two fugitives.

In Montenegro and in Serbian nationalist strongholds in Bosnia, Mr. Karadzic
continued to be feted, in absentia, as a hero, with his image printed on
T-shirts and his name painted on walls. In 2004, he even managed to get a novel
published in Belgrade, and newspapers there said he had been spotted relaxing at
cafes in the Serbian capital.

In an Op-Ed article in The New York Times in 2003, Carla Del Ponte, then the
chief prosecutor at The Hague, expressed her own outrage.

''Only when fugitives like Dr. Karadzic and Gen. Mladic are transformed from
symbols of a lack of backbone into symbols of the international community's
resolve will Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other traumatized states of the
region stand a chance of establishing rule of law,'' she wrote. ''The time has
come to summon the will and bring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic to justice.

''It's what their victims, and the rest of the world, deserve.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: August 2, 2008



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a correction on Tuesday to a Man in the
News article on July 22 about Radovan Karadzic, the former leader of Bosnian
Serbs arrested on war-crimes charges, misstated the role of Lord Owen, a former
British foreign secretary, in efforts to negotiate peace in the Balkan conflict.
He worked on a solution known as the Vance-Owen agreement, which was rejected by
all concerned parties in 1993; he did not help draft the Dayton agreement, which
ended the conflict two years later.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Radovan Karadzic, at right, the Bosnian Serb leader, with Gen.
Ratko Mladic, left, in April 1995. (PHOTOGRAPH BY SAVA RADOVANOVIC/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (87%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); SKIING (78%); HISTORY (77%); MEN (77%); REFUGEES (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); WRITERS (76%); ARMIES (73%); MOUNTAINS (72%); ARMED FORCES
(72%); RELIGION (66%); SPORTS & RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (66%)

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);
BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND (70%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); ENGLAND (79%); CROATIA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             920 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                         The New York Times on the Web

A Leader Turned Ghost

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; MAN IN THE NEWS; Pg.

LENGTH: 1438 words

DATELINE: CAMBRIDGE, England


With his arrest on Monday after more than 12 years on the run, Radovan Karadzic
seems virtually certain to face trial in The Hague -- and the prospect of life
imprisonment -- for his role in masterminding massacres that war crimes
prosecutors have described, in indictments drawn up against him, as ''scenes
from hell, written on the darkest pages of history.''

But in his own mind, at least until he vanished from view in  1996 and became
one of the most hunted men in Europe's history, Mr. Karadzic saw himself as a
sophisticated intellectual, a psychiatrist and poet with an intuitive
understanding of his people, the Bosnian Serbs, and of the challenge to their
survival, as he saw it, that came with the breakup of the former Yugoslavia in
the early 1990s.

It was in his intellectual guise that he liked to present himself to visitors at
the height of his power, when he ruled as president of the self-styled Srpska
Republic and supreme commander of its armed forces, in the mountain redoubt of
Pale, above the besieged city of Sarajevo.

At the Panorama, the converted ski hotel he used as his headquarters, he liked
to hold court, of an evening, and make a show of his grasp of culture, politics
and history.

It was a Lilliputian scene, at once absurd and menacing. Only a few miles away,
artillery guns under his command were shelling Sarajevo into rubble, filling its
soccer fields with graves, with a toll of more than 10,000 killed before the
siege ended. Further afield, murderous paramilitaries working in the Serbian
nationalist cause were driving tens of thousands of Muslims and Croats from
their homes, making refugees of 1.5 million people, in the process known as
''ethnic cleansing.''

Still ahead, in those first two years of the war that lasted from 1992 to 1995,
was the worst atrocity of all, the one that came to define the madness that
seized Mr. Karadzic and his partner in the Bosnian slaughter, the army commander
Gen. Ratko Mladic, who remains uncaptured even as the government in Belgrade
prepares to hand Mr. Karadzic over to the tribunal in The Hague: the genocidal
massacre in 1995 of nearly 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica.

One night in the late spring of 1992, brandishing a Cuban cigar and downing
successive glasses of French Cognac, Mr. Karadzic admonished a reporter from The
New York Times for a dispatch from eastern Bosnia in which the reporter
described terrified groups of Muslim women and children fleeing across the
mountains from towns overrun by Serbian paramilitaries, who had gone house to
house rounding up Muslim men, and killing them. This, the reporter had written,
was the reality of ''ethnic cleansing.''

''No, no, no,'' Mr. Karadzic said, leaning forward intently at his desk. As
though correcting an errant pupil, he said the reporter had failed to understand
ethnic cleansing, presenting it as an abomination to those taking to the
mountains, whereas it was, in reality, quite the reverse. Far from being forced
from their homes, he said, the fleeing Muslims were being given an opportunity
for which they should be grateful -- the chance to ''return'' to the only place
they could ever truly be at home, in towns and villages elsewhere where they
could live with other Muslims, away from Serbs.

As a rationale for genocide it was dizzying, but at the same time wholly in
character for the quixotic Mr. Karadzic, who seemed to have been forged by the
vicissitudes of his past to become the principal architect of an  attempt to
re-engineer Bosnian history.

Born to a poor rural family in Montenegro on June 19, 1945, he carried in his
bones much of the tortured history of the region during World War II, when his
father, Vuk, was a member of the Chetniks, Serbian nationalist guerrillas who
fought the Nazi occupiers of Yugoslavia and the communist partisans of Tito.

When the Chetniks lost to Tito, his father went to jail, and he had a lonely
childhood in the care of his mother, Jovanka, learning from her the romantic
legends that have sustained Serbian nationalism for centuries.

In 1960, he moved to Sarajevo, and graduated from the university there in
medicine, specializing in psychiatry. He concentrated on paranoia, but developed
a reputation among colleagues at the university, where he taught, and among
patients, for a quirkiness of character and professional lapses that made him,
among the city's intelligentsia, something of a figure of fun.

At the same time, he wrote and published his own poetry, hiring halls at the
university for public readings of work that critics in Sarajevo tended to
belittle for its dark and often obscurantist themes, many of them rooted in
Serbian legend.

In his personal style he was florid, given to double-breasted suits and a
carefully coiffed shock of hair. Later, as a war leader, he liked to don
camouflage fatigues, and have his photograph taken with the gun crews shelling
Sarajevo. He was a celebrated gourmand, becoming greatly  overweight by the time
that he made his mark in politics.

He began as a liberal, but as the strains on Yugoslavia's survival grew after
Tito's death in 1980, he moved to the right, helping to found, in 1990, the
Serbian Democratic Party, which  became the vehicle for hard-line Serbian
nationalism in Bosnia, and a handmaiden in the cause of a Greater Serbia that
found its principal champion in Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian leader in
Belgrade.

In April 1992, after the Muslim leader in Bosnia, Alija Izetbegovic, declared
the republic's independence, Mr. Karadzic, declaiming against what he described
as a plan to implant an ''Islamic republic'' in Bosnia, left Sarajevo for his
Pale redoubt and declared the foundation of the separate Serbian republic.

The grandiose manner he developed in the years of conflict was encouraged, many
who knew him then believed, by the willingness of the United Nations and the
Western powers, primarily the United States and Britain, to negotiate with him,
in Pale and at diplomatic encounters across Europe.

Talks with emissaries like Cyrus R. Vance, the former United States secretary of
state, and David Owen, the British foreign secretary at the time, took place
even as the paramilitaries enlisted in the Serbian cause were laying waste to
much of Bosnia. The death toll from the 43 months of war has been estimated at
150,000 to  200,000, and United Nations investigators have concluded that the
deaths were accompanied by as many as 20,000 rapes.

After the 1995 Dayton agreement ended the fighting, and fearing arrest under
U.N. war crimes warrants, Mr. Karadzic and General Mladic quit their posts and
fled into hiding. Despite numerous raids by NATO troops who garrisoned Bosnia
after the peace agreement, many of them led by American units, both men remained
free until the Serbian president's announcement that Mr. Karadzic had been
captured, apparently in or near Belgrade. Over the years, there were reports of
Mr. Karadzic hiding in Serbian orthodox monasteries in remote parts of Bosnia
and his native Montenegro, dressing as a monk and shaving his head, and evading
capture at American military checkpoints by disguising himself as a patient in
an ambulance.

Fearing arrest under United Nations war crimes warrants following the 1995
Dayton agreement that ended the war, Mr. Karadzic and General Mladic quit their
posts and went into hiding.

Despite numerous raids by NATO troops, many led by American units, both men
remained at large until  Monday.

Successive chief prosecutors at the Hague tribunal belabored NATO commanders in
Bosnia, and their political superiors,  for being, as they implied,
insufficiently zealous in their pursuit of the two fugitives.

In Montenegro and in Serbian nationalist strongholds in Bosnia, Mr. Karadzic
continued to be feted, in absentia, as a hero, with his image printed on
T-shirts and his name painted on walls. In 2004, he even managed to get a novel
published in Belgrade, and newspapers there said he had been spotted relaxing at
cafes in the Serbian capital.

In an Op-Ed article in The New York Times in 2003, Carla Del Ponte, then the
chief prosecutor at The Hague, expressed her own outrage.

''Only when fugitives like Dr. Karadzic and Gen. Mladic are transformed from
symbols of a lack of backbone into symbols of the international community's
resolve will Bosnia and Herzegovina and the other traumatized states of the
region stand a chance of establishing rule of law,'' she wrote. ''The time has
come to summon the will and bring Radovan Karadzic and Ratko Mladic to justice.

''It's what their victims, and the rest of the world, deserve.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 29, 2008



CORRECTION: A Man in the News article last Tuesday about Radovan Karadzic, the
former leader of Bosnian Serbs arrested on July 21 on longstanding war-crimes
charges for atrocities committed in the Balkans conflict of the early 1990s,
referred incorrectly to a British statesman who had helped draft the 1995 Dayton
agreement that ended the conflict. At the time he worked on the agreement, he
was Lord Owen, a former foreign secretary; he had been known as David Owen when
he held that post.

GRAPHIC: Radovan Karadzic, at right, the Bosnian Serb leader, with Gen. Ratko
Mladic, left, in April 1995.  SAVA RADOVANOVIC/ASSOCIATED PRESS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (87%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); SKIING (78%); HISTORY (77%); MEN (77%); REFUGEES (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); WRITERS (76%); ARMIES (73%); MOUNTAINS (72%); ARMED FORCES
(72%); RELIGION (66%); SPORTS & RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (66%)

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);
BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); CAMBRIDGE, ENGLAND (70%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); ENGLAND (79%); CROATIA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             921 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan: African Nations Ask Security Council To Delay Indictment of Sudanese
President For War Crimes

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 111 words


The African Union urged the United Nations Security Council to postpone a
possible indictment of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan by the
International Criminal Court for war crimes in Darfur. The request,  at the end
of a meeting of the African Union's Peace and Security Council in Addis Ababa,
Ethiopia, followed a similar appeal by the Arab League. The international
court's prosecutor has asked for an arrest warrant for Mr. Bashir on suspicion
of masterminding crimes against humanity in Darfur. The Russian ambassador to
the United Nations, Vitaly Churkin, said in New York that the Security Council
should seriously consider the African Union's request.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
ARREST WARRANTS (85%); ARRESTS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (94%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES (57%); UNITED NATIONS
(57%)

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); AFRICA (93%); ETHIOPIA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (51%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             923 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 22, 2008 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

BOSNIAN SERB UNDER ARREST IN WAR CRIMES

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY and MARLISE SIMONS; Nicholas Kulish contributed
reporting from Berlin.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1398 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Radovan Karadzic, one of the world's most wanted war criminals for his part in
the massacre of nearly 8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica in 1995, was
arrested Monday in a raid in Serbia that ended a 13-year hunt.

Serge Brammertz, the prosecutor of the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The
Hague, hailed the arrest as an important step in bringing to justice one of the
architects of Europe's worst massacre since World War II. He said Mr. Karadzic,
63, the Bosnian Serb president during the war there between 1992 and 1995, would
be transferred to The Hague in ''due course.''

''This is a very important day for the victims who have waited for this arrest
for over a decade,'' Mr. Brammertz said. ''It is also an important day for
international justice because it clearly demonstrates that nobody is beyond the
reach of the law and that sooner or later all fugitives will be brought to
justice.''

Mr. Karadzic's exact place of arrest was not announced, but Serbian government
officials said he was arrested by the Serbian secret police not far from
Belgrade, the capital. Officials from President Boris Tadic's office said Mr.
Karadzic had appeared before an investigative judge at Serbia's war crimes
court, a prerequisite for his extradition to The Hague.

Mr. Karadzic, a nationalist hero among Serbian radicals and one of the
tribunal's most wanted criminals for more than a decade, is said to have eluded
arrest so long by shaving his swoopy gray hair and disguising himself as a
Serbian Orthodox priest.

He reportedly hid out  in caves in the mountains of eastern Bosnia and in
monasteries. Before his political career, he was a medical doctor who worked as
a psychiatrist in Sarajevo, Bosnia's capital.

Prosecutors in The Hague and officials of  the European Union have long
suspected that he was, in fact, hiding in Serbia, and in recent years have
pressed officials in Belgrade to hand him over. The failure to arrest Mr.
Karadzic and Ratko Mladic, the still fugitive Bosnian Serb general also indicted
on war crimes,  has stood as a block to greater Serbian ties to the European
Union after the wars in Bosnia and later Kosovo.

''This is a historic event,'' said Richard  Holbrooke, who brokered the
agreements in Dayton, Ohio, to end the war in Bosnia in 1995. ''Of the three
most evil men of the Balkans, Milosevic, Karadzic and Mladic, I thought Karadzic
was the worst. The reason was that Karadzic was a real racist believer. Karadzic
really enjoyed ordering the killing of Muslims, whereas Milosevic was an
opportunist.''

Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of Serbia allied with Mr. Karadzic and
Mr. Mladic, was arrested in 2001 and put on trial for war crimes in 2002. He
died there in 2006 before a verdict was reached.

Mr. Holbrooke said that despite Mr. Karadzic's arrest, Serbia's responsibility
was not over. ''They have to capture Mladic,'' he said.

On Monday night after the arrest, armed police officers were deployed near the
war crimes court in Belgrade, where about 50 nationalist supporters of Mr.
Karadzic gathered, waving Serbian flags and chanting, ''Save Serbia, and kill
yourself Mr. Tadic.'' Several protesters were arrested after attacking
journalists. Mr. Karadzic's brother, Luka, was also seen arriving at the
courthouse.

Serbian officials said the police were also dispatched to protect the United
States Embassy, which was set ablaze in February by a mob protesting Kosovo's
declaration of independence.

The arrest, more than a decade after Mr. Karadzic went into hiding,  culminated
a long and protracted effort by the West to press Serbia to arrest Mr. Karadzic
for the massacres in the southeastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica, in the most
heinous crime committed during the Balkan wars.

The arrest was  just weeks after a new pro-Western coalition government in
Serbia was formed whose overriding goal is to bring Serbia into the European
Union, the world's biggest trading bloc. The European Union has made delivering
indicted war criminals to The Hague a precondition for Serbia's membership.

The arrest was hailed by Western diplomats as proof of Serbia's determination to
link its future to the West and put the virulent nationalism of the past behind
it. The capture under the stewardship of the new government has particular
resonance because the government is made up of an unlikely alliance between the
Democrats of Mr. Tadic and the Socialist Party of Mr. Milosevic, which fought a
war against the West in the 1990s, but has now vowed to bring Serbia back into
the Western fold.

In a sign that the move would accelerate Serbia's path to the European Union,
the bloc's official in charge of expansion, Olli Rehn, said Monday that Mr.
Karadzic's arrest was a ''milestone'' that would help clear the way for the poor
Balkan nation to join.

''It proves the determination of the new government to achieve full cooperation
with the tribunal,'' he said. He said he and European Union foreign ministers
would meet with Serbia's foreign minister, Vuk Jeremic, in Brussels on Tuesday
to discuss accelerated ties with Serbia.

The White House said the arrest was  ''an important demonstration of the Serbian
government's determination to honor its commitment to cooperate with the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.'' It said, ''There is
no better tribute to the victims of the war's atrocities than bringing their
perpetrators to justice.''

The United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague indicted the former leader
on July 24, 1995, just days after thousands of unarmed Bosnian men were executed
in and around Srebrenica, a United Nations-protected enclave that  was overrun
by the Bosnian Serb military and the police. Their forces were assisted closely
by Serbian troops sent by Belgrade.

The prosecution charged him with genocide, persecution, deportation and other
crimes committed against non-Serb civilians in Bosnia during the 1992-95 war.

He was indicted together with his chief military commander, Mr. Mladic, who is
also believed to be in Serbia.

Natasha Kandic, director of the Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade, a leading
human rights advocate, said by telephone from  her home moments after hearing
the news: ''I'm still in shock. This is historic news. Nobody believed anymore
this would be possible. I was sure Karadzic was under the protection of the
church.''

Ms. Kandic said she had been in touch with friends in Sarajevo, in Bosnia, who
were still incredulous after hearing arrest rumors for so many years. ''They are
saying they cannot and dare not believe it,'' she said. ''Finally the victims
can be satisfied.''

Mr. Karadzic's wife, Ljiljana, told The Associated Press by phone from her home
near Sarajevo that she had been alerted about the arrest by her daughter Sonja,
who called her before midnight. ''As the phone rang, I knew something was
wrong,'' she said. ''I'm shocked. Confused. At least now, we know he is alive.''

Even though indicted by the United Nations tribunal, he was often seen for at
least another year in and around Pale, his stronghold in Bosnia;  NATO troops
stationed in the area often had the chance to arrest him but claimed that they
had no arrest orders, despite the international warrant issued against him.

Later, when NATO began to look for him in earnest, he moved around the
mountainous regions of Bosnia and in neighboring Montenegro, where he was born.
Although the United States  and others offered rewards for information leading
to his capture, Mr. Karadzic seemed protected by his status as aSerbian hero.

He  is charged with genocide for the murder of close to 8,000 Bosnian Muslim men
and boys in Srebrenica in 1995.

The indictment charges that Mr. Karadzic also committed genocide, persecutions
and other crimes when forces under his command killed non-Serbs during and after
attacks on towns throughout Bosnia and Herzegovina, rounded up thousands of
non-Serbs and transferred them to camps set up by the Bosnian Serb authorities.

The charges state that forces under Mr. Karadzic's command killed, tortured,
mistreated and sexually assaulted non-Serbs in these camps.

Further, he is charged with responsibility for the shelling and sniping of
civilians in Sarajevo, during the 43-month siege of the city, which led to the
killing and wounding of thousands, including many women and children.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 24, 2008



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a picture on Tuesday with the
continuation of a front-page article about the arrest of Radovan Karadzic, the
fugitive former leader of Serbia wanted on war-crimes charges, carried an
erroneous credit. The photograph of skeletal remains of victims of the 1995
massacre of Muslims in Srebrenica, Bosnia, was by The Associated Press, not
Reuters.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Clothed skeletons at the site of the massacre in 1995 of nearly
8,000 Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica, Bosnia. The remains were on a hilltop
west of the town.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXANDER ZEMLIANICHENKO/REUTERS)
 In July 1995 Bosnian refugees from Srebrenica mourned the victims of the
massacre at a refugee camp in Bosnia.(PHOTOGRAPH BY WADE GODDARD/REUTERS)(pg.
A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); ARRESTS (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); MEN (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
EXTRADITION (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); RELIGION (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(64%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (64%); MOUNTAINS (63%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (50%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); DAYTON, OH, USA (51%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%);
EUROPE (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); UNITED
STATES (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             926 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Civilian Risks Curbing Strikes In Afghan War

BYLINE: By THOM SHANKER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1532 words


Dawn was breaking over Afghanistan one day this month  as Air Force surveillance
planes locked in on a top-ranking insurgent commander as he traveled in secret
around Kandahar, the spiritual home of the Taliban.

But as attack aircraft were summoned overhead to strike, according to a
recounting of the mission by Air Force commanders, the Taliban leader entered a
building. Intelligence specialists scrambled to determine whether  civilians
were inside. Weapons experts calculated what bomb could destroy the structure
with the least damage.

It had taken the American military many days to identify, track and target the
senior Taliban officer. But the risk of civilian deaths was deemed too high. Air
Force commanders, working with military lawyers, aborted the mission. The
Taliban leader escaped.

''We miss the opportunity, but the beauty of what we do is we will get them
eventually,'' said Lt. Gen. Gary L. North, commander of American and allied air
forces in the Middle East and Southwest Asia. ''We will continue to track them.
Eventually, we will get to the point where we can achieve -- within the
constraints of which we operate, which by the way the enemy does not operate
under -- and we will get them.''

In interviews at the air operations headquarters in Southwest Asia, American and
allied commanders said that even as orders for air attacks in Afghanistan had
increased significantly this year, their ability to strike top insurgent leaders
from the air was severely restricted by rules intended to minimize civilian
casualties.

The rules that govern dropping bombs and firing missiles are far more
restrictive now in Afghanistan than in Iraq, senior Pentagon and military
officials say.

The rules of engagement were reviewed and tightened in 2007 after a spate of
civilian casualties, under Gen. Dan K. McNeill, then the top NATO commander in
Afghanistan, and reviewed and revised again in April, officials said.

American commanders acknowledge that civilian casualties undermine support for
the NATO-led stability mission exactly at a time when the Taliban is
experiencing a potent resurgence across the country. They say Afghan officials,
including President Hamid Karzai, routinely complain about civilian deaths in
meetings with Americans.

Military officers also acknowledge that their control over airstrikes is reduced
when crews scramble to help NATO contingents under attack.

But air commanders say they have a commitment to support ground forces in
trouble. Only last weekend, nine Afghan police officers were killed in western
Afghanistan when Afghan and United States forces called in airstrikes on the
officers, thinking they were militants.

According to the United Nations, 698 civilians were killed in the first six
months of this year, compared with 430 in the same period last year. The United
Nations report said nearly two-thirds of the deaths this year resulted from
actions by the Taliban and other insurgents. The remainder were attributed to
actions by Afghan government, American or allied forces.

In interviews at the air base, American and allied commanders expressed
frustration about the obstacles they faced. They described what they said were
missed opportunities and told how Taliban leaders, who live and operate among
the population, have learned to exploit the restrictions.

''There are frustrations, without a doubt,'' said a British officer, Air
Commodore Simon Dobb, director of the combined air operations center. ''But we
understand what Clausewitz said, that war is an extension of policy. We are
acutely aware of the sensitivities toward collateral damage,'' the military term
for civilians killed or wounded.

A reporter for The New York Times  was given access to the Combined Air and
Space Operations Center under a written agreement that neither the name of the
base nor its location be published, in deference to the host nation's concerns.

Over recent weeks, a wave of deadly Taliban attacks illustrated just how thinly
American and NATO troops were stretched across Afghanistan, prompting Defense
Secretary Robert M. Gates and Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff, to pledge to find additional forces for the mission.

In the meantime, orders for airstrikes in Afghanistan have increased in recent
months, as American and allied warplanes attack Taliban hide-outs and swoop in
to assist allied and Afghan forces under fire.

According to statistics compiled by the air operations center, during the first
six months of this year, 1,853 munitions were dropped by air over Afghanistan --
more than twice the 754 dropped in Iraq during the same period.

In June alone, 646 bombs and missiles were used in Afghanistan, the second
highest monthly total since the end of major combat operations in 2002.

Air Force lawyers vet all the airstrikes approved by the operational air
commanders. Senior Pentagon officials said the more stringent rules of
engagement now in effect for Afghanistan specified the acceptable levels of risk
to civilians for a priority attack. They said these more stringent rules
required a significantly lower risk of civilian casualties than was acceptable
in Iraq.

Missions in Afghanistan that are judged vital but highly risky to civilians may
now require approval by the overall regional commander and, in some instances,
even by the defense secretary himself, according to Pentagon and military
officials.

''In their deliberate targeting, the Air Force has all but eliminated civilian
casualties in Afghanistan,'' said Marc Garlasco, senior military analyst with
Human Rights Watch. ''They have very effective collateral damage mitigation
procedures.''

The greater risk of civilian casualties, Mr. Garlasco said, comes in unplanned
targeting, when American and allied troops come under attack unexpectedly and
call for airstrikes for urgent help.

''When this immediate targeting needs to be done, an aircraft may not have the
correct weapon for that target,'' Mr. Garlasco said. ''The aircraft may be
rerouted to assist troops in a hard fight, and there is not time to do the
collateral damage modeling they would want to do. In an attempt to help troops
on the ground caught up in the fight, there have been situations where they have
killed civilians.''

At the air operations center, targeting specialists spend hours before each
mission measuring distances from the potential strike zone to the nearest house,
building, mosque, school or hospital.

Vast numbers of public, religious and historic sites make up a computer database
of no-strike zones. Special goggles are worn while reviewing digital images
compiled from surveillance aircraft and satellites to give a detailed,
three-dimensional view of the target area.

The bombs themselves are chosen carefully and sometimes modified. Some designed
for air burst are instead programmed with a delayed fuse to bury themselves
before exploding, thus reducing the blast range. One sort of bomb has even been
loaded with less explosive, filled instead with concrete, to cause great damage
where it hits but no farther.

''We explicitly guarantee extra benefits to civilians,'' said Col. Gary Brown,
the top military lawyer at the air operations center. Lawyers like Colonel Brown
check that proposed operations conform to a complex body of military law,
including the Geneva Conventions, acts of Congress and court decisions.

Although Air Force officials acknowledge that unintended civilian casualties
have been inflicted, Colonel Brown also said the Taliban and Al Qaeda regularly
fabricate reports of civilian deaths. He and other officers at the operations
center say every mission has two dimensions: the fight itself and theinformation
fight after that fight.

''The Taliban have a very efficient and very effective political machine,''
Colonel Brown said.

Though target planners were frustrated by the inability to carry out the mission
against the Taliban leader who took refuge in the building, another mission just
days before, overnight on July 8, was carried out with the goal of eliminating
another Taliban commander on the list of ''high-value targets'' -- even though a
last-minute change was ordered to prevent the loss of civilian life.

An array of  surveillance vehicles, some remotely piloted, had tracked the
Taliban leader around the clock for days, establishing what intelligence circles
call  ''a pattern of life.''

When the Taliban leader and his followers camped for the night on the northwest
outskirts of Kandahar, a team of targeting and weapons specialists at the
combined air operations center went to work, scanning aerial photographs to
gauge the distance to nearby structures and analyzing the blast radius of bombs
and missiles aboard aircraft overhead.

It turned out that houses and other buildings were inside the blast range of
those munitions, so the Air Force deployed an A-10 Thunderbolt. Its
armor-piercing shells were designed for destroying Soviet tanks -- but the
aircraft can also strike with great accuracy without a large blast area.

The A-10 strafed the sleeping Taliban camp with cannon fire. According to later
reports, buildings nearby went undamaged.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Hospital workers in Jalalabad tended to a boy who was said to
have been injured in an airstrike by American-led coalition forces in eastern
Afghanistan on July 6. (PHOTOGRAPH BY AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
CHART: Tally of Air Attacks: Bombs dropped and missiles fired by American and
allied forces, in hundreds. (Source: U.S. Air Force)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIR FORCES (92%); TALIBAN (91%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); MILITARY
SURVEILLANCE (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SURVEILLANCE &
RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
BOMBINGS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
MILITARY BASES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
LAWYERS (54%)

ORGANIZATION: US AIR FORCE (59%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%); JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (96%); ASIA (92%); IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             927 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            July 23, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dinko Sakic, 86, Leader of Death Camp

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS MARTIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 946 words


Dinko Sakic arrived at the concentration camp known as the ''Auschwitz of the
Balkans'' riding a white horse, wearing a tailored black uniform with polished
black boots and carrying a whip and a submachine gun, survivors remembered.

His brazenness continued even after Croatia went down to defeat with Nazi
Germany, its ally. He fled to Argentina, where he lived for a half century under
his real name, making no attempt to hide. In his last decade of freedom, he gave
interviews saying he was proud of what he had done and would gladly do it again.

Mr. Sakic, the last living commander of a World War II-era concentration camp,
died Sunday at 86  in a hospital in Zagreb, the Croatian news agency Hina
reported, citing Croatia's prison system as its source. Mr. Sakic was serving a
20-year sentence for crimes against humanity.

''He is the most notorious living Nazi war criminal not in custody,'' George
Spectre, then associate director of the B'nai B'rith center for public policy,
said in an interview with The New York Times in April 1998.

A year and a half later, Mr. Sakic was found guilty of killing more than 2,000
Serbs, Jews and Gypsies at the camp named Jasenovac. Among other crimes, the
verdict said, he ordered executions; did not treat the sick; worked inmates to
death; starved and tortured some with a blowtorch; and hanged others, sometimes
leaving them dangling for days. He personally shot at least four prisoners dead,
two of them for smiling.

In response to the verdict, Mr. Sakic clapped his hands and laughed in derision.

The case had broad implications. After Croatia gained independence from
Yugoslavia in 1991, President Franjo Tudjman and his government were taking
steps to rehabilitate the pro-Fascist government that presided over Croatia
before it was absorbed into Communist Yugoslavia after the war.

Mr. Tudjman wrote a book questioning whether the number of Jews said to have
been killed in the Holocaust had been exaggerated. Croatian officials gave
veterans of the Fascist government, called the Ustashe,  lavish benefits and
invited them to military celebrations. The military prowess of the Ustashe
forces was glorified.

The Times quoted a survivor as saying that he had recently seen the police
giving the Fascist salute. The survivor said that years earlier he had watched
Mr. Sakic oversee the execution of several hundred Jewish women and children.

Andrija Hebrang, vice president of the then-governing Croatian Democratic Union,
called Mr. Sakic ''a victim of historical circumstances'' who sought to ''create
an independent Croatian state with the aid of the Nazis since Communism was not
an option.''

But there was no doubt that by the lowest Croatian estimates tens of thousands
had died in Croatian camps. Higher estimates put the death toll at hundreds of
thousands. Nazi hunters, keenly aware that time was running out, were scrambling
to find the last living culprits.

Mr. Sakic did not make the hunt difficult. In 1990, his photograph and an
interview were published in a Croatian newspaper, The Feral Tribune: Mr. Sakic
castigated the Serbs and praised the Ustashe government.

In 1994, during a state visit to Argentina by President Tudjman, Mr. Sakic spoke
to Magazin, a Croatian magazine. ''I'd do it all again,'' he said, adding that
he wished more Serbs had died at Jasenovac. ''I sleep like a baby.''

Three years later, a television reporter knocked on Mr. Sakic's door, and Mr.
Sakic gladly consented to an interview. He said the only deaths in the camp had
been from natural causes.

Many news reports said Croatia decided to extradite Mr. Sakic only to keep him
out of the hands of Serbs in the remnants of Yugoslavia, which was also trying
to bring him to trial. Slavenka Drakulic, a Croatian writer, wrote on The
Times's Op-Ed page that this meant that Mr. Tudjman's government ''must now
condemn the same Fascist regime that it has tried to rehabilitate.''  It
ultimately did.

Argentina took the opportunity to step away from its history of harboring former
Nazis, including the leader of the Nazis' Croatian puppet state, Ante Pavelic.
Carlos Corach, the Argentine interior minister, expressed ''satisfaction'' at
Mr. Sakic's arrest and sent him home to stand trial.

Dinko Ljubomir Sakic was born on Sept. 8, 1921,  in Studenci,
Bosnia-Herzegovina, his indictment said. He graduated from high school. At 21 he
arrived at Jasenovac,  where he worked his way up to commander, a post he held
for seven months in 1944.

He was the protege of Vjekoslav Luburic, the leader of all Croatian
concentration camps, including Jasenovac, a sprawling 150-square-mile
conglomeration of several camps. It quickly became known for a brutality that
shocked even visiting Nazi officials, one of whom likened it to Dante's hell.
Camp employees devised a knife for the express purpose of slitting throats.

Mr. Sakic married Mr. Luburic's sister  Nada, who started working at Jasenovac
at 16. She was also extradited from Argentina to face war crimes charges, but
was released for lack of evidence.

Mr. Sakic ran a textile business in Argentina and was vocal in Argentina's
10,000-member Croatian community, The Washington Post reported in 1998. In the
late 1950s, The Post said, he ran a ''rest camp'' for former Croatian Fascists
in Paraguay with his friend the Paraguayan dictator Alfredo Stroessner.

Mr. Sakic is survived by his wife, who changed her first name to Esperanza. The
1998 indictment said they had three children.

The family's neighbors in Argentina said that Mr. Sakic had not been especially
talkative, The Post reported. They sometimes noticed him mowing his lawn or
hugging his wife goodbye.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: Dinko Sakic

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Dinko Sakic, center, was convicted in 1999 of war
crimes.(PHOTOGRAPH BY  NIKOLA SOLIC/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); PRISONS (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
JAIL SENTENCING (73%); STARVATION (73%); SENTENCING (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
TORTURE (73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (72%)

ORGANIZATION: B'NAI B'RITH INTERNATIONAL (55%)

CITY: ZAGREB, CROATIA (58%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); ARGENTINA (92%); GERMANY (88%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             930 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 24, 2008 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Karadzic and War's Lessons

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg.

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: CHERENCE, France


After covering a war, a friend said, buy yourself a house. I did. I came to this
French village where church bells chime the rhythm of the days, married here,
raised children and parked Bosnia somewhere in a corner of my mind.

I had to forget. I had to write a book, so the horror would never be forgotten,
in order to forget just enough to go on. There is always a measure of guilt in
survival when so many have died. There are faces, in death and bereavement, that
can never be eclipsed.

It's peaceful here. I'd been out watching crows in the stubble when I returned
to discover Radovan Karadzic had been arrested in Belgrade, 13 years after the
end of the war, to face charges of genocide and crimes against humanity.

The years fell away, fear resurfaced, and I've been unable to sleep. I find
myself back in Pale with you, Dr. Karadzic, back in that two-bit ski resort you
parlayed into the Bosnian Serb capital and bestrode with your killer hairdo,
back asking you questions you never could answer.

Objectivity and neutrality are not synonymous. The head is useless without the
heart. War teaches that better than journalism school. The unseeing eyes of
young Sarajevan women penetrated by shrapnel had taught me the rights and wrongs
of the war long before I met you. Still I wanted to look you in the eye.

Unhinged would be a kind description. You talked of your ''love'' for Sarajevo,
the ethnically mixed city your boozy forces kept shelling. You told me, 32
months into the fighting, that you were ready ''to declare a state of war.'' I
stared in disbelief and asked about Ruzdija Sestovic.

Names dispel a numbing when the death toll rises toward 100,000. Sestovic had
been seized from his home in eastern Bosnia on June 20, 1992, by masked Serbian
forces and had disappeared.

He was one of thousands of Bosnian Muslims to meet this fate in the sharp bust
of Serbian violence that opened the war and ''cleansed'' wide swathes of the
country of non-Serbs, many processed through murderous concentration camps. Pits
of bones form the bitter harvest of this genocidal Serbian season.

''Ethnic cleansing was not our policy,'' Karadzic responded with nonchalance.
''It happened because of fear. Fear and chaos. I was not informed on a daily
basis of what was happening in the first months of the war, although we got some
information from our troops and police. But the fate of men like Sestovic was
beyond our control.''

An international court in The Hague will now examine that contention of the
former Bosnian Serb leader. I don't doubt the outcome. Justice is important  --
for Bosnia and for amnesia-afflicted Serbia with its everyone-was-guilty
evasiveness. But justice won't change the faces brought back to me now across
the years.

Nermin Tulic, an actor, his legs blown off by a Serbian shell on June 10, 1992,
telling me how he wanted to die until his wife gave birth to their second
daughter and his dad told him a child needs his father even if he just sits in
the corner.

I took that away from the war: the stubbornness of love.

Amra Dzaferovic, beautiful Amra, telling me in the desperate Sarajevo summer of
1995 that: ''Here things are black and white, they are. There is evil and there
is good, and the evil is up in the hills. So when you say you are just a
journalist, an observer, I understand you, but I still hate you. Yes, I hate
you.''

I took that away from the war: the fierceness of moral clarity.

Pale Faruk Sabanovic watching a video of the moment he was shot in Sarajevo and
saying: ''If I remain a paraplegic, I will be better, anyhow, than the Serb who
shot me. I will be clean in my mind, clean with respect to others, and clean
with respect to this dirty world.''

I took that away from the war: the quietness of courage.

Ron Neitzke, noblest of American diplomats, handing me his excoriation of the
U.S. government and State Department for ''repeatedly and gratuitously
dishonoring the Bosnians in the very hour of their genocide'' and urging future
Foreign Service officers to be ''guided by the belief that a policy
fundamentally at odds with our national conscience cannot endure indefinitely
--  if that conscience is well and truthfully informed.''

I took that away from the war: the indivisibility of integrity and the
importance of a single dissenting voice.

Nobody labored with fiercer lucidity to inform America's conscience about
Karadzic's crimes than Kurt Schork, the Reuters correspondent killed in Sierra
Leone in 2000. I wish he were here.

Schork would be smiling  --  and chiding me for being careless with my Bosnian
lessons in the onward rush of life. The precious is no less important for being
unbearable.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CHILDREN (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); RESORTS
(73%); RELIGION (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ARRESTS (69%); SKIING (67%); JOURNALISM
(66%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (50%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%);
NETHERLANDS (50%)

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             931 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 25, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serb Leader's Capture Brings Little Solace at Site of Killings in Bosnia

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: SREBRENICA, Bosnia and Herzegovina


Fadila Efendik had little time to rejoice this week over the capture of Radovan
Karadzic, the man she blames for the death of her only son: she was too busy
looking for his missing and scattered body parts.

The arrest on Monday of Mr. Karadzic, the wartime leader of the Bosnian Serbs
accused of masterminding the worst massacre since World War II, brought her cold
comfort,  Mrs. Efendik said.

She nervously played with her head scarf and sobbed as she scanned the endless
rows of white gravestones  here on Wednesday in the area where Serbian
paramilitary forces under the command of Mr. Karadzic separated the men and boys
who would later be killed in a frenzy that claimed 8,000 lives.

''I am bitter because it took so long to find Karadzic,'' she said. ''My son was
two weeks shy of his 20th birthday. I still can't find his body. I found some of
my husband's bones but not enough to bury him whole. Karadzic may have been
found, but now I am alone in the world.''

When news of Mr. Karadzic's arrest on war crimes charges broke on Monday,
hundreds of Muslims poured onto the rainy streets of Sarajevo, the Bosnian
capital. The city still bears the scars of a brutal three-and-a-half-year siege
during which Mr. Karadzic is accused of authorizing the shooting of civilians.

Some danced and chanted, ''This is Bosnia!'' -- a defiant answer to Mr.
Karadzic's wartime aim of  the ''ethnic cleansing'' of Bosnian Muslims from the
country and making it part of a greater Serbia. More than 10,000 Bosnians died
in Sarajevo during the war.

But here in Srebrenica, where the massacre took place in 1995, locals said they
had little faith in a legal process undertaken by the United Nations tribunal in
The Hague 13 years after the hunt for Mr. Karadzic began. Some feared the
tragedy he is accused of helping to orchestrate was being overshadowed by the
lurid soap opera, played out on front pages across the world, detailing his
evasion as an alternative medicine specialist, with a mistress, a fake American
family and an elaborate disguise.

Mr. Karadzic has been indicted, along with the Bosnian Serb military commander,
Gen. Ratko Mladic, on charges of  genocide in connection with the killings
during the siege at Sarajevo and the massacre at Srebrenica, where unarmed
Bosnian Muslim men and boys  were lined up, killed and buried in mass graves.

Mrs. Efendik said residual anger  for the West's inaction remained. In
particular, she pointed to the 300 Dutch peacekeepers at the United
Nations-protected enclave where 40,000 people had sought refuge before the
killings. She said the peacekeepers should have done more to protect Bosnian
Muslims from the raiding Serbian forces, some of whom stole the helmets and
vehicles of peacekeepers to trick and capture victims trying to flee. Past Dutch
governments have said responsibility for the massacre lay with the killers, not
with the United Nations troops.

''The U.N. couldn't save us then. What is it going to do now?'' Mrs. Efendik
said.

She recalled the day the killings began, when Serbian paramilitary forces
separated the men from the women, putting the women on open trucks that would
carry them to Muslim-controlled territory. She said the truck she was traveling
on was stopped along the route, where the women were forced to watch and give
the three-finger Serbian nationalist salute as Serbian forces mowed down their
fathers, brothers and sons before their eyes.

Only a handful of the 8,000 men and boys survived, some by pretending to be dead
and hiding under corpses. Witnesses said those who remained were herded to
nearby wooded areas, soccer grounds, warehouses or barren meadows, where they
were killed. Many bodies were later found in mass graves with their hands tied
behind their backs.

Hatidza Mehmedovic, president of Srebrenica Mothers, a victims support group,
who lost two young sons, her husband, her father and two brothers during the
massacre, said she would  be able to rest only when the West had brought  Mr.
Mladic to justice. For now, he remains  at large.

''Karadzic gave the orders for Srebrenica, but it was Mladic who executed it,''
she said. ''I have some satisfaction from Karadzic's arrest, but it doesn't
change the fact that Srebrenica remains a mirror to the shame of the world and
its inaction. All those who could have prevented this should see the graves so
that this will never happen again.''

Ms. Mehmedovic said all that she had left of her two sons, Almir and Azmir, 19
and 21 when they were killed, was a tree Almir had planted in her front yard and
a school notebook Azmir had left on his desk. ''We were awaiting the wedding of
our children, the birth of our grandchildren,'' she said. ''Now all we have are
empty graves.''

She said Mr. Karadzic's arrest was little solace for thousands of families like
hers that had not been able to bury their loved ones because forensic experts
had  recovered only part of their remains. Last year, she said, she found the
mangled body of one of her sons, but was unable to identify which one. She also
found the bones of her husband, but not enough to give him a proper burial.

Avdo Suljic, 35, an unemployed Bosnian Muslim who lost 200 relatives at
Srebrenica, ranging in age from 16 to 85, said he had only recently returned,
for fear of confronting too many ghosts. He recalled he had escaped being killed
by trekking seven days in the mountains, drinking rainwater and hiding.
''Karadzic is an old man. Nothing with his arrest has changed for me. I have no
job and little future.''

Mr. Suljic, who fought with Bosnian forces during the war, said the war had
devastated the town economically. He said he spent his days gambling and
drinking. He noted two events that eased his pain since he returned to
Srebrenica two years ago. ''I found my father's legs two years ago, and two
weeks ago I found his head,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sahbaz Mujcinovic and his sons visited the graves of his
brother and father in Bosnia at a cemetery for Muslims killed by Serbian forces
in Srebrenica in 1995.
 Flowers on a memorial for the Srebrenica massacre. A cemetery nearby contains
the graves of more than 4,000 victims. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOHAN SPANNER FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)   MAP: Nearly 8,000 Bosnian Muslims were killed at Srebrenica. Map
details SREBRENICA, Bosnia and Herzegovina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MEN (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); RELIGION
(89%); GENOCIDE (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
PEACEKEEPING (86%); WAR CRIMES (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
INDICTMENTS (77%); WORLD WAR II (72%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%)

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (67%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (94%);
NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             938 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 27, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES, JULY 27, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1869 words


International

LOOKING PAST KREMLIN,

Russian Tabloids Thrive

The Russian newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda, formerly a gray government
mouthpiece, is now part of a vibrant tabloid culture that illustrates the
complex nature of life under Prime Minister Vladimir V. Putin: As long as the
papers do not threaten the Kremlin or its closest friends, they can be as
raucous as they like.  PAGE 6

MORE EXPLOSIONS IN INDIA

At least 16 explosions rocked an Indian city for the second time in two days,
this time in the western city of Ahmedabad Gujarat State, killing 29. The Indian
government said cities across the country had been put on alert for similar
attacks. Similar blasts went off in the southern technology hub of Bangalore on
Friday. PAGE 10

FATAH IS RAIDED IN GAZA

Hamas police officers in Gaza rounded up scores of activists in Fatah, the rival
Palestinian movement, and raided its offices after five Hamas militants and a
young girl were killed in a bomb blast late Friday, local residents said. The
explosion and the Hamas reaction stoked internal tensions in Gaza to one of the
highest levels since the Hamas takeover of the Palestinian territory last year.
PAGE 10

Qantas Inquiry Persists  9

NATIONAL

FLORIDA AGENTS PROTEST

Bond for Cuba Travel

Florida travel agents who provide charter flights to Cuba are relieved after a
judge temporarily lifted a measure requiring them to post a $250,000 bond to
continue doing business with Cuba. But the battle between state lawmakers and
the agents is far from over.  PAGE 13

TEAM FAULTED FOR SPONSOR

The Washington Nationals opened their season with the country's first certified
green professional sports stadium. That hasn't spared them protests from
environmentalists, who are taking issue with the Nationals' advertising
relationship with ExxonMobil.  PAGE 13

NEW YORK REPORT

LIFE ON THE FRINGES

Of the New Brooklyn

Newer residents of Bedford-Stuyvesant, a Brooklyn neighborhood which has high
rates of crime and foreclosures, but which New York magazine labeled the city's
''next hipster enclave,'' have grown frustrated waiting for change to come. PAGE
18

A MEMBERS-ONLY TRACK

The Monticello Motor Club is where members pay $125,000 to push their Ferraris
to the limit without worrying about speeding tickets. Neighbors complain it is a
throwback to an age before high gasoline prices made fuel economy big news. PAGE
19

SPORTS

THE JETS, BRETT FAVRE

And Desperation

When the Jets began inquiring about a possible acquisition of Brett Favre, the
retired star quarterback, they did so in the hope that he would be an immediate
improvement over their incumbent signal-callers. But for Coach Eric Mangini and
Mike Tannenbaum, the team's general manager, there's also the hope that Favre
could help save their jobs. Harvey Araton, Sports of the Times.  PAGE 1

HISTORY AND TEDIUM

Indianapolis Motor Speedway is laden with history, which makes it fun for stock
car drivers to drive into. Racing there is another story, as the stock car races
on the track tend not to have a lot of lead changes and the track requires that
the drivers go much slower.  PAGE 6

Wrigley Field North  2

OBITUARIES

KATHERINE KINKADE, 77

A utopian idealist, she with fellow believers took over a former tobacco farm in
Charlottesville, Va., in 1967 to found Twin Oaks, an experimental community
inspired by the behaviorist ideas of B. F. Skinner. ''She was the Hillary
Clinton of Twin Oaks,'' Ms. Kinkade's daughter said. PAGE 20

NORMAN DELLO JOIO, 95

A composer who achieved wide popularity in the mid-20th century with a
proliferation of lyrical works, he wrote dozens of pieces each for chorus,
orchestra, solo voice, chamber groups and piano, as well as three operas, among
them ''The Triumph of St. Joan.''  PAGE 20

CHARLES L. BRIEANT JR., 85

A former chief judge of the United States District Court for the Southern
District of New York, he presided over a raft of controversial and sometimes
unusual cases.  PAGE 20

The Magazine

GLIMPSES OF WOMEN

In a Closed World

The photographer Stephanie Sinclair was given rare access two weeks ago to some
of the women at the center of the battle between the State of Texas and the
Fundamentalist Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The women may be
keeping their faith, Sarah Corbett writes in a companion essay, but they have
had to start a relationship with the world they call the ''outside.''  PAGE 36

An Afghan Narco-State?  44

SUNDAY BUSINESS

AN UPSTART AGENCY

Lands Big Names

Creative Artists Agency has long been the talent industry's leader. Then came
Endeavor, a junior agency known for the sort of quick thinking and ferocity that
carried Creative Artists to the top. But Endeavor must show it has staying
power, and how it accomplishes that task offers a window onto the shifting
landscape of talent brokering in Hollywood.  PAGE 1

DOWNLOADING CHEMISTRY

Textbook publishing has a nasty problem on its hands: College students, who
regularly pay hundreds of dollars a book, are beginning to download textbooks
free on pirate Web sites. Which is why textbook publishers are going digital,
shifting the business model from selling objects to renting access to a site
with a time-defined subscription. PAGE 4

Beating Foreclosure  1  STYLES

LEAVING YOUR EGO

At the Garage Door

With rising costs at the gas pump, guilt over exhaust, and self-consciousness
about the image a full-size behemoth conveys about its driver, Americans'
romance with the automobile is being severely tested. ''The love affair is
over,'' said one software engineer who just sold his dream car, a Toyota
4Runner. ''I'm ready to let it go.''  PAGE 1

AUDITIONS AT THE CAMPFIRE

The frenzy that many children face to get into the right school is particularly
acute for those who aspire to a career in the performing arts. Attending the
right summer theater camps (Stagedoor Manor, French Woods) can be a
steppingstone to Broadway or even Hollywood. ''It's like the secret handshake,''
said one aspiring actor of Stagedoor Manor. PAGE 1

Blogosphere's Glass Ceiling  1

ARTS & LEISURE

EDITING BEIJING'S HISTORY

With Gentrification

An explosion of construction activity has transformed Beijing into a modern
metropolis. It has also turned many of the city's historical neighborhoods --
known for their narrow alleyways, or hutongs -- into rubble. As grass-roots
preservationists labor to protect what remains, they are facing a new, equally
insidious threat: gentrification. PAGE 1

RETURN OF THE RENEGADE

Few children's book authors during the cold war years made a habit of playing
poker with the Cuban envoy to the United Nations. Or had a side career
publishing books of often disturbing erotica.  But Tomi Ungerer, who did, left
America in 1970 and took his reputation with him. With Phaidon reissuing 20 of
his books and the Weinstein Company acquiring the movie rights to one of them,
Mr. Ungerer is back in the spotlight.  PAGE 1

The Demise of Liner Notes  15 TRAVEL

THREE INTIMATE INNS OFFER

A Taste of Scotland

Draw a straight line from where you are to where you're going: That's the scenic
route. Now draw a wavy line, or a figure eight: Those routes are just as scenic.
The adjective loses meaning after a while. The Highlands of Scotland are full of
gorgeous landscapes and stunning views. And three B&Bs are making the region a
culinary destination as well.  PAGE 1

AMONG CRETE'S GOATHERDS

The eastern end of Crete, made up of enclaves of 300-year-old cottages once used
by olive farmers and goatherds, offers portholes into the island's history and
robust geography. Peaceful and primitive, the cottages, many of them now rustic
retreats for tourists,give visitors a glimpse into the life of old Crete.  PAGE
3

BOOK REVIEW

FOR ONE ENGLISHMAN,

The Greatest Love of All

Thrumpton Hall is a Jacobean manor house in Nottinghamshire. To judge from
photographs, it's nothing special, Charles McGrath writes. But the place had an
extraordinary hold on Miranda Seymour's father. Her odd and oddly affecting
book, ''Thrumpton Hall: A Memoir of Life in My Father's House,'' is a story of
house-love that borders on madness. PAGE 1

WEEK IN REVIEW

WHEN TO INDICT

A War Criminal

The dueling war crimes cases of July -- the Sudanese president, Omar Hussein
al-Bashir, and the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic -- received distinct
reactions from the international community. That's because there is a strand
among human rights advocates who say that war crimes indictments should be used
only after a conflict is resolved, as such indictments can extend the length of
a conflict. PAGE 1

SENATOR TO MR. PRESIDENT

John McCain or Barack Obama will be only the third president to go directly from
the Senate to the White House. And, perhaps not coincidentally, Patrick Healy
writes, both men face an electorate that seems to crave Senate-style compromise
and negotiation, defying conventional wisdom in modern politics.  PAGE 1

A Brief History of Hacking  2

The Siren Call of Escapism  3

AUTOMOBILES

AN OVERACHIEVER

Lives Up to Its Billing

Nissan gave the GT-R a clearly defined mission: annihilate nearly every other
car on the market around a racetrack while providing seating for four, room for
two sets of golf clubs and year-round livability, all for the price of a
well-optioned Porsche Cayman S. Amazingly, it hits each of those targets. SPORTS
PAGE 11

EDUCATION LIFE

GOOD FOR THE PLANET,

Good for the Ranking

When the Princeton Review releases its annual guide to colleges, it will include
a new measure: a ''green rating.'' Campuses are thus racing to be the greenest
of them all. But some officials worry they are taking easy steps to win the
label rather than doing the unglamorous work to reduce carbon emissions.  PAGE
26

THE SUSTAINABLE HAMPTON

Stony Brook Southampton, SUNY's newest campus, is building not only an
environmentally friendly campus but also a curriculum in which nearly every
course deals with sustainability.  PAGE 28

A Green Charter School  30

When Twins Compete  16

Editorial

REBATES RUN THEIR COURSE

Lawmakers are considering a second round of stimulus. One is needed, but
tempting as it is to send out checks in an election year, lawmakers will do a
disservice to voters if they simply serve up more of the same. WEEK IN REVIEW,
PAGE 9

Op-Ed

FRANK RICH

Presented with a leadership void, Barack Obama has taken the reins as acting
president, and John McCain has cracked.  WEEK IN REVIEW, PAGE 12

THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

The only good thing to come from soaring oil prices is that they have spurred
innovator/investors like T. Boone Pickens and Shai Agassi to move into clean
energy with a mad-as-hell, can-do ambition.  WEEK IN REVIEW, PAGE 10

MAUREEN DOWD

The columnist interviews Barack Obama as they jet from Paris to London, on the
last leg of his Eurotrip.  WEEK IN REVIEW, PAGE 11

TOO BIG TO FAIL OR SURVIVE

In an Op-Ed article, William Poole, the departing chief executive of the Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, contends that while the government is right to bail
out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac now, it should look to put them out of business
over the long run.  WEEK IN REVIEW, PAGE 11

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); HAMAS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); BOMBINGS (76%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (76%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (75%); CRIME RATES (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); TAKEOVERS (71%); BAIL (71%); STADIUMS & ARENAS
(69%); SPONSORSHIP (69%); SPORTS & RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (69%);
ATHLETES (68%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (68%); BASEBALL (68%); VEHICULAR OFFENSES
(67%); AIR CHARTER SERVICES (65%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (62%); OIL & GAS
PRICES (60%); JUDGES (51%); TRAVEL AGENTS (51%); GASOLINE PRICES (50%)

COMPANY: EXXON MOBIL CORP (53%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (53%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (53%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (73%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); INDIANAPOLIS,
IN, USA (79%); AHMEDABAD, GUJARAT, INDIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); INDIANA, USA (79%); GUJARAT,
INDIA (79%); WEST INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); INDIA (93%); ISRAEL (93%); UNITED STATES
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             943 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 29, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Below Surface, A Terror Trial Reveals Itself

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; GUANTaNAMO MEMO; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1362 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


On the surface, the proceedings unfolding inside a makeshift courthouse on a
hill here resemble an American trial. A judge wearing a black robe presides.
There is a public gallery and a witness stand. Prosecutors present witnesses,
and defense lawyers cross-examine them. Objections are made and ruled upon.

But behind the judicial routine at the first trial for a Guantanamo detainee
lies a parallel universe of law and lawyers. Secret evidence held in red folders
is not revealed in open court. The gallery is mostly empty, because there are no
members of the public. In what would be the jury box, every occupant wears a
military uniform.

In the first week of the trial of Salim Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's driver, law
enforcement officials recounted what he had said during interrogations in the
years since he was detained in 2001. But it was also disclosed that some of the
interrogations had been conducted in the middle of the night and by men wearing
masks, and that Mr. Hamdan did not have a lawyer during those sessions, nor was
he warned that he might be prosecuted.

Mr. Hamdan's trial is, in a sense, two trials. Mr. Hamdan is being tried on
accusations of conspiracy and material support of terrorism. And the Bush
administration's military commission system itself is on trial. After years of
debate, protest and litigation, the legal standing of the tribunal system at
Guantanamo remains a question for American courts and officials around the
world.

The chief Guantanamo prosecutor, Col. Lawrence J. Morris of the Army, said this
first Guantanamo tribunal was ''the most just war crimes trial that anybody has
ever seen.''

Matt Pollard, a legal adviser for Amnesty International who is an observer here,
sees it differently. He said he was struck by a sense that the proceedings were
more of a replica of a trial than a real one.

''We are within a frame of a beautiful picture,'' created by the Pentagon, Mr.
Pollard said. ''When you're inside that frame, everything looks nice.''

The Guantanamo legal system was intended to try ''unlawful enemy combatants''
caught on the post-Sept. 11 battlefield. Prosecutors say there is little room
for the usual legal restrictions in interrogations intended to prevent a
terrorist attack. The administration's strategy in using the Guantanamo naval
station was based on its belief that the Constitution would not apply here.

Legal challenges to that assertion are among a number of factors that have
delayed the government's efforts to conduct trials here for years.

A federal judge in Washington, James Robertson, refused a last-minute plea by
Mr. Hamdan's lawyers to stop this trial. But in his July 18 ruling, Judge
Robertson said serious questions remained about the system here, calling it
''startling'' that evidence obtained through coercive interrogations was
permitted to be used in trials.

But with the trial inaccessible to the public and no broadcast television
cameras in the courtroom, reporters are the only way for the wider world to know
what is happening. The Pentagon's public relations theme has been
''transparency,'' yet the freedom of the press has its limits at Guantanamo.

Legal documents are often released months after they are filed with the military
commission, if at all. Military officials run and attend news conferences, both
for the prosecution and the defense. Reporters are accompanied by military
escorts almost everywhere, including to meals and court.

The spokeswoman for the detention camp, Cmdr. Pauline Storum, said it was
''standard policy to require media be escorted,'' and that the military sought
to provide journalists access in a way ''that balances the protection of
operation security with providing information.''

With few seats designated for reporters in the courtroom, the Pentagon set up
closed-circuit televisions at a news media center in an old hangar. During some
critical moments in the first week of testimony, the courtroom camera was
pointed away from witnesses' faces and the evidence, including documents and
videotapes.

When a reporter noted that in America reporters were permitted to see witnesses
and evidence, a spokeswoman for the Office of Military Commissions at the
Pentagon, Maj. Gail Crawford, responded, ''This is not America.''

Without explanation, the camera was soon back on the witnesses.

One after another, Federal Bureau of Investigation agents and other criminal
investigators took the witness stand last week to describe damaging admissions
they said Mr. Hamdan had made in interrogations, including his descriptions of
attending a terror training camp and Mr. bin Laden's preparations for attacks.

The agents acknowledged that it was official policy to deviate from their normal
procedure of informing Mr. Hamdan of any constitutional rights.

One of the agents, George M. Crouch Jr., testified that he had helped arrange in
June 2002 for Mr. Hamdan to call his family. Mr. Hamdan, who had been in custody
for seven months and had been allowed no contact with the outside world, ''was
concerned that they would think he was dead,'' the agent testified.

Mr. Pollard said holding someone incommunicado for months sounded like the kind
of ''disappearances'' practiced by other countries. But in the court at
Guantanamo, the reference did not cause a ripple.

The interrogations of Mr. Hamdan have caused him to sometimes think the trial is
just another method of interrogation, a psychiatrist who interviewed him here
testified. ''He doesn't know if this court is real,'' the psychiatrist, Dr.
Emily A. Keram, said.

In June, the Supreme Court ruled that detainees here had a constitutional right
to challenge their detentions in federal court. Some lawyers said the ruling
suggested that other parts of the Constitution, like the Fifth Amendment's right
against self-incrimination, might apply here.

That could have undercut the case against Mr. Hamdan. But the military judge,
Capt. Keith J. Allred of the Navy, ruled that ''the Fifth Amendment of the
Constitution does not apply to protect Mr. Hamdan.''

Even so, the judge excluded some of Mr. Hamdan's statements, saying they were
given in the ''highly coercive environment'' of an Afghan prison. But he allowed
many other statements by Mr. Hamdan to be entered as evidence, including some
that defense lawyers contend were coerced. One of the F.B.I. agents, Ammar Y.
Barghouty, said Mr. Hamdan seemed to realize during the interrogations that he
had few options. ''A drowning man will reach for a twig, and I am a drowning
man,'' Mr. Barghouty quoted Mr. Hamdan as saying.

Mr. Hamdan's lawyers say appeals are likely from any conviction here, setting
the stage for rulings, perhaps years from now, about whether the courts here
meet American standards.

However the American courts eventually sort out the Guantanamo legal claims, the
trial here is proceeding with its own idiosyncrasies. A prosecution witness
presented an organizational table of Al Qaeda's leadership from when Mr. Hamdan
was part of Mr. bin Laden's security detail. The chart included an entry for the
head of the detail, a Moroccan, Abdellah Tabarak, who himself was held at
Guantanamo. He was released in 2004, four years before the start of Mr. Hamdan's
trial.

Asked about the unusual circumstance that an employee was on trial while a man
who may have been his boss had been released, a Pentagon spokesman, Cmdr.
Jeffrey D. Gordon, said, ''The transfer of detainees takes various factors into
consideration,'' including a receiving country's promise ''to mitigate the
threat.''

Ben Wizner, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer who is an observer here,
said the experiences of Mr. Tabarak and Mr. Hamdan seemed to underscore the
contradictions of the legal system here.

Mr. Wizner said there was a more fundamental contradiction underlying the trial.
The Bush administration insists that even if a detainee is acquitted, officials
could  hold him indefinitely.

''Where else in the world,'' Mr. Wizner said after court one day, ''is someone
being prosecuted for a crime who is already serving a life sentence and will
continue to serve one if he's acquitted?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A detainee last week at Guantanamo Bay. The trial of Salim
Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's driver, has entered its second week.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
FRED R. CONRAD/THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (91%); LAWYERS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); JUDGES (89%); TERRORISM (88%); ARMIES (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); JURY
TRIALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%);
CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (74%);
ARMED FORCES (74%); STANDING TO SUE (73%); NAVIES (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (69%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (68%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             944 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 29, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside The Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2383 words


International

THE LIFE OF THE ONLY LAWYER

In a Previously Lawyerless Town

There are plenty of reasons that smaller towns in the Japanese countryside would
have a lawyer: debts, disputes over property, wrangling over inheritances. But
it's not unusual for places like Yakumo, population 19,743, or even Japanese
towns five times its size, to not have a lawyer. In April, Yakumo got its first
lawyer, Katsumune Hirai, as part of an ambitious plan to send them to the
hinterlands.  PAGE A10

PALESTINIAN GROUPS STEP UP ARRESTS

Tensions between the main rival Palestinian groups, Hamas and Fatah, spread from
Gaza to the West Bank with reports of the Fatah-dominated Palestinian Authority
forces detaining more than 50 activists and academics associated with Hamas. The
detentions seemed to be in retaliation for a Hamas sweep against Fatah members
and institutions over the weekend.  PAGE A11

THE ECONOMIC UPSIDE OF PEACE

With its economy stagnating, many people in Syria are coming to believe that
peace with Israel is inevitable -- and necessary. The country, which could once
afford to be serenely indifferent to Western sanctions, is now being forced to
liberalize and open its economy as its oil reserves run low. ''Poverty is
increasing, inequality is increasing, and I believe the street is frustrated,''
a Syrian lawyer said. ''They need peace with all our neighbors.''  PAGE A11

TURKISH LEADER URGES UNITY

At the funeral for 10 of the 17 victims of Sunday's double bombing in Istanbul,
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey called for national unity. ''Our
problem is to maintain unity and togetherness so that our nation can attain a
better position,'' he said. As he spoke, local residents chanted slogans against
a Kurdish separatist group that is suspected in the bombing.  PAGE A12

CHINA MULLS POLLUTION FIXES

The skies in Beijing are still murky from pollution as the Olympic Games draw
nearer and authorities are considering emergency measures during the Games
beyond the traffic restrictions and factory shutdowns that, so far, have failed
to clear the air. The country's state media said that officials might force far
more vehicles off city streets -- possibly 90 percent of the city's total -- and
temporarily close more factories.  PAGE A6

TENSIONS SURROUND SERBIAN RALLY

Some fear a rally called by an ultranationalist party in Belgrade, Serbia, could
turn violent over the likely extradition of Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian
Serb leader arrested last week on war crimes charges. The rally on Tuesday is
being organized by the Radical Party, which has glorified Mr. Karadzic as a hero
and opposes extraditing him to the United Nations tribunal. PAGE A6

national

HATE FOR LIBERALS AND GAYS

Drove Gunman in Tennessee

A man who entered a church in Knoxville, Tenn., on Sunday during services and
shot eight people, killing two, was motivated by a hatred for liberals and
homosexuals, Chief Sterling P. Owen IV, of the Knoxville Police Department said.
During interrogation the man admitted to the shooting and that ''he had targeted
the church because of its liberal leanings and his belief that all liberals
should be killed because they were ruining the country,'' the chief said.   PAGE
A15

A ROUTINE CHECKUP FOR MCCAIN

Senator John McCain said that his dermatologist had removed a spot from his
right cheek and that while it did not appear to be serious she would perform a
biopsy ''just to make sure everything is fine.''   PAGE A14

HOUSTON LAGS ON GOING GREEN

Houston's shimmering skyline may wear the label of the world's energy capital,
but deep in Houston's Dumpsters lies a less glamorous superlative: it is the
worst recycler among the United States' 30 largest cities. Environmental
advocates are pleading for municipal intervention. And some small improvements
-- an organic waste program, for one -- are expected soon. But city officials
say real change will be hard to come by.   PAGE A13

OBAMA RETURNS FOCUS TO U.S. WOES

With the conventions of the two major parties just a month away, Senator Barack
Obama shifted the emphasis of his campaign back to the deteriorating economy
after a weeklong trip abroad. In Washington, he met with a group of 20 prominent
economists, former government officials and business and labor leaders to
discuss problems like vanishing jobs and rising food and fuel costs. Polls show
that the deepening economic slowdown is the issue most on the minds of
Americans.   PAGE A14

PROMISED ROAD PLANS IN JEOPARDY

Gasoline tax revenue is falling so fast that the federal government may not be
able to meet its commitments to states for road projects already under way, the
secretary of transportation, Mary E. Peters, said. She said the short-term
solution would be for the Highway Trust Fund's highway account to borrow money
from the fund's mass transit account, which would require Congressional
approval. It is sure to face opposition.  PAGE A17

AGENCY HALTS STUDENT LOANS

The Massachusetts Educational Financing Authority, which secured more than $500
million in educational loans last year, announced it would not offer loans for
the coming academic year. The authority's executive director said the financing
authority could not obtain money because of disruptions in the capital markets.
PAGE A20

Business

TO ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD,

Via the Middle East

Air carriers around the world are shedding jobs and getting rid of routes in the
face of rising oil costs. Except in the Middle East, where carriers are
aggressively expanding. This allows gulf states to leverage their geographical
position as a crossroads, putting 80 percent of the world's most attractive
markets, like India and China, within reach of nonstop flights.  PAGE C4

THE FAMILY THAT'S SLIMED TOGETHER

Nickelodeon has been around long enough for people who viewed the network as
children to have children of their own. The children-oriented network is trying
to make its schedule more attractive to the parents who were raised on a diet of
slime falling from the sky and gross-out humor by making its Nick at Nite
programming block more family-friendly and reimagining its primetime lineup.
PAGE C8

G.M. ANNOUNCES LAYOFFS

General Motors will eliminate shifts in Moraine, Ohio, and Shreveport, La., and
lay off 1,760 workers to further reduce production of slow-selling pickups and
sport utility vehicles. The moves were expected, as G.M. and other automakers
continue to cope with the drastic shift in consumers' taste to smaller, more
fuel-efficient vehicles.  PAGE C4

CHANGING THE FACE OF THE BRAND

The Insignia, a new vehicle from the General Motors brands Opel and Vauxhall,
was introduced last week  sporting some new insignias, part of a push by G. M.
to show that something new and different is happening with those brands. But how
much will tweaking logos help bolster the struggling automaker?  PAGE C7

metro

OFFICER UNDER INVESTIGATION

After Bicyclist Episode

A New York City police officer was stripped of his gun and badge and assigned to
desk duty pending a Police Department investigation after an amateur online
video surfaced showing him grabbing and pushing a bicyclist to the ground in
Times Square. In court papers, the officer, Patrick Pogan, said the man rode his
bicycle straight into him. But the video clip shows the officer lunging toward
the cyclist.  PAGE B1

A FLAMBOYANT, FITTING FUNERAL

The streets of Harlem were filled with music and pomp during the funeral
procession for Barbara Ann Teer, the founder of the four-decades-old National
Black Theater. The marquee at the Apollo Theater flashed a tribute. There were
African drummers. Doves were released. And there was an elephant. ''She was very
fond of elephants,'' an attendee said.  PAGE B1

Science Times

10 THINGS YOU SHOULDN'T LET RUIN

Your Summer Vacation

Are killer hot dogs keeping you up at night? Do you take the bus every morning
because you're terrified of being swallowed by a wormhole while driving to work?
Not to worry, John Tierney writes: you can scratch these and eight other
anxieties from your worry list.  PAGE F1

ANYTHING BUT CLEAR

The architecture of atoms and molecules in glass, like stained-glass windows in
old churches, is indistinguishable from that of a liquid. Yet the lenses in
eyeglasses do not drip out, they stay put. This paradox still mystifies
scientists, and the theories that are being developed provoke vehement
disagreement.  PAGE F1

MEDICINE'S RACIAL SCHISM

The American Medical Association, the nation's largest and most powerful
physicians' group, is overwhelmingly white. Black physicians have a lesser-known
group, the National Medical Association. Recently a spotlight fell briefly on
this schism. The A.M.A. made a rare public address to the N.M.A. to deliver an
even rarer message: an apology to the nation's black physicians, citing a
century of ''past wrongs.''  PAGE F5

Global Warming Whiplash  F3

Do You Trust Your Doctor?  F6

Treadmills and Hearts  F7

Arts

CALCULATING THE ECONOMICS

Of an Eye for an Eye

At what point is a need for vengeance counterproductive to a society's
development? That's one of the questions posed in a paper published by the
National Bureau of Economic Research, which found that vengeful feelings , like
the preferred punishments for certain crimes, are stronger in poorer countries,
or those that have recently experienced a war or are ethnically or
linguistically fragmented.  PAGE E1

FALLOUT FROM A NIGHTMARISH WAR

The children who endured the long civil war in Uganda are the focus of ''Lord's
Children,'' part of the ''Wide Angle'' series on PBS. Some were kidnapped and
forced to become soldiers. Others were raped. And when the dust settled -- a
cease-fire in 2006 halted the abductions -- they returned to families often
terrified of what they had become. A review by Neil Genzlinger. PAGE E3

HEAVEN AND HASH MARKS

Until recently, the most profitable work produced by Tyndale House Publishers
was the ''Left Behind'' series of apocalyptic novels. But a new advice book by
the Ohio State University head coach football Jim Tressel marks the company's
third best seller that eschewed the Gospels in favor of the gridiron.  PAGE E1

Cribbing From 'Da Vinci Code'  E4

Sports

FOR ARMY STANDOUT,

N.F.L. Is on Hold

Caleb Campbell had been drafted by the Detroit Lions, and was anticipating
training camp and signing his professional contract. But that was before he was
ordered to return to West Point, where he graduated in May, as an officer on
active duty. Campbell was supposed to be able to play under a policy that
allowed individuals with exceptional skills to pursue professional careers while
remaining on active duty, a policy that was recently rescinded.  PAGE D7

FROM PROSPECT TO TRIVIA QUESTION

It was almost a year ago that Mike Bacsik, a former pitcher for the Washington
Nationals, let loose a weak fastball that became Barry Bonds's record-breaking
756th career home run. The anniversary should be generating a lot more buzz, but
it hasn't: Bonds is in baseball purgatory, and Bacsik, who had carved out a nice
side career as a historical footnote, has spent most of his time toiling in the
minor leagues.  PAGE D6

RUSSIA BOLSTERS ITS SPORTS PROGRAMS

Just a few years ago, Russia was only spending a few hundred thousand dollars in
Rossport, the government agency charged with overseeing Russia's athletic
development. But now that it's flush with oil revenues, the country is pumping
much more cash into its sports programs in the hopes of staving off a slide in
its Olympic eminence -- to the tune of $1 billion. PAGE D1

AS THE FAVRE TURNS

The soap opera surrounding Brett Favre's return to the N.F.L. (will he? won't
he? and with whom?) keeps trudging along, even as the team with which he made
his name -- and which reserves his rights -- begins training camp. ''The biggest
thing is, everybody wants a resolution, so everybody can move on to the next
thing,'' a Packers defensive lineman said.  PAGE D7

Obituaries

JAMIEL ALEXANDER CHAGRA, 63

An F.B.I. wanted poster described him as ''a carpet salesman, professional
gambler and narcotics trafficker.'' He was also depicted as the highest of high
rollers, a man who flew in private jets and gambled at roped-off tables in Las
Vegas. He was accused but never convicted of masterminding the assassination of
a federal judge in 1979, and was later convicted of heading a major
drug-smuggling ring and attempting to murder a federal prosecutor.  PAGE B6

MICHAEL BERNIKER, 73

The Brooklyn-born music producer went to Columbia and served in the military
before entering the music industry, and during the course of his career he won
nine Grammy Awards over four decades. He served as producer for acts in myriad
genres, including Latin jazz, spoken word, comedy and classical albums.  PAGE B6

Editorial

THERE WAS SMOKE -- AND FIRE

It was hardly news that the Bush Justice Department has been illegally
politicized, but it was important that the Justice Department finally owned up
to that sorry state of affairs.  PAGE A18

PROSTITUTION AND PREVENTION

By spreading knowledge and devising plans to help at-risk children, the
authorities can put themselves in a position to intervene before troubled
youngsters end up selling their bodies on the streets.  PAGE A18

PAST TIME FOR SPEAKING OUT

Two weeks before he goes to the Beijing Olympic Games, President Bush remains
unacceptably silent about China's crackdown on basic human rights.  PAGE A18

op-ed

DAVID BROOKS

The skills slowdown is the biggest issue facing the country. Rising gas prices
are bound to dominate the fall election because voters are slapped in the face
with them every time they visit the pump. But this slow-moving problem, more
than any other, will shape the destiny of the nation.  PAGE A19

BOB HERBERT

It remains to be seen whether Team Obama, which has already missed some
opportunities, can go on the offensive with the economy.  PAGE A19

UNIDENTIFIED FLYING THREATS

The United States government hasn't looked into U.F.O. sightings since 1969. In
an Op-Ed article, Nick Pope argues that the investigations should resume in
order to detect any earthly aircraft, invisible to radar, that might represent a
threat to national security.  PAGE A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (90%); LAWYERS (90%); HAMAS (90%); EXTRADITION (89%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); BOMBINGS (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(71%); SHOOTINGS (69%); LIBERALISM (69%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (69%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (66%); BUSINESS INTERRUPTIONS (66%); PRIME MINISTERS
(64%); OLYMPICS (62%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (62%); POLITICAL PARTIES (60%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); WAR CRIMES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%)

PERSON: RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN (51%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (74%);
KNOXVILLE, TN, USA (50%)

STATE: TENNESSEE, USA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (67%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); TURKEY (93%); CHINA (92%);
SERBIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); SYRIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             947 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 31, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bluff Called, Karadzic Awaits Trial In U.N. Cell

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Marlise Simons contributed reporting from The Hague,
and Dan Bilefsky from Belgrade, Serbia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 908 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader who was transferred early
Wednesday from Serbia to a jail cell near here, will appear in public court on
Thursday for the first time to answer charges of genocide and war crimes.

Open to spectators and recorded by an official court camera, the hearing will
begin legal proceedings against him, as well as offer a first public glimpse of
the man who evaded capture for 13 years, most recently hiding behind a bushy
beard and white hair as a practitioner of alternative medicine.

Mr. Karadzic, reportedly shorn of his disguise, has said through a lawyer that
he intends to represent himself in the international tribunal here.

The hearing may also indicate how seriously he intends to take the court. A hint
came Wednesday. After Mr. Karadzic's arrest on a bus last week in Belgrade, his
brother told reporters repeatedly that lawyers were challenging the legality of
his transfer to The Hague and had filed an appeal. But on Wednesday one of the
lawyers admitted that no such step had ever been taken.

Goran Petronijevic, a member of the Karadzic legal team, told reporters in
Belgrade, Serbia's capital, that the account of an appeal being mailed from
somewhere in Serbia had been a ruse to stall the extradition and to buy time for
Mr. Karadzic's family to visit him in jail. The family did not see him, but it
will be allowed to visit him in the tribunal jail.

With no appeal in hand, Serbian officials whisked Mr. Karadzic through Belgrade
on Wednesday, hours after thousands of nationalists protested downtown against
his transfer to The Hague, and he was flown to Rotterdam.

He was then taken by a Dutch police helicopter inside the walls of the men's
penitentiary in nearby Scheveningen. Within this compound, invisible from the
road, the United Nations leases a modern independent cellblock, where about 40
inmates are held while facing  charges of committing war crimes during the
Balkan wars of the 1990s.

On his first day here, Mr. Karadzic was informed of his rights and examined by a
doctor, according to a court official. At first, he will be kept separate from
the other prisoners, among them Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims, his former
allies and foes, the official said.

In this jail, which holds people from three sides of violent political
conflicts, newcomers are often isolated at the beginning to let them integrate
slowly. Some are kept on separate floors to prevent them from colluding on
evidence. Eventually Mr. Karadzic and others will be allowed to exercise
together, play games and cook if they do not want jail food, lawyers familiar
with jail procedures said.

Mr. Karadzic's trial is not expected to start for several months, the tribunal's
chief prosecutor, Serge Brammertz, said Wednesday.

If Mr. Karadzic is found guilty of the charges in his indictment, which include
crimes against humanity and genocide, he may face a life sentence. This tribunal
has no death penalty. But he will not serve his sentence in the cellblock run by
the United Nations as a temporary detention center. Other countries have set
aside prison space for tribunal convicts.

For now, Mr. Karadzic will reside somewhere close to the cell where his former
close ally, Slobodan Milosevic, the former Serbian president, spent close to
five years. Mr. Milosevic died here in 2006, before the end of his trial. While
acting as his own lawyer, Mr. Milosevic was given an additional cell to keep his
court documents.

Mr. Karadzic may be given the same amenities if judges permit him to represent
himself,

He will also be able to receive visitors in public spaces that are monitored.
Lawyers, close relatives, children and other select visitors can call at the
jail every day from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Inmates can also reserve private space in
one of three conjugal bedrooms. There are other perks, including newspapers in
Serbo-Croatian, public pay phones in the halls and access to computers, which
are not connected to the Internet. Because of the range of amenities, some
Serbian news organizations have nicknamed the jail the Hague Hilton.

Mr. Karadzic, indicted in 1995, arrives at the busiest period in the history of
the special tribunal for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia. Eight trials are
under way, involving 27 defendants. Mr. Karadzic's presence here is now widely
expected to prolong the life of the tribunal, which was scheduled to close in
2010.

That decision is up to the United Nations Security Council, which created the
court in 1993, during the violent breakup of the former Yugoslavia.

The name of Mr. Karadzic, like that of Gen. Ratko Mladic, his military
commander, who is still a fugitive, has long haunted the court and its
successive prosecutors, who kept the fugitives' pictures on a wanted poster in
their office. For Carla Del Ponte, who stepped down as prosecutor in December,
the campaign for their capture  was almost the main theme of her eight-year
tenure.

During an interview before her departure in December, she said she had counted
on getting custody of General Mladic because he was widely known to be in
Serbia. She said there had been many rumors, but few believable traces of Mr.
Karadzic. In her memoirs, published in Italy this year, she wrote that the West
had lost a number of chances to arrest him and said that she been naive in
believing assurances to her by the Central Intelligence Agency that his capture
was a top priority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Serge Brammertz, left, chief prosecutor for the international
war crimes tribunal, and Olga Kavran, his spokeswoman, at a news conference in
The Hague on Radovan Karadzic's case.(PHOTOGRAPH BY JOHN THYS/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); EXTRADITION (90%); PRISONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE
(89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); ARRESTS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (68%); APPEALS (67%); HELICOPTERS (50%);
RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); ROTTERDAM,
NETHERLANDS (56%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); CROATIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             951 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 1, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karadzic Calmly Hears Tribunal's Charges Of Genocide and War Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS; Graham Bowley contributed reporting from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1378 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Thin, stiff and impeccably polite, Radovan Karadzic declined on Thursday, in his
first appearance before the war crimes tribunal here, to answer charges that he
led Bosnia into an ethnic war that turned to genocide.

Rather, while families of the victims of massacres he is charged with
engineering watched on live television from Bosnia, the former Serb leader
announced that he had been kidnapped three days before his arrest was disclosed
in Belgrade on July 21.

''I was kept in an unknown place, my rights were not told to me, I had no right
to telephone or even to a text message,'' he said, in a 75-minute hearing,
staying mostly low-key with occasional twitches of anger and humor alike.

Seated in the same chair that his old mentor, Slobodan Milosevic, occupied in
his own trial here, Mr. Karadzic also repeated old rumors that the former
American envoy, Richard C. Holbrooke, had brokered a deal with him to evade
justice. Mr. Karadzic said he feared for his life after 13 years as a fugitive
because Mr. Holbrooke had had ''the intention to liquidate me.''

''If Holbrooke still wants my death, because the tribunal has no death sentence,
I wonder if his arm is long enough to reach me here,'' he told the judge,
Alphons Orie.

Despite his odd claims, Mr. Karadzic, in a dark suit and tie, was almost
businesslike. His disguise as a big-bearded and long-haired healer was stripped
away, his demeanor much diminished from his years as the swaggering ideologue
who led the self-proclaimed ministate of the Serb Republic during the Balkan
wars from 1992 to 1995.

In the hearing, Mr. Karadzic, 63, declined a full reading of the indictment
against him: atrocities against civilians that led to charges of genocide, war
crimes and crimes against humanity.

Some experts, still stunned by Mr. Karadzic's sudden appearance after so many
years, said they believed that the charges, even of genocide, might be easier to
prove than the similar counts against Mr. Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader.
After four years on trial, Mr. Milosevic died in 2006 before the court reached a
verdict.

This case will focus mainly on crimes in one country, as opposed to the
Milosevic case, which was enormous in its scope, dealing with wars in three
countries and spanning a decade.

The evidence, experts say, is also much clearer.

Mr. Karadzic, even before the outbreak of war in Bosnia, often declared publicly
that his mission was to ''protect'' Christian Serbs from Bosnian Muslims
threatening to create an Islamic state. He made virulent speeches, warning that
if Bosnia broke away from Yugoslavia, its Muslim population could be decimated.

After the war, the Bosnian Serb forces under his command destroyed many military
records, but NATO troops swept through army barracks and police stations and
nonetheless seized thousands of documents. The prosecution has reams of material
presented at the tribunal in almost two dozen other cases related to Bosnia.
Forensic experts have dug up mass graves. There are intercepts of telephone and
radio conversations between Mr. Karadzic and top politicians and commanders.

''Karadzic was closer to the action than Milosevic,'' said Geoffrey Nice, the
former lead prosecutor in Mr. Milosevic's trial. ''He was there, he was vocal,
he was in charge. Milosevic was contributing from afar, through political and
military support. Karadzic used explicit and damning language in his public
speeches. I don't know if it is enough, but it's very powerful.''

For the court, much is at stake in the trial of this new high-profile defendant,
who will be judged as the tribunal, created in 1993 by the United Nations
Security Council, moves toward closing down. Some see it as a chance for the
tribunal -- often criticized for plodding and overcomplicated cases, Mr.
Milosevic's in particular -- to enhance its record.

''With Karadzic coming in, it is a lot easier for the tribunal to make a strong
and lasting impact,'' said David Kaye, who followed the court as an American
diplomat in The Hague and now teaches law at the University of California, Los
Angeles. ''This is the chance to tell the full story of what happened in Bosnia.
Karadzic had the overall vision, the command structure and the direct
responsibility for wartime events.''

Mr. Karadzic appeared before the court only one day after he was transferred
here from Serbia. Charges against him, followed by an arrest warrant, were first
lodged in 1995. Last week, his lawyers in Serbia had already contended that Mr.
Karadzic had been arrested three days before the capture was announced. Serbian
officials denied this.

Additionally, Mr. Holbrooke, the American diplomat who brokered the peace
agreement that ended the war in 1995, denied the Karadzic allegation that he had
agreed to any deal, calling the accusation ''ridiculous.''

In an interview, Mr. Holbrooke said that in July 1996 he traveled to Belgrade
and over 10 hours of talks negotiated a signed agreement forcing Mr. Karadzic to
resign as the Bosnian Serb leader, with Mr. Milosevic also exerting pressure on
him to do so.

''There was an agreement he would leave power,'' said Mr. Holbrooke. ''He got
nothing in return.''

In the hearing, Judge Orie apologized for the long legal formalities, which
required him to ask questions that seemed obvious -- and allowing Mr. Karadzic a
moment of dry humor.

At one point, the judge, who is Dutch, asked Mr. Karadzic if his family or
others needed to be informed that he was detained at the tribunal prison.

''I don't believe there is anyone who does not know,'' Mr. Karadzic responded
with a smile. Judge Orie briefly smiled back.

Mr. Karadzic declined to enter a plea and said he preferred to wait until the
prosecution had finished making its planned changes to the indictment. Rules
allow him to wait 30 days to make a plea.

The judge ordered the prosecution to disclose its evidence against Mr. Karadzic
as soon as possible and scheduled the next hearing for Aug. 28.

Mr. Karadzic appears in far better health than did Mr. Milosevic, the former
Serbian president, who arrived at the tribunal in 2001 suffering from heart
disease. This caused his trial to be interrupted regularly and hearings to be
reduced to three half-day sessions a week. Mr. Milosevic died in his cell in
2006, before the end of his trial.

''My health is perfect,'' Mr. Karadzic told the judge.

For an efficient trial of Mr. Karadzic, who is held accountable as political
leader and commander in chief, some experts argue that prosecutors should focus
on fewer crimes. The indictment is a 25-page document citing crimes in numerous
locations, most crucially the three-year siege of Sarajevo, which left more than
10,000 civilians dead, and the mass killings at Srebrenica, where nearly 8,000
unarmed men and boys were executed in a weeklong massacre.

But it also lists events in close to 40 municipalities and at least 10 prison
camps.

''The prosecution will have to narrow its case,'' Antonio Cassese, a former
chief judge at the court, said in an interview. ''In any event, the court cannot
satisfy all the victims and prosecute thousands of people in all the places. The
court has to make choices, so it is best to choose for an effective trial.''

One telling document used in other trials and signaling a tragedy in the making
was signed by Mr. Karadzic. It includes instructions to Bosnian Serb military
commanders in March 1995, four months before the mass killings at Srebrenica.
The order directs the army's Drina Corps to break all contact between Srebrenica
and Zepa, two enclaves protected by United Nations troops. ''By planned and
well-thought-out combat operations, create an unbearable situation of total
insecurity, with no hope of further survival or life for the inhabitants of
Srebrenica and Zepa,'' the order said.

The massacre at Srebrenica and the siege of Sarajevo have been thoroughly
documented in other trials. Mr. Karadzic himself has been filmed visiting the
Serbian gun positions that were pounding the civilians of Sarajevo. At
Srebrenica, Mr. Karadzic can argue he did not order the massacre; prosecutors
will have to prove that even if he did not issue such an order, he was kept
informed and could have stopped the killing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Left, Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader, during
a hearing at the Hague while a summary of charges against him is read. Below,
under pictures of victims of the Srebrenica massacre, Muslim women in Bosnia
watched the televised proceedings.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL PHOTO BY JERRY LAMPEN)
(PHOTOGRAPH BY DAMIR SAGOLJ/REUTERS)
 Forensic experts in 1996 working in a mass grave of Muslim men and boys in the
village of Pilica, part of the Srebrenica massacre.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ODD
ANDERSEN/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (83%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); ARRESTS (73%); VERDICTS (68%); RELIGION (62%);
ARMED FORCES (60%); TEXT MESSAGING (55%)

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (77%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             956 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 3, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Black Sites

BYLINE: By ALAN BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2026 words


THE DARK SIDE

The Inside Story of How the War on Terror Turned Into a War on American Ideals.

By Jane Mayer.

Illustrated. 392 pp. Doubleday. $27.50.

Within hours of the attacks on the World Trade Center and the Pentagon on Sept.
11, 2001, Dick Cheney in effect took command of the national security operations
of the federal government. Quickly and instinctively, he began to act in
response to two longstanding beliefs: that the great dangers facing the United
States justified almost any response, whether or not legal; and that the
presidency needed vastly to enhance its authority, which had been unjustifiably
and dangerously weakened in the post-Vietnam, post-Watergate years. George Bush
was an eager enabler, but not often an active architect, of the government's
response to terror. His instinct was to be tough and aggressive in response to
challenges, and Cheney's belligerence fit comfortably with the president's own
inclinations.

In fairness, in the aftermath of the 9/11 attacks and the anthrax scare that
followed, who could not have imagined the worst and contemplated extraordinary
efforts to prevent it? But as Jane Mayer, a staff writer for The New Yorker,
makes clear in ''The Dark Side,'' a powerful, brilliantly researched and deeply
unsettling book, what almost immediately came to be called the ''war on terror''
led quickly and inexorably to some of the most harrowing tactics ever
contemplated by the United States government. The war in Iraq is the most
obvious and familiar result of the heedless ''toughness'' of the new
administration. But Mayer recounts a different, if at least equally chilling,
story: the emergence of the widespread use of torture as a central tool in the
battle against terrorism; and the fierce, stubborn defense of torture against
powerful opposition from within the administration and beyond. It is the story
of how a small group of determined men and women thwarted international and
American law; fought off powerful challenges from colleagues within the Justice
Department, the State Department, the National Security Council and the C.I.A.;
ignored or circumvented Supreme Court rulings and Congressional resolutions; and
blithely dismissed a growing clamor of outrage and contempt from much of the
world -- all in the service of preserving their ability to use extreme forms of
torture in the search for usable intelligence.

Occasional lurid revelations of abuse -- most prominent among them the appalling
photographs of Iraqi detainees in Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, made public in
2004 -- have been widely denounced throughout the world. The president has
expressed outrage and has insisted that the degradation was the work of a few
bad apples who would be appropriately punished. But it was only the pictures
that made Abu Ghraib an aberration. The tactics the president denounced were
precisely those he had authorized and encouraged in the growing network of
secret prisons around the world. The detainees in these scattered sites -- many
of them innocent -- have been held for months and years without charges, without
lawyers, without notification to their families and often without respite from
torture for weeks and months at a time. The Bush administration's response to
the Abu Ghraib scandal was not to stop the behavior, but to try to hide it more
effectively.

No one knows how many people were rounded up and spirited away into these secret
locations, although the number is very likely in the thousands. No one knows
either how many detainees have died once in custody. Nor is there any solid
information about the many detainees who have been the victims of what the
United States government calls ''extraordinary rendition,'' the handing over of
detainees to other governments, mostly in the Middle East, whose secret police
have no qualms about torturing their prisoners and face no legal consequences
for doing so.

This vast regime of pain and terror, inflicted in the name of a war on terror,
rests in large part on the untested belief of a few high-ranking leaders in
Washington that torture is an effective tool for eliciting valuable information.
But there is, Mayer persuasively argues, little available evidence that this
assumption is true, and a great deal of evidence from numerous sources
(including the United States military and the F.B.I.) that torture is, in fact,
one of the least effective methods of gathering information and a likely source
of false confessions. Among the many cases Mayer and other journalists have
chronicled -- including the case of the most notable Al Qaeda operative yet
captured, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed -- the information gleaned from tortured
detainees has produced unreliable and often entirely unusable information. That
many of the interrogations were conducted by American servicemen and -women with
scant training made the likelihood of success even lower. (Some of the
interrogators had no qualms about what they were doing and welcomed being
unconstrained by any laws or rules. ''It was the Camelot of counterterrorism,''
one officer later told a journalist. ''We didn't have to mess with others and it
was fun.'' Others were traumatized by what they had done and seen, and suffered
psychologically as a result.)

The architects of this network of secret prisons and secret torture were a small
but powerful group within the Bush administration. Dick Cheney stood at the
center of the effort but delegated many of its operations to others. The vice
president's counsel (and later chief of staff), David Addington, was a ruthless,
bullying enforcer of the strategy, effectively derailing all challenges by
claiming that everything had been mandated by the president and by dismissing
all legal and moral challenges as naive and weak. John Yoo, a law professor from
the University of California, Berkeley, who worked in the Justice Department's
Office of Legal Counsel, drafted an infamous memo giving legal cover to torture
by simply redefining what torture was -- virtually anything short of deliberate
killing. George Tenet, the eager-to-please C.I.A. director; William Haynes, the
militant general counsel to the Pentagon; Alberto Gonzales, the weak and pliable
White House counsel who later became attorney general: all played vital roles in
the creation and protection of these covert strategies. At the urging of Cheney
-- or his surrogate Addington -- President Bush nullified the Geneva Conventions
and, without publicly stating it, suspended habeas corpus for terror suspects,
thus removing two important impediments to torture. Others worked to undermine
the 1984 international Convention Against Torture, which, under American
leadership, had provided the first explicit definition of what torture was.

Mayer provides a particularly ghoulish description of James Mitchell, a former
military psychologist, who introduced the C.I.A. to a secret military program
that had been designed in the 1950s to teach high-risk personnel to withstand
torture. Known as SERE (Survival, Evasion, Resistance, Escape), it rested on the
belief that inflicting a controlled level of pain and humiliation on those who
might face it in combat would help them survive the real thing if they were
captured. For the C.I.A. after 2001, SERE became not a tool for resisting
torture, but a template for inflicting it -- a template soon adopted by
interrogators in the far-flung ''black sites'' where detainees were imprisoned.
Mitchell dismissed the arguments of F.B.I. agents that his tactics were
ineffective and that he had no experience with the Middle East or Islamic
terrorism. ''Science is science,'' he said. At one point, the F.B.I. agents
collaborating with the C.I.A. on interrogation plans were so alarmed by what
they were hearing that they urged their superiors to arrest Mitchell. Soon after
that, they withdrew from the program altogether. ''We don't do that,'' one of
the F.B.I. agents said. ''It's what our enemies do!''

From the very beginning, there was strong resistance to the regime of torture.
Those who challenged it included journalists like The New York Times's James
Risen and Scott Shane, The Washington Post's Dana Priest, Ron Suskind (the
author of ''The One Percent Doctrine''), The New Yorker's Seymour Hersh and
Mayer herself (who scrupulously credits the work of her many colleagues). Other
opponents were officials in the State Department, the F.B.I., the C.I.A.,
members of Congress of both parties and many career military officers, including
former chiefs of staff. But as Mayer notes, few of them ''had the temerity to
confront Cheney, who clearly was the true source of these policies.'' Among the
most courageous opponents of the use of torture was a small group of lawyers
working within the Bush administration -- conservative men, loyal Republicans,
who in the face of enormous pressure to go along attempted to use the law to
stop what they considered a series of policies that were both illegal and
immoral: Alberto Mora, the Navy general counsel, who tried to work within the
system to stop what he believed were renegade actions; Jack Goldsmith, who
became the head of the Office of Legal Counsel in 2003 and sought to revoke the
Yoo memo of 2002, convinced that it had violated the law in authorizing what he
believed was clearly torture; and Matthew Waxman, a Defense Department lawyer
overseeing detainee issues, who sought ways to stop what he believed to be
illegal and dangerous policies. Waxman summoned a meeting of high-ranking
military officers and Defense Department officials (including the secretaries of
the Army, Navy and Air Force), all of whom supported the restoration of Geneva
Convention protections. Waxman was quickly hauled up before Addington and told
that his efforts constituted ''an abomination.'' All of these lawyers, and
others, soon left the government after being deceived, bullied, thwarted and
marginalized by the Cheney loyalists.

By the end of 2005, those defending the regime of torture were no longer seeking
primarily to protect the search for valuable intelligence. They were fighting
for its survival, in the face of considerable evidence of the failure of SERE
and other programs, because they feared being prosecuted should the program be
halted and exposed. Even releasing detainees whom they knew to be entirely
innocent was dangerous, since once released they could talk. ''People will ask
where they've been and 'What have you been doing with them?''' Cheney said in a
White House meeting. ''They'll all get lawyers.''

There is no happy ending to this sordid and shameful story. Despite growing
political pressure, despite Supreme Court decisions challenging the detainment
policy, despite increasing revelations of the once-hidden program that have
shocked the conscience of the world, there is little evidence that the secret
camps and the torture programs have been abandoned or even much diminished. New
heads of the Defense and Justice Departments have resisted addressing the
torture issue, aware that dozens of their colleagues would face legal jeopardy
should they do so. And the presidential candidates of both parties have so far
shown little interest in confronting the use of torture or recommitting the
country to the Geneva Conventions and to America's own laws and traditions.

The Bush administration is not, of course, the first or only regime to violate
civil liberties. John Adams, Abraham Lincoln, Woodrow Wilson and Franklin
Roosevelt all authorized or tolerated terrible violations of civil and human
rights, all of them in response to great national and global crises. In some
respects, the Bush administration is simply following a familiar path by
responding to real dangers with illegal and deplorable methods. But Jane Mayer's
extraordinary and invaluable book suggests that it would be difficult to find
any precedent in American history for the scale, brutality and illegality of the
torture and degradation inflicted on detainees over the last six years; and that
it would be even harder to imagine a set of policies more likely to increase the
dangers facing the United States and the world.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Dark Side, The (Book)>; Dark Side, The (Book)>

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS BY PETER MENDELSUND) (pg.BR1 and BR8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); TORTURE (88%); WRITERS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%); ANTHRAX (67%); SUPREME COURTS (61%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (61%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (50%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             963 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 5, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

AMBUSH IN CHINA RAISES CONCERNS AS OLYMPICS NEAR

BYLINE: By ANDREW JACOBS; Jake Hooker and Tang Xuemei contributed research.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1269 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


Two men armed with knives and explosives ambushed a military police unit in
China's majority Muslim northwest on Monday. State media reported the attackers
killed 16 officers and wounded 16 others, likely making it the deadliest
outburst of ethnic violence  in China since at least the early 1990s.

The assault took place 2,100 miles from Beijing, but it added to security
concerns in the capital as tens of thousands of foreign athletes, journalists
and spectators begin to arrive for the opening of the Olympic Games on Friday.

Chinese security officials have claimed for months that extremists in the
Xinjiang region, where the dominant ethnic Uighur population is mainly Muslim,
pose a terrorist threat to the Olympics.

Many Western experts say that China has provided little information to back up
its claim that Uighur extremists have the capacity or the intention to stage
major terrorist attacks. Beijing has suppressed ethnic Uighurs and kept Xinjiang
under tight military control primarily to prevent a challenge to Han Chinese
rule in the vast desert region that borders Central Asia, some experts say.

Even so, the brazen attack on a paramilitary police unit in Kashgar,  an ancient
oasis city on the Silk Road that has been a hotbed of unrest, followed a spate
of smaller bombings or attempted bombings elsewhere in China in recent weeks.
The bombings received relatively little attention from the Chinese  and Western
media, but they appear to have rattled the Chinese leadership as  the country
prepares to host a parade of  dignitaries, including President Bush.

The attack also underscores the ethnic instability China faces in its western
regions. In the spring, Tibetans in the southwest erupted in sustained riots
against Chinese rule, prompting the authorities to dispatch tens of thousands of
troops and arrest hundreds of monks and activists accused of promoting the
exiled Dalai Lama or stoking anti-Chinese sentiment, overseas Tibetan groups
say.

China's official Xinhua news agency said Monday that the police had arrested the
two men  responsible for the attack in Kashgar. The agency quoted the police as
saying they suspected that it was a terrorist attack.

Even before the assault, the authorities seemed on alert for plots against the
Games. Beijing has been girded with soldiers, missile launchers and sidewalk
cameras. The heavy surveillance did not prevent a small protest near Tiananmen
Square on Monday by people who said they had not been compensated after their
homes were demolished for a redevelopment project, but a swarm of police
officers rapidly broke it up.

Officials say they remain confident the events will take place without incident.

''We are prepared to deal with any kind of security threat and we are confident
we will have a safe and peaceful Olympic Games,'' said Sun Weide, a spokesman
for the Beijing organizing committee.

Officials of the International Olympic Committee said they were also confident
that security in the capital would be more than adequate when the Games began.
''We all feel the Chinese authorities have done everything possible to assure
the safety and security of everyone attending the Games,'' said Giselle Davies,
a spokeswoman for the I.O.C.

According to Xinhua, two men driving a dump truck rammed it into a brigade of
border patrol police officers as they jogged outside their barracks near the
center of Kashgar, killing or wounding 10 officers. The attackers then jumped
out of the truck, stabbing officers with knives, and then lobbed homemade bombs
at the barracks, which exploded outside the compound, Xinhua said.

Officers, part of the People's Armed Police, a paramilitary guard force,
arrested the assailants, whom they described as Uighurs, ages 28 and 33, but did
not release their names. Xinhua said the arm of one man was badly injured when
an explosive device detonated in his hand. The police later discovered  10 more
such devices and what it described as a ''homemade gun'' in the dump truck.

Images reportedly taken from local Kashgar television and briefly posted on the
Internet showed bodies shrouded in white sheets or on stretchers. The attack,
however, received no mention on the evening news in Beijing.

If the details as reported by Xinhua are accurate, the attack would be the worst
eruption of ethnic violence on Chinese soil since the early 1990s, when China
blamed Muslim separatists for a spate of violent attacks.

In recent years, China has waged an increasingly muscular battle against those
it describes as radical Muslims. The East Turkestan Islamic Movement, a group
listed as a terrorist organization by the United States and China, is blamed for
much of the violence in Xinjiang. The attacks, as recounted by the Chinese
government, often involve bombings of police stations, buses, factories and oil
pipelines.

Human rights advocates say the official accounts are often exaggerated to
justify crackdowns on Uighur advocates.

Dilxat Raxit, a spokesman for the World Uyghur Congress, an exile group based in
Germany, said that the government had been systematically repressing the culture
and religion of Xinjiang residents, and that such policies were radicalizing a
growing number of people. ''These policies are forcing more Uighurs to turn to
more militant protest,'' he said.

Chinese security strategists have cited groups like the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement as the greatest threat to the Olympics. At a news conference last week,
officials said a crackdown on Uighur separatists this year had led to the arrest
of 82 people who the officials said were plotting to disrupt the Games through
acts of terrorism.

Last month, the authorities executed two men and meted out heavy sentences to 15
others who the government said were members of the East Turkestan Islamic
Movement. The men were seized during a raid on what officials said was as a
terrorist training camp. Also last month, the police raided an apartment in
Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang, and shot dead five men who they said were
planning a ''holy war'' against the region's ethnic Han population.

The official media have publicized other acts in recent months, including what
the authorities said was a thwarted attack by three airline passengers who were
planning to crash a Beijing-bound plane.

As in previous cases, the authorities presented little evidence to back up their
claims. Yitzhak Shichor, a professor of East Asian studies at the University of
Haifa in Israel who specializes in the East Turkestan Islamic Movement, voiced
doubt that the attack in Kashgar had been an act of terrorism.

He said he thought the government was trying to continue its vilification of the
group, which, if it exists at all, does not have the personnel or weaponry to
carry out a sophisticated attack. ''I am very skeptical of this kind of
information that comes only from Chinese sources,'' he said.

But Li Wei, a counterterrorism expert at the China Institutes of Contemporary
International Relations, said  he thought the attack bore the hallmarks of
Uighur separatists determined to grab the spotlight when the world was focusing
on China.

It is unclear whether the attack on Monday was related to  a larger plot that
included several smaller bombings in parts of China, including bus explosions in
the cities of Kunming and Shanghai.

Another self-described Uighur Muslim separatist group,  Turkestan Islamic Party,
released a video dated July 23 that featured a statement by a Commander
Seyfullah claiming responsibility for the two bus explosions and making broader
threats against the Olympics.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Security forces kept people away from the site of an attack on a
military police unit on Monday in Kashgar, in northwestern China.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
NIR ELIAS/REUTERS)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); OLYMPICS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); POLICE FORCES
(90%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); JOURNALISM (78%); NEWS REPORTING (78%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); ARRESTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); RIOTS
(73%); OLYMPIC COMMITTEES (70%); DESERTS (67%)

PERSON: DALAI LAMA (58%)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (94%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); NORTHWEST CHINA (93%); XINJIANG, CHINA (90%);
XIZANG, CHINA (73%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); TIBET (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             982 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 14, 2008 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Georgia Files Suit Against Russia, Charging Racial Discrimination

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 354 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Georgia has filed a lawsuit against Russia at the International Court of Justice
in The Hague for its actions in and around the territory of Georgia from 1991 to
2008, the court said in a statement.

Georgia has also consulted the prosecutor's office of the International Criminal
Court, also in The Hague, but has taken no further steps, a court official said.

In recent days, Russia has threatened to file war crimes charges against Georgia
in connection with its attack on the South Ossetian city of Tskhinvali last
week.

Georgia filed the lawsuit late on Tuesday at the Peace Palace in The Hague,
where the court is based, an official said. In its 32-page complaint, Georgia
said that beginning in 1991 Russia, along with separatists in Abkhazia and South
Ossetia  under Moscow's control,  used violent means to caused the mass
expulsion of Georgians as well as other ethnic groups and prevented their return
home.

As a basis for the court's jurisdiction, Georgia invoked the 1965 International
Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, which it
said Russia had violated.

The International Court of Justice is the United Nations highest court and rules
on disputes between nations. No hearing has been scheduled on the case and no
action is expected soon, said a lawyer familiar with the court.

''It will be a long and tortuous process, but Georgia has no option,'' said
Payam Akhavan, a specialist in international law and a member of Georgia's legal
team. ''Georgia has to assert its right under international law.''

At the International Criminal Court, the director of jurisdiction in the
prosecutor's office, Beatrice Le Fraper, said that a representative of the
Georgian government had come ''to provide information and to ask questions.''
But no further steps had been taken, she said.

The criminal court, which is independent of the United Nations, deals with war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. Ms. Le Fraper said the court had
jurisdiction over matters  on Georgian territory because the country was a full
member of the court, having ratified its statute.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (94%); SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
JURISDICTION (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (74%); ETHNIC GROUPS (73%); RACE & RACISM (72%); ETHNICITY (68%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (68%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (91%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (58%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (58%)

COUNTRY: GEORGIA (98%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             990 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 17, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Humanitarian Impulses

BYLINE: By GARY J. BASS.

Gary J. Bass, a Princeton professor, is the author of ''Freedom's Battle: The
Origins of Humanitarian Intervention,'' which will be published by Alfred A.
Knopf this month.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1002 words


The long overdue sight of Radovan Karadzic in The Hague facing trial for
genocide is a useful reminder of wars past. In 1995, after three and a half
years of killing, an American-led NATO bombing campaign helped stop Karadzic's
atrocities and turned the Bosnian Serb leader into a fugitive. But do the
humanitarian interventions typified by America's interventions in Bosnia and
Kosovo have a future? Even as Darfur bleeds, Iraq has become a grim object
lesson in the dangers of foreign adventures. The former Secretary of State
Madeleine K. Albright recently wrote that ''many of the world's necessary
interventions in the decade before the invasion [of Iraq] -- in places like
Haiti and the Balkans -- would seem impossible in today's climate.''

And yet somehow the idea of humanitarian intervention remains intact. In the
2000 presidential race, both George W. Bush and Al Gore said they would not have
intervened to halt the genocide in Rwanda. But today, John McCain says the
United States has an obligation to stop genocide when it can do so effectively,
and Barack Obama has made genocide prevention a signature issue. He has
surrounded himself with advisers haunted by America's failure to stop the
Rwandan genocide and regularly calls for saving Darfur.

How can this be? For many Europeans, there is a simple explanation: the United
States has learned nothing. Rather than recognizing the stark limitations of
military power, Americans are promising again to remake the world. Infinitely
distractable, the United States plunged into Iraq before it had stabilized
Afghanistan; now, while both countries are still hanging by a thread, it may be
on to Darfur. Humanitarian intervention, in short, seems to many a distinctively
American idea -- and not in a good way. During the Somalia intervention in 1992,
Henry A. Kissinger wrote that ''no other nation'' except the United States had
ever asserted that ''humane concerns'' matter so much ''that not only treasure
but lives must be risked to vindicate them.''

But a look back at history shows this to be a caricature. In fact, Europeans
were backing humanitarian interventions almost two centuries ago, while
Americans were often the ones who objected. Throughout the 19th century, people
in Britain, France and Russia urged the dispatch of troops to stop killings in
places like Poland and Bulgaria -- even when doing so undermined the national
interest. Some of the most celebrated European names -- Victor Hugo, William
Wilberforce, Anthony Trollope, Oscar Wilde -- demanded action. The telegraph and
newspapers confronted readers with horrific stories from remote lands -- a
forerunner to the famous ''CNN effect'' in which televised images of suffering
prompt the call for rescue.

The result was actual interventions in Syria and Naples and, perhaps most
spectacularly, Greece. When Greek nationalists rose up against Ottoman rule in
1821, much of the British public rallied to their cause, galvanized by press
reports of Ottoman atrocities. This was supremely inconvenient for the British
government, which had a clear imperial interest in supporting the Ottoman Empire
as a bulwark against Russian expansion. But the London Greek Committee lobbied
the government, sent money and weapons to the Greeks and dispatched men,
including Lord Byron, then probably the most famous poet in Europe, to Greece to
fight. Byron died of fever there. (Imagine Bono fighting in Darfur today.)
Finally, in 1827, the British Navy, alongside French and Russian ships, sank
much of the Ottoman Navy in Greece -- helping to secure the creation of today's
independent Greece.

In contrast, the United States was rarely moved by humanitarianism alone. While
Thomas Jefferson, Daniel Webster and countless Americans thrilled to the Greek
cause, Secretary of State John Quincy Adams refused to act: America, he famously
said, ''does not go abroad, in search of monsters to destroy.'' There was
widespread American outrage at the 1915 Armenian genocide, which Theodore
Roosevelt called ''the greatest crime of the war.'' But Woodrow Wilson dared not
risk entering World War I at the time, and his secretary of state, Robert
Lansing, secretly admitted that his department was ''withholding from the
American people the facts now in its possession'' -- an official cover-up of
genocide.

Humanitarian intervention, in other words, is not the property of the United
States or the generation of liberal hawks who championed Balkan interventions in
the 1990s. For better or worse, it is best understood as an idea that's common
to the big democracies on both sides of the Atlantic. Canada has promoted the
principle of an international ''responsibility to protect'' endangered
civilians. Europe has a fresh crop of foreign ministers who -- following their
19th-century predecessors -- support humanitarian intervention: Bernard Kouchner
of France argued for delivering aid to cyclone victims in Myanmar by force if
necessary, and David Miliband of Britain championed the faltering United
Nations-African Union peacekeeping mission in Darfur on a February trip to
Beijing. And in Berlin, Barack Obama won German cheers and applause by saying,
''The genocide in Darfur shames the conscience of us all.''

Of course, the real test will come when George W. Bush is gone and Americans and
Europeans have to turn those cheers into policy. It's not at all clear that
European publics are outraged by abuses in Darfur the way they were once
outraged by massacres in Greece, Syria and Bulgaria. When the next president
takes office, America will still have troops in Afghanistan and Iraq and will
inevitably be more eager for European soldiers to deploy in Afghanistan than in
Darfur. In August 1992, a promising presidential candidate named Bill Clinton
said, ''If the horrors of the Holocaust taught us anything, it is the high cost
of remaining silent and paralyzed in the face of genocide.'' As the Rwandans
found out, it's easier to state historical lessons than to apply them.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: THE MARCH OF THE WOODEN SOLDIERS: ''Men march from west to east,
killing their fellow creatures, and this event is accompanied by phrases about
the glory of France, the baseness of England, and so onIs there any sort of
combined action which could not find justification in political unity, or in
patriotism, or in the balance of power, or in civilization.'' Leo Tolstoy, ''War
and Peace''(Photograph by Lynsey Addario)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(89%); IRAQ WAR (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (77%); BOMBINGS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (64%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%); BARACK OBAMA (57%); AL GORE (57%); JOHN MCCAIN
(57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); RWANDA
(92%); KOSOVO (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (90%); NETHERLANDS (88%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); HAITI (79%); SYRIA
(79%); BULGARIA (77%); GREECE (73%); ENGLAND (67%)

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             995 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 17, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paperback Row

BYLINE: By ELSA DIXLER

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; BROWSING BOOKS; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 860 words


RUN,by Ann Patchett.(Harper Perennial, $14.95.) Patchett's prize-winning novel
''Bel Canto'' explored the interactions among a group of hostages and captors
during an incident in South America. Here the disparate characters all belong to
one family -- that of a former mayor of Boston, who adopted two black babies
(now university students), and their birth mother and her young daughter --
whose lives reconnect in the midst of a snowstorm. Interracial adoption, family
allegiances and political ambition are among the novel's themes.

LENIN'S PRIVATE WAR: The Voyage of the Philosophy Steamer and the Exile of the
Intelligentsia,by Lesley Chamberlain.(Picador, $18.) In September 1922, a ship
full of writers and intellectuals left Petrograd, taking away an independent
worldview the new Soviet regime would not tolerate. Chamberlain describes the
''paper civil war'' in which the Bolsheviks closed independent journals and
purged universities, and ''brings these forgotten figures back to life with
great skill and sympathy,'' William Grimes wrote in The Times; the voyage was an
indication of what was to come.

THE EXCEPTION,by Christian Jungersen. Translated by Anna Paterson.(Anchor,
$15.95.) The central characters in Jungersen's novel work together at the Danish
Center for Information on Genocide, researching atrocities around the world.
When two of them receive anonymous death threats, suspicion falls on their
colleagues, and the office becomes ''a crucible in which the reader is offered
no less than a profound and unsettling examination of evil,'' our reviewer,
Marcel Theroux, said. He praised the ''hugely empathetic imagination behind this
novel'' and its ''rich and contradictory accounts of what evil is.''

THE BEST OF FRIENDS: Two Women, Two Continents, and One Enduring Friendship,by
Sara James and Ginger Mauney.(Harper, $14.95.) The subjects of this lively dual
memoir speak in alternating chapters, describing a closeness that began during
their Virginia childhoods and going on to discuss work, love and family. In the
Book Review, Heather Byer found the women's adventures fascinating, but noted
that the ''drive to explore and succeed shaped these women'' and wished that the
topic of ambition had been addressed more directly.

JAMES MADISON: And the Struggle for the Bill of Rights,by Richard
Labunski.(Oxford, $15.95.) This well-researched history focuses on the years
from 1787 to 1789, during which Madison played a major role in shepherding the
Constitution into existence. Labunski's account of Madison's involvement in the
creation of the Bill of Rights is fascinating; ''No other person in the nation's
history did so much for which he is appreciated so little,'' he writes. A
MAGNIFICENT CATASTROPHE: The Tumultuous Election of 1800, America's First
Presidential Campaign,by Edward J. Larson.(Free Press, $15.) The first contested
presidential election, in 1800, was marked by serious policy differences and
personal rivalries -- and by many dirty tactics that modern voters will
recognize. The participants ''could write like angels and scheme like demons,''
Larson declares in this dramatic narrative.

THE SABOTAGE CAFE,by Joshua Furst.(Vintage Contemporaries, $14.95.) A young
woman flees her suburban home for the seedy Minneapolis neighborhood where her
mother lost her way in the 1980s, in a novel that our reviewer, Field Maloney,
called an ''urban blight pastoral.'' He said it ''suggests that each generation
is condemned to live out its parents' unresolved stories.''

LEONARD WOOLF: A Biography,by Victoria Glendinning.(Counterpoint, $16.95.)
Woolf's ''life, character and career have been hardly considered except in
relation to his wife's,'' Glendinning writes in this readable biography. She
redresses the balance, exploring Woolf's accomplishments as a writer, publisher,
journal editor and political figure (he was a Labor Party activist).

TO THE CASTLE AND BACK,by Vaclav Havel. Translated by Paul Wilson.(Vintage,
$15.95.) ''I was unable, nor did I wish, to write a full-blown memoir,'' Havel
explains in the preface to the English edition of his ''strange little book.''
But feeling that ''I owed people an account of some kind,'' he ''decided to
fashion a special kind of collage.'' This collection of brief anecdotes and
commentaries moves between past and present, illuminating his personality and
beliefs. (Interestingly, he thought Hillary Clinton would make a ''wonderful
president.'')

THE BESTIARY,by Nicholas Christopher.(Dial, $14.) In prose that often has the
feel of incantation, Christopher (a poet as well as a novelist) describes a
quixotic quest for a renegade medieval religious encyclopedia dedicated to the
beasts that were barred from Noah's ark. The novel is ''erudite, lyrical and
breathlessly paced,'' Ligaya Mishan wrote in the Book Review. ''Everything is  a
little larger than life, and all the more interesting for it.''

THE NARCISSIST'S DAUGHTER,by Craig Holden.(Simon & Schuster, $14.) A cynical,
ambitious young medical student trying to transcend his working-class roots
seduces first his boss's wife and then the boss's daughter in this tautly
plotted thriller.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (91%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%);
WRITERS (78%); CHILDREN (76%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (76%); HISTORY (76%); STUDENTS
& STUDENT LIFE (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); ADOPTION (71%);
RACE & RACISM (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (90%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); SOUTH AMERICA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             996 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 18, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections: For the Record

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; 4A; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 84 words


An article on Wednesday about a ruling by the Nevada Equal Rights Commission
that a health club discriminated by charging men more for membership than women
misstated the position that the American Civil Liberties Union of Nevada has
taken on the issue. Although the group indeed agreed with one assessment that
price differences based on sex were a lawful business strategy under current
statute, the union does not believe that such practices should be legal, and has
in fact sought to change the statute.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(90%); COMPANY STRATEGY (52%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%)

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             997 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 19, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Terrorists, a War on Aid Groups

BYLINE: By SAMANTHA POWER.

Samantha Power, a professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, is
the author of ''Chasing the Flame: Sergio Vieira de Mello and the Fight to Save
the World.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1492 words


FIVE years ago, at roughly 4:30 p.m. on Aug. 19, 2003, in Baghdad, a suicide
bomber in a flatbed truck pulled up outside the lightly fortified office of the
United Nations's leading diplomat, Sergio Vieira de Mello, and detonated a
cone-shaped bomb the size of a large man. The bomb was laced with hand grenades
and mortars, and it carried more than a thousand pounds of explosives. Its force
was so fierce that it shook the American-controlled Green Zone, three miles
away.

While many United Nations officials were killed instantly, Mr. Vieira de Mello
was not. For more than three hours, he lay trapped beneath the collapsed roof
and floors of the three-story building, as he asked about the fates of his
colleagues and complained about the pain in his legs. Although the Bush
administration had not equipped American forces to respond to large-scale
terrorist attacks on civilian targets, several soldiers heroically risked their
lives to save him, submerging themselves in the sweltering, crumbling wreckage.

But without proper equipment, they were forced to rely on their hands and
helmets, along with a makeshift pulley system constructed out of a woman's straw
handbag and an office curtain rope. Mr. Vieira de Mello died, as did 21 other
people from 11 countries. Among the dead were experts in conflict resolution,
humanitarian assistance and development work. More than 150 people were severely
injured. Survivors of the attack and devastated colleagues branded the day the
United Nations's 9/11.

Just as we Americans tried to make sense of our tragedy, United Nations
officials, nongovernmental workers and world leaders grappled with applying the
lessons of August 19. But five years later -- and less than a week after Taliban
forces in Afghanistan killed three female educators and a driver with the
International Rescue Committee -- the individuals who carry out vital
humanitarian and development work for the United Nations and nongovernmental
organizations have never been more at risk.

The Baghdad bombing made it clear that the United Nations and humanitarian
groups had moved from the 1990s, when their flags no longer offered them
protection, to a phase in which their affiliations made them outright targets of
Al Qaeda and other violent extremists.

Al Qaeda and other groups have said that the United Nations is a priority
target. In November 2001, Osama bin Laden declared, ''Under no circumstances
should any Muslim or sane person resort to the United Nations. The United
Nations is nothing but a tool of crime.'' Last year, Al Qaeda specifically
denounced the humanitarian agencies of the United Nations as ''direct enemies
aiming to change the fabric of Muslim society.''

United Nations officials have recently received specific threats in Afghanistan,
Algeria, Iraq, Lebanon, Somalia and Sudan. In December, a Qaeda suicide strike
in Algeria killed 17 United Nations workers and injured another 40. The
after-action report on the Algeria attack sounded helpless: ''The U.N. is under
an extremist threat. The threat could be carried out anywhere at any time. There
is no U.N. capacity to predict attacks.''

Mr. Vieira de Mello's political team had come to Iraq in 2003 in order to hasten
the end of the American occupation, but this proved to matter little to a man
known as Abu Omar al-Kurdi, who helped Al Qaeda plan the attack. ''A lot of
Islamic countries have been through injustices and various occupations and
foreign troops using the U.N. resolutions,'' he said afterward, referring to the
resolutions of the United Nations Security Council.

By this logic the 140,000 unarmed, civilian personnel who do political,
humanitarian, development and human rights work for the United Nations would be
blamed for the Security Council's actions and inactions (over which these civil
servants have little say).

The killing of the aid workers in Afghanistan last week showed how aid groups,
too, are being lumped with Western governments and military forces. In claiming
responsibility for the attack, the Taliban posted a statement on the Internet
saying it held the three Western women responsible for NATO's killing of 50
civilians in a wedding party in July.

United Nations officials and aid workers who choose to work in conflict zones
have always exposed themselves to banditry, crime and violence. But the
assaults, kidnappings and killings of humanitarians have more than doubled in
the past five years -- precisely when independent humanitarian, reconstruction
and development assistance has been urgently needed in places like Afghanistan
and Iraq.

So what, then, should governments, the United Nations and humanitarian
organizations do to help these workers continue to provide life-saving
assistance in perilous circumstances?

First, in some places where local authorities are unable to prevent Al Qaeda and
other violent extremists from operating, the United Nations and other aid
organizations may have no choice but to reduce their physical presence. The Bush
administration bypassed the Security Council before the war in Iraq, so
Europeans governments and Secretary General Kofi Annan wanted to send Mr. Vieira
de Mello and the United Nations's ''A-Team'' to Baghdad partly to remind the
world of the organization's continued relevance.

After the Aug. 19 attack, the United Nations and aid organizations must have
more tangible, urgent reasons for placing unarmed civilians in the most
dangerous parts of the world. Often humanitarian groups are doing life-saving
work, but too often they succumb to pressure from local governments, who want to
demonstrate that their countries are safe for foreign investment, and from big
donors, who have pet causes that don't always merit risking the lives of
workers.

Already, many United Nations agencies and nongovernmental organizations have
rightly started to ''nationalize'' their foreign field operations by sending
conspicuous Westerners home. More than 75 percent of United Nations personnel
around the world are local nationals, and on the eve of last week's attack on
the International Rescue Committee, all but 10 members of the organization's
staffof nearly 600 in Afghanistan were Afghans.

While this is a positive trend, 80 percent of United Nations civilians killed in
the last 15 years have been local staff. Their welfare must generate the same
urgent debate over security trade-offs as that of their international
colleagues.

Second, the 192 countries that are part of the United Nations must spend
substantially more money on security for the organization's missions. Before the
Baghdad attack five years ago, member states consistently resisted making
significant investments in United Nations security. Some believed the terror
threat was a mere construct of President George W. Bush, while others believed
nobody would dare target the United Nations. It is shocking to note that the
after-action report on Al Qaeda's attack in Algeria last year pointed to many of
the same financial constraints and managerial dysfunction that undermined the
security of the United Nations mission in Baghdad five years ago.

The Algiers tragedy caused the resignation of the under secretary-general for
safety and security, David Veness -- a Scotland Yard counterterrorism specialist
who had been hired because of the August 19 bombing. But an  individual cannot
corral governments into spending their money and political capital on security
that seems only distantly related to theirown. The General Assembly must vote to
have security for field missions paid by regularly assessed dues rather than by
voluntary contributions.

And finally, while many global terrorist networks cannot be deterred, their
plans can be thwarted when international organizations and aid groups get the
cooperation of their host countries. Often the safety of unarmed humanitarians
will be determined by whether a host country will deny sanctuary to militants,
share intelligence with humanitarian groups, or offer protection to their
facilities.

When the host country ignores requests for high-level security assistance, as
Algeria did last year, the United Nations should be prepared to suspend its
programs or to withdraw altogether. In collapsed states where the host
government has only partial control of its territory, that host still has a duty
to share what information it has and to be explicit about the gaps in its
knowledge. And when United Nations-mandated international security forces are
sent, the world's governments must contribute the troops, equipment and
intelligence they need to deliver professional service.

We cannot return to a pre-8/19 world any more than it can return to a pre-9/11
one. Neither the blue flag nor the red cross is enough to protect humanitarians
in an age of terror. But five years after August 19 we owe it to those who died
-- and to those whom humanitarians have saved -- to do far more to protect the
protectors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY DANIEL STOLLE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (86%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); TALIBAN (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (75%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); SUICIDE (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (62%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (52%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ALGERIA (92%);
SOMALIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             998 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 19, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Battered Villages, Georgians Tell of Looting and Worse, if They Dare to Speak

BYLINE: By C. J. CHIVERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1243 words

DATELINE: KARALETI, Georgia


The young Georgian woman stood behind the entrance of a darkened home. Only her
dark brown eyes were visible, peering from a mail slot at strangers walking
toward the door.

''Peaceful people!'' she cried in relief, and swung the door inward, revealing
two families standing in the shadows of their looted home. They had little food.
Their house had been ransacked.

For more than a week, the villages on the roads running south from Tskhinvali,
the capital of South Ossetia, some 20 miles to Gori, a central Georgian city now
under Russian occupation, have been a corridor of grief, violence and crime.

The roads cross from the mountainous Ossetian enclave to territory that Georgia
had controlled since the war between the two sides settled into a cease-fire in
the 1990s.

Their asphalt lanes serve as paths through a patchwork of villages reflecting
central Georgia's ethnic mix: Many villages were Georgian, many were Ossetian,
and many were mixed, a blurry human boundary along a long-standing military
front.

But as the Russian armored columns drove south in early August, smashing the
Georgian military from their path as they burst out of the enclave and seized
Georgia's main highway, parts of this patchwork were swiftly and violently
rearranged.

First, civilians were subject to rocket and artillery barrages. Then, once the
Georgian military retreated so swiftly that it abandoned its dead, the Georgian
civilians in and near South Ossetia faced a wave of retaliation and
opportunistic crime.

Since a cease-fire between Russia and Georgia began last week, the area has
remained closed.

It is a military zone sealed off by Russian military checkpoints, a land broken
by roaming bands of looters that operated behind the Russian Army and made
eerily empty by depopulation caused by flight. The Kremlin has allowed only
official tours for journalists, accompanied by government minders, of the
region, which Georgia has claimed endured organized intimidation and ethnic
cleansing.

The tens of thousands of refugees who staggered out to Tbilisi, Georgia's
capital, took with them accounts of mass looting, of arson and, on what thus far
seems a smaller scale, of killing on ethnic lines.

The Ossetians, in their capital, have claimed in turn to have been subject to
Georgian efforts at ethnic cleansing, and accused President Mikheil Saakashvili
of war crimes. But the war on the ground, after setbacks the first day, surged
in their favor with Russian help, and Ossetian civilians flowed southward into
Georgia proper, as Georgians fled.

On Monday, three journalists from The New York Times gained unaccompanied access
to four of these villages -- Akhaldaba, Variani, Shindisi and Karaleti --
providing an unfiltered, though limited, view of the ill fortune and punishments
endured by the civilian Georgian population caught in the war.

The villages are in the southern part of the area where Georgia claims ethnic
cleansing occurred and do not include any of the villages from which the most
severe and chilling allegations have come. They also constitute a small area of
the entire territory.

But the scenes suggested that ethnic anger and a sustained, often unchecked
period of looting reached nearly to the boundary of Gori, the city astride the
highway that has been under a Russian-enforced martial law.

Only in Akhaldaba, just outside Gori, where food was running short Monday
because the village was still cut off,  did the residents say that they had not
faced privations beyond the initial barrages of artillery or rocket fire.

In Variani, further up the road, the scene was bleaker. The Rev. Tadeoz Kebadze,
the priest at a small Georgian Orthodox church, said that after the rocket
attacks had come rounds of what he called ''lawless marauders.'' More than 1,200
of the village's roughly 1,500 people had fled, he said.

In Shindisi, the families gathered for a bus carrying sacks of rice and flour
said they were too afraid to speak. One old man had a badly beaten face. When
asked what had happened, another man answered in his place: ''Nothing happened
to him.''

About 90 percent of the town's residents had fled, a village elder said. The
fear was palpable in those who remained. Many people trembled; their bloodshot
eyes looked as if they had been crying for days. Out of earshot, a few men
pulled a reporter aside.

''They stole everything,'' one said, of the looters.

He placed the blame on Ossetian looters and not Russian Army soldiers. During
the day, three families said that the looters had appeared afraid of the Russian
troops and had not often operated around them, although journalists in the past
10 days have seen looters intermingled at times with Russian units.

Almost all the people interviewed asked that their names be withheld, out of
fear of reprisal while they lived in the lawless zone. Three were so reflexively
jumpy by the experiences of the past week that they dashed into the remains of a
store at the sound of an approaching car.

The events the residents described underscored how hard it is to assess the
scope and scale of the violence and crime, and eventually to assign precise
blame. There is no clear estimate yet either of the number of dead and injured
or of the number of refugees.

Some Georgian residents said they had been robbed in repeated cycles of home
invasion: Three or four armed men would show up with a truck or car, rush
through the house and cart off whatever they desired, and then go away. Later,
another car would arrive with a different gang.

This went on for days, and apparently was committed by a legion of criminals.
But assessing the origins of each individual offense was difficult. Victims
spoke of looters from Ossetia, Russia, and, in one case, Chechnya.

Complicating matters, two men said that looting had been conducted by their
neighbors. And while some families said Russian troops had helped restrain the
looting, on the approaches to Karaleti three Times journalists saw a Russian
ambulance crew trying to pack the ambulance with items being yanked from a
house.

Many residents also said that the looting had subsided in the past two days. It
was an open question whether this indicated that security had improved or simply
that there was little left to steal.

Not a single parked car was visible here in Karaleti, except those ruined by
collisions or gunfire. In Variani, one aging car sputtered through the square in
front of the church, and residents said the only other car in the village
escaped being stolen because it was out of gas. In two other villages, no cars
were seen. Two families said they knew of no one in town who still had a
television; all had been stolen.

Georgian refugees said the destruction grew worse northward along the road. But
already in Karaleti,  there were signs that armed men had set houses and
buildings on fire, although such depredations were less widespread than what
refugees have described in villages nearer to the Russian border.

Dzhumbert Parkashvili described a much darker event. His brother, he said, had
been kidnapped by a group of men. He had been standing outside during a lull in
the looting when a gang of armed men seized them all.

''We don't know who took them,'' he said. ''Several of them spoke Russian,
several of them spoke Ossetian.''

Mr. Parkashvili fell silent and then began to shudder and weep. ''It was five
days ago, and no one knows anything about where they took him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Georgian woman in her doorway in Karaleti, a village near
Gori, a city under Russian occupation. Houses there were ransacked after Russian
forces advanced from South Ossetia.
 A Georgian man near a burned-out building in Karaleti on Monday. Rocket and
artillery fire struck villages near Gori before residents faced a wave of
retaliation and opportunistic crime.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY JOAO SILVA FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (88%); REFUGEES (77%); ARMIES (76%); ARSON (75%); VIOLENT
CRIME (75%); POPULATION DECLINE (72%); WAR CRIMES (70%)

PERSON: MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI (58%)

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%); TBILISI, GEORGIA (78%)

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); GEORGIA (96%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1003 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 23, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

French Premier Backs Parliamentary Vote on Deployment in Afghanistan

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Responding to new concerns about the French military presence in Afghanistan
after the deaths of 10 soldiers there in a Taliban ambush, Prime Minister
Francois Fillon said on Friday that he would support a parliamentary vote in
September on the troop deployment in line with recent constitutional changes.

Parliament, which is dominated by the conservative party of President Nicolas
Sarkozy and Mr. Fillon, is expected to approve the continued involvement of
French troops. But the vote is a gesture to public concern. It would take place
after a parliamentary debate on Afghanistan beginning Sept. 22.

The vote would take place under new rules requiring parliamentary approval for
any military deployment overseas that lasts more than four months. Mr. Fillon
would apply the new rules to the Afghan deployment, even though it began before
the constitutional changes were made, in order to hold the vote.

On Tuesday, Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner and Defense Minister Herve Morin
will testify before a special joint session of the foreign and defense
committees of the lower house of Parliament on France's Afghanistan policy.

Mr. Sarkozy has strongly defended the need for France to fight the Taliban in
Afghanistan alongside its Western allies as part of the fight against terrorism
and for  the  rights of Afghan women. But his promise in April to commit an
additional 700 French troops, bringing the total to nearly 3,000, was not
popular.

After the ambush this week in which 10 French soldiers were killed and 21
wounded, the worst death toll for French forces in a military attack since 1983,
the French news media have lavished attention on Afghanistan, driving Georgia
and Russia off the front pages. The dead, the wounded and their families have
received plenty of coverage, and Mr. Sarkozy presided over an elegant memorial
service on Thursday at the Invalides.

''We don't have the right to lose there,'' Mr. Sarkozy said. France ''is not a
country like others,'' he said. The dead, he said, ''gave their lives, far from
their country, to do their duty, for freedom of the rights of man, for the
universal values that are at the heart of our republic.'' Mr. Sarkozy said the
soldiers were engaged ''in an essential battle against barbarism, obscurantism
and terrorism.''

An opinion poll published Friday in Le Parisien, taken by the CSA polling agency
after the deaths, showed that 55 percent of respondents wanted France to leave
Afghanistan, while about 36 percent said France should stay.

But those numbers are not very different from another opinion poll taken by IFOP
in early April, which found 55 percent were opposed to reinforcing the French
troops already in Afghanistan. Only 51 percent thought international forces
should be in Afghanistan at all. Both polls interviewed samples of 1,000 people
over 18.

French and NATO officials have denied reports from a wounded soldier, published
in Le Monde, that the French were fired on by allied forces and that help was
unduly late in arriving.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (94%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); VOTERS &
VOTING (89%); POLLS & SURVEYS (89%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (89%); WAR ON TERROR
(78%); TERRORISM (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); APPROVALS (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); CONSERVATISM
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (65%)

PERSON: FRANCOIS FILLON (90%); NICOLAS SARKOZY (79%); HERVE MORIN (58%); BERNARD
KOUCHNER (58%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1013 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fair Trial Unlikely, Karadzic Argues

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 133 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


The former Bosnian Serb leader, Radovan Karadzic, has called for the dismissal
of charges against him of genocide and crimes against humanity because, he says,
negative publicity has made a fair trial impossible.

In a three-page filing dated Sunday  and released on Tuesday, he said any
presumption of innocence had been ''reduced to a joke'' by what he called
''demonization in the media.''

On Friday he will appear for the second time before the International Criminal
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia to enter pleas to answer 11 charges.

Mr. Karadzic was extradited to The Hague after his arrest in Serbia in July
after 13 years on the run. He is charged with genocide in connection with
masterminding atrocities, including the slaughter of nearly  8,000 Bosnian
Muslims in Srebrenica in  1995.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); ARRESTS (73%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (68%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (91%); SERBIA (91%);
NETHERLANDS (68%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1015 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Saakashvili's Statement on Russia' Action

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 853 words


Here is the written statement by the president of Georgia, Mikheil Saakashvili,
concerning Russia's recognition of the breakaway regions of South Ossetia and
Abkhazia as independent of Georgia, as released in English by his office on
Tuesday.

The Russian Federation's actions are an attempt to militarily annex a sovereign
state -- the nation of Georgia. This is in direct violation of international law
and imperils the international security framework that has ensured peace,
stability and order for the past 60 years.

Russia's decision today confirms that its invasion of Georgia was part of a
broader, premeditated plan to redraw the map of Europe. Russia today has
violated all treaties and agreements it has previously signed.

Russia's actions have been condemned in the strongest possible terms by the
entire international community, which has reaffirmed its support for Georgia's
territorial integrity. The Government of Georgia is grateful for the world's
support.

The regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia are recognized by international law as
being within the borders of Georgia.

Today, by its actions, the Russian Federation is seeking to validate the use of
violence, direct military aggression, and ethnic cleansing to forcibly change
the borders of a neighboring state.

Russia's refusal to withdraw its military forces from Georgia -- and its attempt
to annex two regions of Georgia -- is in direct violation of the E.U.-brokered
cease fire to end Russia's invasion and occupation of Georgia.

The two regions in question have been de-populated by conflict and continue to
be subject to widespread ethnic cleansing by Russia and its proxies -- as
confirmed by the United Nations and other international bodies.

These are areas where the local populations -- simply because of their
nationality -- have been chased out, with the direct intervention of the Russian
Federation.

The few civilians who remain in these regions have been given Russian passports
en masse, in violation of international law and norms, making a mockery of the
principle of ''right to protect.''

One such expulsion took place in 1993 in Abkhazia. Others took place last week
in South Ossetia and in Upper Abkhazia/the Kodori Gorge.

I remind you that before the first conflict, more than 525,000 people lived in
Abkhazia. Today less than 150,000 do.

I remind you that ethnic Georgians in South Ossetia have been systematically
forced to flee that territory due to Russia's invasion. The attacks on ethnic
Georgians, both inside and outside the conflict zones, are continuing.

The ethnic cleansing is something that the local rebel separatists are proud to
announce -- and which Russia, through its actions, is attempting to legalize.

Is it legal to remove ethnic groups from their homes using violence and terror?

Is it moral or legal for an ethnically cleansed area to be rewarded with
independence by a neighbor?

If intervention in Kosovo was about stopping ethnic cleansing, today's decision
by the Russian Federation is about rewarding and legalizing ethnic cleansing.

Russia has turned logic and morality on its head.

Russia's decision is therefore a direct and grave challenge to the international
order. This is a challenge for the entire world. Not just Georgia.

It means that today, annexation and ethnic cleansing have once again become
tools of international relations.

If accepted by the international community, it means that foreign-sponsored
groups around the world can use violence and ethnic cleansing to achieve their
ends.

It means that third parties can arm, sustain and direct those groups in order to
change the borders on the world's map.

Today, it is clear around the world that Russia is acting as an aggressor state.

My appeal to the free world is to condemn and reject Russia's dangerous and
irrational decision -- NOT only for Georgia's sake -- but for the sake of
preserving the fundamental basis of international law and order.

On behalf of my Government and people, I condemn this reckless act and want to
state clearly that the Russian action does not have any legal value.

As before -- and according to international law, Georgia's territorial integrity
and sovereignty is inviolable.

Russia's aims, method and goals are now clear.

The Russian Federation has used military force to try to dismember my country.

In the days and weeks ahead we will work with the international community to
prevent this decision from having any effect on the sovereignty of my country
and from further undermining the international order.

Together we must stand against this aggression and call on you for your
assistance and immediate reaction.

This is a test for the entire world and a test for our collective solidarity.

This is the test that we -- all free people -- must not fail.

My friends, we are all concerned today. And today Georgia counts on your
support.

Today a challenge has been posed to all of us.

Today the fate of Europe and the free world is unfortunately being played out in
my small country.

But together, we can and we must unite to meet this challenge.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(87%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (76%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); DEMOGRAPHIC
GROUPS (71%); ETHNICITY (66%)

PERSON: MIKHEIL SAAKASHVILI (91%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); GEORGIA (96%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1017 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           August 27, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Gain New Foothold In Afghan City

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1554 words

DATELINE: KANDAHAR, Afghanistan


The Taliban bomber calmly parked a white fuel tanker near the prison gates of
this city one evening in June, then jumped down from the cab and let out a
laugh. Prison guards fired on the bomber as he ran off, but they missed, instead
killing the son of a local shopkeeper, Muhammad Daoud, who watched the scene
unfold from across the street.

Seconds later, the Taliban fired a rocket-propelled grenade into the tanker,
setting off an explosion that killed the prison guards, destroyed nearby
buildings, and opened  a breach in the prison walls as wide as a highway. Nearly
900 prisoners escaped, 350 of them members of the Taliban, in one of the worst
security lapses in Afghanistan in the six years since the United States
intervention here.

The  prison break, on June 13, was a spectacular propaganda coup for the Taliban
not only in freeing their comrades and flaunting their strength, but also in
exposing the catastrophic weakness of the Afghan government, its army and the
police, as well as the international forces trying to secure Kandahar.

In the weeks since the  prison break, security has further deteriorated in this
southern Afghan city, once the de facto capital of the Taliban, that has become
a renewed front line in the battle against the radical Islamist movement. The
failure of the American-backed Afghan government to protect Kandahar has rippled
across the rest of the country and complicated the task of NATO forces, which
have suffered more deaths here this year than at any time since the 2001
invasion.

''We don't have a system here, the government does not have a solution,'' said
Abdul Aleem, who fought the Taliban and helped to put some of its members in the
prison. They are on the loose again, and he now faces death threats and sits in
his garden with a Kalashnikov rifle on the chair beside him.

He said that without the presence of international forces in the city, the
situation would be even worse. ''If we did not have foreigners here, I don't
think the Afghan National Army or police would come out of their bases,'' he
said.

A rising chorus of complaints equally scathing about the failings of the
government can be heard around the country. The collapsing confidence in the
government of President Hamid Karzai is so serious that if the Taliban had
wanted to, they could have seized control of the city of Kandahar on the night
of the prison break, one Western diplomat in Kabul said.

The only reason they did not was they did not expect the government and the NATO
reaction to be so weak, he said.

In fact, interviews with local officials and other people here who witnessed the
bold prison break and its aftermath show that the level of government
organization and security was woefully inadequate around what was clearly a
high-priority target for the Taliban.

There were only 10 guards at the prison  that night and  about 1,400 inmates,
said Col. Abdullah Bawar, the new head of the prison.

Five of the guards were killed in the attack; three of them  --  Colonel Bawar's
son, his nephew and the son of another warden -- died at the front gate when the
tanker exploded. Four others were wounded, one losing a hand and suffering 17
bullet wounds, Colonel Bawar said.

Reinforcements arrived only after the prisoners had escaped. Police officers at
a checkpoint a few hundred yards west of the prison panicked and started to
flee, said Mr. Aleem, a former mujahedeen commander, who came out of his house
that night to see what was going on.

''I told them, 'Don't run, you will be safe,' '' he said. The Taliban, as he
predicted, then made their escape south through a warren of streets opposite the
prison, and did not bother to pick a fight with the police.

The city police chief and his forces, meanwhile, stood at a traffic circle to
the east of the prison, guarding the approaches to the town, but never advanced
on the prison until the Taliban, who numbered about 40, were long gone.

''All the officials were watching with bulging eyes,'' Mr. Aleem said. ''If just
20 or 30 police had come round from the side they could have stopped them.''

Now he lives in constant danger. ''It's a very tough situation for people like
me who helped the government,'' he said. ''I receive calls and they ask: 'Are
you still alive?' '' The government also warned him the Taliban insurgents were
plotting his assassination, and yet he maintained that they are not powerful.
''I don't think so; it is the government that is weak,'' Mr. Aleem said.

He dismissed the frequent plea of the Afghan Army and the police, that they do
not have enough resources to fight the Taliban, and said the real problem was a
lack of leadership. The provincial governor, Asadullah Khaled, was visiting the
United States at the time of the prison raid, leaving the city without strong
leadership that night, Mr. Aleem said.

''The government has the facilities, weapons and equipment, but we don't have
the shepherds,'' he said. On Saturday a former army general, Rahmatullah Raufi,
was appointed as the new governor of Kandahar in a long-planned change. The
former prison chief has also been arrested and accused of collusion in the
prison break.

Abdul Qadir Noorzai, the head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
in Kandahar, said the Taliban raid represented a great loss of face for the
government. ''People already did not believe in the government, so it doubled
their disbelief in the government.''

In the immediate aftermath of the  prison break, terrified local residents
closed their shops and the town was silent for days as people braced themselves
for more violence, including a possible attack on the city.

Within days families were fleeing, as Taliban appeared in villages in the
Argandab district to the north of the city of Kandahar, forcing the government
finally to send in a large force from the army and the police to quell the
threat. That response relieved the panic somewhat, but the city has remained
tense as escaped criminals and Taliban militants precipitated a sharp rise in
crime in the city.

''We don't know exactly if the Taliban is powerful, we have heard that,'' said
Gul Muhammad, 35, a shopkeeper who witnessed the assault on the prison  and was
even thrown off his feet by the blast. ''But when we see this kind of attack, it
seems they are very powerful.''

Haji Muhammad Musa Hotak, a member of Parliament from Wardak Province, near the
capital, Kabul, warned that the gap between the people and the government had
grown dire.

So wide is it, in fact,  the situation reminds him of the end of the Communist
era, when support for the government of the Soviet-backed president, Najibullah,
began collapsing under the onslaught of the mujahedeen, who had waged a 13-year
resistance in the name of Islam against successive Communist rulers.

The Taliban attack has also shaken local confidence in the international forces
here and exposed the difficult situation of the understaffed  Canadian troops in
Kandahar, who have lost 90 soldiers in the last two and a half years in the
province trying to contain an increasingly virulent Taliban insurgency.

An independent report by a panel led by the former Canadian foreign minister,
John Manley, recommended in January that the Canadian contingent  continue in
Kandahar Province only if bolstered by 1,000 more troops and the necessary
helicopters and surveillance drones.

On the night of the prison break, Canadian troops based in the town as part of
the NATO-led international Security Assistance Force were busy  dealing with a
number of roadside bombs planted, apparently in a coordinated plan to divert the
attention of security forces from the attack.

Two of the bombs exploded just half an hour before the prison raid, and two,
laid to hit any reinforcements sent to the prison, were found and defused, said
Joe McAllister, a Canadian police superintendent who leads an eight-member team
to train and mentor the Afghan police in Kandahar.

Superintendent McAllister defended the slow arrival of Canadian and Afghan
police officers at the prison that night, saying that rushing in and getting
injured would have caused more problems. ''Police safety is civilian safety,''
he said.

But he acknowledged a more glaring omission, that of the security of the prison
itself. ''I would suggest it wasn't as strong as it could have been,'' he said.

The Correctional Service of Canada had helped train and improve security around
the prison, he said, but still there was no barrier or blast walls near the
entrance, nothing to stop the bomber from parking the fuel tanker right outside
the gates.

The failings make people wonder what the foreign troops are really doing in
Afghanistan, said Mr. Daoud, the shopkeeper. ''The Canadians are here, but
things are getting worse and worse.''

United States Special Forces, who maintain a base on the northern side of
Kandahar city, occupied the football stadium for a while after the prison break
to guard against a rumored Taliban plan to attack the city from the south.

Meanwhile the police, under a new chief, have begun aggressive night patrols to
clamp down on the crime wave that has ensued from so many criminals being back
on the streets.

''The police will have to work hard for a while,'' Superintendent McAllister
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Afghan guards and a child watched television near the cells in
the Kandahar prison from which 900 inmates escaped in June.
 Parts of the Kandahar prison were reduced to rubble in the Taliban raid that
freed the inmates, many of them Taliban fighters.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY MOISES SAMAN
FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (92%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); COUPS (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); ARMED
FORCES (67%)

COMPANY: WALLS AS (71%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (54%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531120 LESSORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (EXCEPT
MINIWAREHOUSES) (71%); SIC6512 OPERATORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (71%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (53%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (95%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1021 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            August 30, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karadzic Declines to Plead at War Crimes Court in Hague

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 515 words

DATELINE: PARIS


Radovan Karadzic faced a judge on Friday for the second time since his arrest
and quickly seized the chance to demonstrate his defense strategy.

After his first month in the custody of the United Nations war crimes tribunal
in The Hague, Mr. Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader, was back in court,
seeming more relaxed and evidently fully engaged with the proceedings against
him. He refused to enter pleas to all 11 charges against him and dismissed the
tribunal as a ''court of NATO'' disguised as a court of the international
community.

But, acting as his own defense lawyer, he has already fired off lengthy motions,
letters and requests in recent days. He wants copies of warrants to search his
former home, copies of orders to freeze his assets and answers to his challenge
of the court's jurisdiction. He has demanded to know whether NATO or the United
States intended to kill him, as he has claimed.

The hearing on Friday was one of a series of steps leading up to his trial on
charges of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes during the Bosnian
war between 1992 and 1995.

Prosecutors will seek to prove that as political leader and commander in chief
of a Bosnian Serb mini-state, he bears the legal responsibility for some of the
greatest atrocities of the Balkan wars, including the massacre in Srebrenica,
where close to 8,000 unarmed Muslim men and boys were executed in 1995, and the
three-year siege of Sarajevo, which left 10,000 civilians dead.

Seated between  United Nations guards, Mr. Karadzic alternately delivered
broadsides against the court and tried to joke with the judge.

But Iain Bonomy, the Scottish judge in charge of the proceedings, kept a brisk
pace, giving Mr. Karadzic little chance to stray from the  agenda. He told Mr.
Karadzic he had the right to have his indictment read out to him.

''I have no interest in listening to that,'' Mr. Karadzic responded.

The judge moved on, asking the defendant to rise to enter his pleas. In the
indictment, he began, ''you are charged with genocide. How do you plead, guilty
or not guilty?''

Mr. Karadzic, standing, replied: ''I will not plead.''

In keeping with court rules, the judge said, he would enter for all 11 charges
the words ''not guilty.''

Mr. Karadzic resumed his seat, and called out: ''May I hold you to your word?''

''Which word?'' the judge asked.

''That I'm not guilty,'' Mr. Karadzic said.

''We shall see in due course,'' the judge replied.

Judge Bonomy urged Mr. Karadzic to take on professional defense lawyers because
of the huge workload awaiting him.

He also chided the prosecution, which has said it is revising the indictment
against Mr. Karadzic and will present a new version in late September.

Given the importance of the trial and the need to conclude the tribunal's work,
the judge said, he found it difficult to understand why it was taking so long to
update the  indictment.

Prosecutors replied that they needed to take into account the large volume of
evidence and jurisprudence from recent trials that might overlap with the case
against Mr. Karadzic.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ARRESTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); SEARCH
WARRANTS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); SEARCH
& SEIZURE (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES
(78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); NETHERLANDS
(88%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1022 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             August 31, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Housing Goals Remain Elusive

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section WE; Column 0; Westchester Weekly Desk; DEVELOPMENT; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1153 words


SIX years ago, when planners in Hastings-on-Hudson agreed to build a  14-unit
rental project that is now nearing completion in the village center, the goal
was to provide housing for locally employed workers who otherwise could not
afford to live there.

That goal will  finally be realized this fall when municipal employees begin
moving in.

Jen Corso, 25, who earns $36,000 a year as the village's cable access
coordinator, will move out of a studio apartment in Harrison and into a
one-bedroom unit. ''And now that I won't have to commute anymore,'' Ms. Corso
said, ''I'll be able to join the village's volunteer fire department and rescue
squad.''

According to Sue Smith, chairwoman of the village's Affordable Housing
Committee, Ms. Corso is ''exactly the kind of person we had in mind from the
beginning.''

In addition to those who commute to high-paying jobs elsewhere, Ms. Smith  said,
the village needs residents who work locally, often for less money, and are
available during the workday to respond to emergencies.

However compelling the arguments are for supporting an economically diverse
workforce, the effort to build lower-cost  housing in Westchester has faced
difficulties. The problem, county officials say, has less to do with financing
or finding land than it does with generating the political  will to back the
effort.

Despite objectives established by the Westchester Housing Opportunity
Commission, a panel established by the County Legislature in 1994 to enlist
local support for such   housing, efforts have fallen far short of the mark. The
initial goal set by the commission was 5,000 new below-market-rate  units by
2000, but  2,307 were built during that period. A new recommendation  of 10,768
units was set in 2000, and at the halfway mark last year, 2,187 units had been
or were being built.

And according to a federal lawsuit filed last year,  many of the  units that
have been created are in municipalities that are predominantly black. In
mid-July last year, a federal judge refused to dismiss the suit, in which the
Anti-Discrimination Center of Metro New York, a civil rights group, says  the
county's efforts to build below-market-rate   housing so far have effectively
kept its  municipalities racially segregated.

On Sept. 19 in Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York in
Manhattan, the Anti-Discrimination Center and the county will file motions for
summary judgments, stating their cases to Judge Denise L. Cote.

Michael Allen, a lawyer with the Washington firm of Relman & Dane, argues that
the county has built below-market-rate   housing in places like Mount Vernon and
New Rochelle, which already have high concentrations of black residents, rather
than in mostly white towns like Eastchester, Mount Pleasant and Harrison. ''A
real test of political will,'' Mr. Allen said, ''would involve the county
challenging the other municipalities to do their share.''

The county's position, its lawyer   Matthew T. Miklave said,  is that it  cannot
force a locality to build below-market-rate housing.

In fact, since the housing commission first released its report calling for more
lower-cost  units, many communities have ignored its  recommended allocations.

''What's more, a lot of good politicians who supported the cause have lost their
jobs over the issue,'' said Richard Hyman, a consultant to the  commission.

Mr. Hyman cited Harrison as an example. In 1992, a plan developed by Andrew M.
Cuomo, who was at the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
but was not yet secretary, called for two-family homes to be bought by municipal
workers, school staff members and young families working or living in Harrison.
Under the proposal, the second unit would be rented to families qualifying for
federal housing subsidies.

The plan had the support of the late Charles G. Balancia, then the  town
supervisor, but it provoked  voter resentment and contributed to the failure of
his  bid for a seat on the Town Council the following year. Since then, Harrison
has contributed no units toward the commission's suggested allocations, which
call for 756 units there. And Joan Walsh, the  current town supervisor, said the
municipality still had no plans to build below-market-rate housing.

But other municipalities in the county are working with nonprofit housing groups
to encourage below-market-rate  housing, said Norma V. Drummond, Westchester's
deputy commissioner of planning. In the past year, 137 new units  have been
built, and  592 are under construction, while  435 units have been approved,
though construction on them has not yet begun.

In May, ground was broken for the $3.5 million Symphony Knoll project in Croton,
an 11-unit  development for residents over 55. The county contributed about $1.3
million to the project, with other money coming from the county's Industrial
Development Agency and the federal Low-Income Housing Tax Credit program. Eight
units will be rented to residents with incomes at or below 50 percent of the
county's  median income, or $40,650 for a two-person household. The other  units
will be rented to residents with incomes at or below 60 percent of the median
income, or $48,780 for a two-person household.

In White Plains, in a project not using county funds, the nonprofit Community
Housing Innovations and the city have broken ground on Minerva Place
Condominiums, 14 units for families with incomes between 80 and 100 percent of
the  county's  median income. The city is contributing land and about $75,000 a
unit from its Affordable Housing Fund.

Unlike most below-market developments, which are limited to families earning
less than 80 percent of the area median income, Minerva Place is designed to
attract families with two wage earners, who do  not typically qualify  for such
housing.

Some communities, Mount Kisco, Rye Brook and Briarcliff Manor among them, are
also contributing units meeting  local affordability standards for those earning
100 or 125 percent of the area median income, rather than the county's more
restrictive definitions.

Low-cost housing can make a significant difference in the quality of life -- not
only for young workers like Ms. Corso in Hastings, but also for elderly
residents like Rose and Sidney Weiner, who can no longer manage alone in their
two-bedroom Yonkers apartment.

Mrs. Weiner, a former teacher's assistant in the Bronx, and her husband, a
retired factory worker, are moving this fall to Garito Manor at Union Square, a
102-unit assisted-living-type complex in New Rochelle. The $30 million project
is being built by the New Rochelle Neighborhood Revitalization Corporation with
local, county,  state and federal money.

''It's a big decision to move to affordable housing, but we have to do it,''
Mrs. Weiner said. ''At least we'll get help in the new place, and what else
could we find on a fixed income?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: NEW HOME: Jen Corso, cable access coordinator in
Hastings-on-Hudson, will move into a lower-cost apartment there. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
JANET DURRANS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(WE1)
 GOING UP: Less-than-market-rate units under construction on Alto Avenue in Port
Chester. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JANET DURRANS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)(WE6)   MAP:
Affordability Gap: The Westchester County Housing Opportunity Commission has set
goals for the number of below-market-rate housing units to be built by 2015. As
of 2007, many communities had not built any units. Of those which have not
started building, many are communities with few minorities. (Source: Westchester
County Housing Opportunity Commission)(WE6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTIES (89%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (88%); LITIGATION (88%);
DISCRIMINATION (85%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (78%); LOW COST HOUSING SCHEMES (78%);
FIRE DEPARTMENTS (77%); CIVIL SERVICES (76%); LABOR FORCE (72%); WORKPLACE
DIVERSITY (72%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); SUMMARY
JUDGMENT (69%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (68%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (68%); JUDGES (66%); RACE & RACISM (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(64%); CIVIL RIGHTS (60%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1024 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 2, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Terrorist Watch List, Jumbled in Translation

BYLINE: By JOE SHARKEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; ON THE ROAD; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 710 words


NOBODY likes the way the terrorist watch lists work. Not the federal government,
not the airlines, and certainly not the innocent travelers who are  flagged and
delayed at the airport when an airline finds a match of their name on the
federal master list.

There's even dispute about how many names are on the list. A million (!) says
the American Civil Liberties Union. Not even close (!), responds the
Transportation Security Administration.

The federal Terrorist Screening Center database contained more than 724,000
''records'' as of April 2007, according to an audit by the inspector general's
office of the Justice Department, which said the number of records was growing
by 20,000 a month.

The American Civil Liberties Union, after extrapolating, issued a report in July
saying that the ''nation's terrorist watch list has hit one million names.''

It added that ''members of Congress, nuns, war heroes and other 'suspicious
characters' with names like Robert Johnson and Gary Smith have become trapped in
the Kafkaesque clutches of this list.''

Whoa, says Kip Hawley, the director of the Transportation Security
Administration. ''The list has no more than 50,000 names,'' Mr. Hawley said in a
recent interview.

As he begins to wrap up his three-year tenure at the T.S.A., Mr. Hawley says he
is perplexed by the commotion over the watch list.

The Terrorist Screening Center maintains the list to flag names of people in two
categories: those with known terrorist ties who are on the ''no fly'' portion of
the list, and those with names that for various reasons are on a broader
''selectee'' list.

The selectee list is responsible for much of the ridicule directed at the T.S.A.
That list contains many common names -- like Michael Kirby, who was featured in
last week's column.

Like Mr. Kirby, many people who share names or variants of names on the selectee
list can't print a boarding pass in advance. Every time they want to fly, they
must report to the airline ticket desk to be cleared before they board.

The Justice Department found that the Terrorist Screening Center ''has not done
enough to ensure that the database was complete and accurate.''

The confusion is compounded because the airlines, not the government, are
usually the point-of-contact arbiter of who actually is flagged at the airport.

Airlines compile their lists using names on the federal list, Mr. Hawley said.
But depending on how the airline puts together its list,  passengers with the
same or even vaguely similar names as ones on the federal list can turn up as
''false positives,'' Mr. Hawley said.

''Depending on how the airline filters it, you may end up with hundreds of
people being told they're on the selectee list,'' Mr. Hawley said.

The airlines, he said, ''decided that rather than investing in technology to
work this out, we'll have you go over to a ticket agent because it's no skin off
our nose if you stand in line. At that point, they look up the government list,
which has more detailed data, and they will see that the real person on the
watch list is 60 years old and you're 25 years old, and they say O.K., you're
obviously not the person. But all those people go away mad, thinking 'What's the
T.S.A. got against me?' ''

The airlines dislike the cumbersome task of matching  their passenger lists,
which don't contain personal data like birth dates, against the federal list,
which does. The airline industry strongly supports a federal initiative called
Secure Flight, which would require the T.S.A. itself to check names against
passenger lists supplied by airlines in advance of every flight.

In a statement, the Air Transport Association said, ''The airlines have been
given assurances for more than four years that T.S.A. would soon be taking over
responsibility for vetting passenger names against government watch lists. With
recurrent T.S.A. delays in meeting that commitment, airlines invested millions
of dollars in programming costs to minimize the number of misidentified
passengers.''

Secure Flight, which Mr. Hawley says he supports, is expected to be in place
next year. It has been stalled while the Homeland Security Department addresses
concerns raised in Congress about privacy.

E-mail: jsharkey@nytimes.com

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY CHRIS GASH)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (92%); AIRPORTS (90%); TRAVELER
SAFETY & SECURITY (90%); AIRLINES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TRAVEL TICKETS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); INTERVIEWS
(71%); AUDITS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%); US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY
ADMINISTRATION (83%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1027 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 3, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Airstrike Inquiry at Odds With Reports of More Afghan Deaths

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 490 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


An American military investigation concluded Tuesday that 5 to 7 civilians and
30 to 35 Taliban were killed in an airstrike operation in western Afghanistan
last month, many fewer than the 90 civilians that the Afghan government and the
United Nations found in their preliminary investigations. Two civilians were
also wounded, the American command said in a statement.

The American  investigation, a standard internal procedure, precedes a joint
investigation that the military has agreed to conduct with the United Nations
and the Afghan government.

The Afghan president, Hamid Karzai, condemned the operation at the time and
dismissed two  commanders for what he called dereliction of duty and concealing
the truth, after a government inquiry  concluded that large numbers of women and
children had died in the airstrike.

The United Nations' special representative in Afghanistan said a human rights
team had found convincing evidence that 90 people had been killed, 60 of them
children.

The American military command originally reported a successful operation that
killed 25 militants, then announced that it was opening an investigation.

Its findings Tuesday differed little  from the first military reports. The
operation was a planned offensive conducted in  early on Aug. 22 in the village
of Azizabad, in Herat Province, and Afghan and American forces came under fire
as they approached their objective, the statement said. The fire's intensity
justified using small-arms fire and close air support, it said.

The military investigator interviewed 30 Afghan and American participants in the
operation and reviewed reports from  ground and air personnel during the
engagement, the statement said.

The investigator also used video taken during the engagement, photos taken at
the scene and weapons, explosives and intelligence materials collected there,
some of it suggesting that militants had been planning an attack on a nearby
American base.

The investigation found that 30 to 35 Taliban militants had been killed, with
evidence suggesting that a known Taliban commander was among them.

The statement added, however, that the military investigator had not seen
evidence collected by other organizations, nor were troops able to return to the
village on Aug. 22. According to the United Nations and the Afghan government,
villagers dug out most of the bodies of the women and children on that day.

U.S. Accused in Pakistan Deaths

DERA ISMAIL KHAN, Pakistan (AP) -- At least 15 people, including women and
children, died in an attack involving American-led forces in a remote Pakistani
village near the border with Afghanistan, intelligence officials and a witness
said Wednesday.

The American-led coalition in Afghanistan said it had no report of such an
incursion, in the militant-infested South Waziristan tribal region. Pakistan's
army confirmed an attack but did not say if it believed foreign troops were
involved.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: An Afghan man prayed on Aug. 23 at the graves of people killed
in an American-led airstrike on Azizabad, Afghanistan.(PHOTOGRAPH BY REZA
SHIRMOHAMMADI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); BOMBINGS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
EYEWITNESSES (89%); ARMIES (78%); WITNESSES (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%);
WOMEN (74%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); TESTIMONY (73%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (63%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (57%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (96%); PAKISTAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1030 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 6, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Threat of Hezbollah

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 171 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Hezbollah Shrine to Terrorist Suspect Enthralls Lebanese Children''
(Nabatiye Journal, Sept. 3):

Hezbollah's shrine to the slain terrorist mastermind Imad Mugniyah demonstrates
how terrorist groups use and indoctrinate children into their blood-soaked
culture of hatred, martyrdom and violence.

It also offers a real glimpse at the stark realities facing Lebanon, Israel and
the international community.

It is frightening that a group that perpetrates and venerates deadly terrorism
is set to take on a leading role in Lebanon's transitional government, with
cabinet seats and veto power.

And if there was any doubt that Hezbollah is rebuilding its arsenal in the
aftermath of the 2006 Lebanon war, the high-tech rockets and other munitions on
display in Nabatiye should serve as a wake-up call to world leaders about the
continuing threat that this Iranian-backed group poses to Israel, Lebanon and
the entire region.

Abraham H. Foxman

Natl. Dir., Anti-Defamation League

New York, Sept. 3, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (94%); TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (55%)

COUNTRY: LEBANON (95%); ISRAEL (93%)

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1039 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 11, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Questions Of Security

BYLINE: By PHILIP BOBBI and JOHN C. DANFORTH.

Philip Bobbitt, the author of ''Terror and Consent: The Wars for the 21st
Century,'' is a law professor at Columbia and a fellow at the University of
Texas. John C. Danforth, a former Republican senator from Missouri, was the
United States ambassador to the United Nations from 2004 to 2005.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1300 words


JOHN McCAIN and Barack Obama are two of the most remarkable Americans to enter
public life. Both men are extraordinarily capable and their campaigns -- which
began against great odds -- reflect that fact. And yet with respect to national
security, neither campaign has articulated the fundamental points of view that
will allow people to make an informed choice in November.

Time is running out. Without understanding how these two leaders approach and
analyze problems, without having a clear sense of their differentiated
approaches, we will be mired in the ephemera of polls, horse race journalism and
the petty exchange of complaints arising from alleged missteps.

Here, then, on the anniversary of 9/11, a day when both candidates have chosen
to put politics aside and appear together at ground zero, are a dozen questions
we would like to see them address. We know both candidates differ on Iraq and
agree on closing the Guantanamo prison camp. We also know that both are for
change, that they are patriotic and that they are cautious. But we hope they
will not be too cautious to give us clear answers, even when these might
alienate some voters. It is our hope that these answers will be published on
this page.

1. Afghan officials have charged that some elements of the Pakistani government
are seeking to undermine their country by giving sanctuary to Taliban and Qaeda
groups that cross the border to attack Afghanistan. Would you launch large-scale
armed attacks against terrorists in Pakistan if the new government there is
unwilling -- or unable -- to suppress these groups and refuses to give United
States forces permission to act? Or are you willing to put the Afghan regime at
risk in order to play for time in Pakistan, hoping that a more successful
government will emerge in Islamabad, and fearing that any attempt to use force
there will result in a nuclear-armed anti-Western state?

2. For some years now, the world has watched while ethnic cleansing -- even
genocide -- has gripped Darfur. Are you prepared to announce the rules for
American intervention for humanitarian purposes and, if so, what would those
rules be? Would you be willing to organize a coalition of states to intervene?
Or should the United States defer to the United Nations or regional
organizations -- even when they are deadlocked and unable to act?

3. It has been more than five years since the United States-led coalition
removed Saddam Hussein from power. How long should American troops remain in
Iraq if American commanders on the ground state that withdrawal would lead to
chaos? That is, should the United States withdraw according to a predetermined
timetable, even if the consequences appear dire for Iraq? Or should troops
remain indefinitely until their withdrawal can be assured to leave behind a
stable Iraq?

4. Would you authorize the use of force by the United States -- or collaborate
with Israel -- to prevent Iran from developing nuclear weapons if it appears
that diplomatic efforts are failing to bring about substantial progress in this
regard? If not, what further incentives would you offer Iran to end its nuclear
programs? For example, would you be willing to press Israel to do away with its
own nuclear weapons as part of a regionwide de-nuclearization? What incentives
would you be prepared to offer Israel to desist from a pre-emptive attack? Would
you be willing, for instance, to give Israel a place under the United States
nuclear umbrella?

5. The Supreme Court recently held that prisoners taken in the war against
terror are entitled to habeas corpus review in the federal courts. Is it
sensible to speak of a ''war'' on terror, or is this a struggle that should be
principally handled by law enforcement? Should suspected terrorists be given the
same protections as ordinary criminals -- like the right to confront their
accusers and the right not to be tried by illegally obtained evidence? Or should
there be special rules for the trials of terror suspects, or even a special
court that would hold secret trials?

6. In light of United Nations Security Council inaction in Bosnia, Cambodia,
Rwanda, Zimbabwe and elsewhere, critics have said that the United Nations is not
an effective instrument for confronting rogue states, terror and genocide. Do
you favor expanding NATO, or using it as a model for creating an alliance of
democracies? If you do, would such an alliance require unanimity of its members
for action? Or, if you oppose creating such a group, how should the United
States confront crises when the council is paralyzed?

7. What if anything should the United States do to further trade negotiations
after the collapse of the Doha round in Geneva? Should the United States try to
revive multilateral talks, and, if so, how? Do you support bilateral trade
agreements with Colombia, South Korea and Panama? Should the United States
abrogate Nafta if Canada and Mexico will not revise the agreement to our liking?

8. Russia's invasion of Georgia followed Georgia's attack on the separatist
region of South Ossetia; it was also an expression of Russian resentment over
former Warsaw Pact states becoming members of NATO and hosting proposed American
missile defense systems. Would you try to restore Georgian sovereignty over
South Ossetia and Abkhazia? If so, how -- by offering United States security
guarantees to Georgia, expelling Russia from the Group of Eight, withholding
membership in the World Trade Organization? Or would you attempt to calm Russian
sensibilities by renouncing, at least for the time being, Georgian and Ukrainian
candidacies for NATO membership, and putting Polish and Czech missile defense
deployments on hold?

9. Both of you have talked about global partnerships to address problems as
varied as climate change, weapons proliferation and terror. What specific
incentives can you offer potential allies to create such partnerships? Why do
you believe these incentives will be more likely to succeed than those offered
by the Bush and Clinton administrations?

10. Political instability in the Middle East underscores the need for Western
energy security. At the same time, the Group of Eight has set a goal of bringing
global carbon dioxide emissions down to half their 1990 level by 2050.
Realistically, there is little chance of achieving this target, nor of achieving
real energy security, without drastically new technologies. What, if anything,
should government do to increase domestic production of oil and gas, to expand
the use of nuclear energy and to encourage energy conservation and new
technologies? Which technologies do you favor and how should government promote
them -- or with high oil prices, would you leave this job to the market?

11. Rising food prices and population growth raise the specter of widespread
starvation in Africa. The overseas aid budgets of most countries, including the
United States, are far below the United Nations Millennium Development Goals'
target of 0.7 percent of gross domestic product. Would you favor greatly
increasing this aid to meet those levels or would you, instead, try to wean
Africa off direct aid in favor of using these funds to spur investment in the
region?

12. What do you see as the principal difference between you and your opponent in
your fundamental approach to the national security problems facing the United
States?

Choice is at the heart of the American electoral idea. If Americans are given a
clear choice -- as they were in 1964 and 1980 -- they can speak with clarity at
the ballot box. If not, the winning candidate will risk inheriting a fragile
mandate that will soon erode in the face of the challenges he avoided
forthrightly addressing in the campaign. As 9/11 painfully reminds us, these
challenges insistently reassert themselves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); PRISONS (77%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (77%); HORSE RACING (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); TERRORISM (74%);
POLITICS (74%); TALIBAN (70%); GENOCIDE (66%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(66%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%); ARMED FORCES (63%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (90%); JOHN MCCAIN (74%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (52%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%); PAKISTAN (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1042 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 13, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terror Plan Would Give F.B.I. More Power

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Justice Department made public on Friday a plan to expand the tools the
Federal Bureau of Investigation can use to investigate suspicions of terrorism
inside the United States, even without any direct evidence of wrongdoing.

Justice Department officials said the plan, which is likely to be completed  by
the end of the month despite criticism from civil rights advocates, is intended
to allow F.B.I. agents to be more aggressive and pre-emptive in assessing
possible threats to national security.

It would allow an agent, for instance, to pursue an anonymous tip about
terrorism by conducting an undercover interview or watching someone in a public
place. Such steps are now prohibited unless there is more specific evidence of
wrongdoing.

The plan is the latest in a series of steps by the Bush administration to extend
key aspects of its counterterrorism strategy beyond the end of President Bush's
tenure. An executive order from Mr. Bush in August rewrote the rules for the
nation's 16 spy agencies, and an administration legislative proposal before
Congress would reaffirm that the country ''remains engaged in an armed conflict
with Al Qaeda.''

The proposed guidelines combine several sets of procedures  into a single
document governing what F.B.I. agents can and cannot do in criminal and national
security investigations.

The review of the guidelines generated intense interest and occasional criticism
from lawmakers and others over the summer, and the Justice Department took the
unusual step on Friday of holding briefings for reporters and for civil rights
advocates and showing them the draft plan.

The draft is likely to be made final soon after Robert S. Mueller III, the
F.B.I. director, testifies on Tuesday before the House Judiciary Committee and
on Wednesday before the Senate Judiciary Committee. Democrats have promised to
question him closely about the new guidelines.

After they were shown the plan, civil rights leaders said they were troubled
that the new guidelines would allow the F.B.I. to use racial and ethnic factors
to focus on Middle Easterners and others. ''Racial profiling by any other name
is still unconstitutional,'' said Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the
American Civil Liberties Union.

But Justice Department officials insisted that the new guidelines would not
change standards in place since 2003 for the use of race or ethnicity, which can
be considered as a factor -- but not the sole factor -- in terror
investigations.

''It is simply not responsible to say that race may never be taken into account
when conducting an investigation,'' Brian Roehrkasse, a spokesman for the
department, said in a statement. ''The reality is that a number of criminal and
terror groups have very strong ethnic associations (e.g., the I.R.A. was Irish,
La Cosa Nostra is Italian; Hezbollah is largely Lebanese).

''If the F.B.I. is charged with knowing whether there are elements of such
groups present and operating within the United States, it cannot ignore those
ethnic connections, any more than it would ignore the identification of a bank
robber as a short white male when trying to solve the bank robbery.''

Under existing guidelines, F.B.I. agents cannot use certain investigative tools
in conducting so-called threat assessments as a precursor to a preliminary or
full inquiry. The revisions would  allow agents to conduct public surveillance
of someone, do ''pretext'' interviews -- pose as someone other than an agent or
disguise the purpose of the questions -- or send in an undercover source to
gather information.

Such steps are  allowed in standard criminal investigations without specific
evidence of wrongdoing, and officials say they want to  authorize the same
investigative steps in terrorism inquiries as well.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%); TERRORISM
(91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); ETHNICITY (85%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(78%); EVIDENCE (77%); EXECUTIVES (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); ESPIONAGE
(76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); RACIAL PROFILING (61%); RACE & RACISM
(61%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(94%); AL-QAEDA (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); ROBERT MUELLER (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1045 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 14, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Are We Experienced Legal Practice

BYLINE: By NOAH FELDMAN

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 329 words


To teach constitutional law, you need a vision about where our country has been
and where we need to go in the future. You must be able to confront our darkest
moments -- slavery, segregation, forced sterilization -- while preserving your
optimism about the moments when we have expanded rights and liberties and lived
up to our aspirations.

Students push you to defend what you believe, and you had better be ready to
acknowledge your contradictions, and even your mistakes. As a law professor,
your goal is not to lecture, but to elicit from students their deepest
intuitions about their own values, and to show them how to frame arguments for
what they believe. And you must know the law. The students are smart and
engaged, and they don't miss a trick. There's no room for vagueness or
imprecision.

Constitutional law demands that you understand the delicate balance between the
president, Congress and the Supreme Court. Most presidents, regardless of party,
want to maximize their own authority, but the teacher of constitutional law
knows that when presidents overstep, the court slaps them back.

Individual rights loom large in our Constitution. As a professor, you know that
presidents should resist restricting liberty. However, you also know that
Lincoln suspended habeas corpus and  Franklin D. Roosevelt interned
Japanese-Americans. Best of all, with your 20/20 hindsight and your bully
pulpit, you can righteously stand in judgment of mistakes made by presidents in
our national experiment.

What a teacher of constitutional law never has to do is put theory into practice
-- which is probably why even the best of us can be astonishingly idealistic.
The only president to come from full-time employment in our profession, Woodrow
Wilson, tried to make over the world in the image of our constitutional
democracy. Our part-timer, Bill Clinton, was  ready to make compromises to get
the job done.

-- NOAH FELDMAN, a professor of constitutional law at Harvard

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TEACHING &
TEACHERS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGAL SERVICES (89%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); APPRENTICESHIPS & INTERNSHIPS
(76%); HABEAS CORPUS (67%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); ASIAN AMERICANS (65%);
FULL TIME EMPLOYMENT (50%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (54%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1046 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           September 15, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detained in Nigeria, A Lifeline in New York

BYLINE: By SUSAN DOMINUS.

E-mail: susan.dominus@nytimes.com

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; BIG CITY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 954 words


Andrew Berends, a documentary filmmaker who lives in Brooklyn, only had the
chance to make a phone call about 15 hours after he was detained by Nigerian
officials while gathering footage of women at a market in the Niger Delta, an
area rich with oil and with frequent militant uprisings. The moment he could, he
called a friend in Nigeria and instructed him to get in touch with the United
States Embassy and with Aaron Soffin, the 26-year-old associate producer of Mr.
Berends's film ''Delta Boys.''

''Aaron, good morning,'' began the concise e-mail message that Mr. Soffin
received when he woke up at 8 a.m. on Labor Day. It gave the barest facts about
Mr. Berends's arrest in Port Harcourt, Nigeria, and ended: ''He is in trouble
and needs help, fast.'' Mr. Soffin, who lives in the East Village and had been
planning to leave that week for Rwanda, stared at the message, trying to figure
out what to do. His first thought: Call someone who will know what to do.

He tried reaching James Longley, an award-winning documentarian and a close
friend of Mr. Berends's, but Mr. Longley was in Seattle, where it was 5 a.m.,
and didn't pick up. Then he dialed Micah Garen, a former colleague of Mr.
Soffin's who had been kidnapped and held hostage in Iraq for 10 days in 2004. No
answer. The next call: Dad. Dad said, ''Call the State Department.''

So Mr. Soffin Googled the State Department and reached someone there, commencing
what would turn out to be 10 days of nonstop conversations and e-mail messages
advocating on behalf of Mr. Berends and his translator, Samuel George, a
Nigerian citizen who was also detained.

There are some playbooks that should not have to be written: What to do, say,
when someone near and dear has been taken against his or her will in a hostile
land. But given the state of world affairs, such playbooks are plentiful, in the
form of Mariane Pearl's ''A Mighty Heart,'' for example, and ''American
Hostage,'' a memoir in which Mr. Garen and his companion, Marie-Helene Carleton,
detail the diplomatic channels Ms. Carleton frantically pursued to see him
returned to safety.

MR. SOFFIN reached Mr. Garen and Ms. Carleton later that Labor Day. They
provided useful advice and contacts, as did Sandy Cioffi, a documentary
filmmaker who had been detained in Nigeria in April. Working on no more than
four hours of sleep for several days, Mr. Soffin pursued what have now become
the standard avenues: pressuring the American Embassy, collaborating with the
groups Reporters Without Borders and the Committee to Protect Journalists,
sending e-mail message blasts urging any and all recipients to contact their
local elected officials and journalists.

And he and his allies came up with some innovations. A filmmaker whom Mr.
Berends had never even met in person set up a blog with updates from Mr. Soffin.
One of Mr. Berends's best friends, the photographer Jason Gardner, joined Mr.
Soffin at his command center -- his parents' Upper West Side apartment, which
boasted luxuries like a land line and a full refrigerator -- and built a
Facebook group called Help Filmmaker Andrew Berends Get Released from Nigeria.

Over the course of a week, e-mail messages were flying around the world, 99
percent of which Mr. Soffin did not know about: one from a filmmaker in
Azerbaijan who e-mailed a contact in New York who reached out to a friend in
Toronto who was friendly with Mariane Pearl; a friend of a friend who connected
with a contact in Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton's office who would prove
helpful. Mr. Soffin's efforts yielded a letter to the president of Nigeria,
written by Senator Clinton and Senator Charles E. Schumer and signed by seven
other members of Congress. ''We work on cases like this in Africa every week,''
said Tom Rhodes, of the Committee to Protect Journalists. ''And I've never seen
a response or reaction as impressive as Andrew's colleague Aaron Soffin.''

Although he was never formally accused of a crime, Mr. Berends, 36, was held in
Nigeria without food and water for 30 hours (fearful of exposing his sources, he
managed to swallow the SIM card from his cellphone that carried their names and
numbers). He managed brief phone conversations with Mr. Soffin. ''I got the
message from him that everything possible was being done,'' Mr. Berends said
this past Friday. ''Knowing it was happening was very comforting.''

Mr. Berends was speaking at his home in Windsor Terrace, Brooklyn, where he
arrived safely on Wednesday, 10 days after he was detained. Late Tuesday,
without explanation, Nigerian security agents had put Mr. Berends on a Lufthansa
flight to New York. Mr. Soffin met him at the airport. On the cab ride back, Mr.
Berends took from his neck a silver necklace he had purchased in Nigeria and
gave it to Mr. Soffin. ''He's not someone you have to grovel to thank,'' Mr.
Berends said of Mr. Soffin, who sat beside him on the couch, wearing the
necklace.

The two men had been busy since Mr. Berends's return, working to ensure the
safety of Mr. George, the translator, who had also been released but ordered to
return to law enforcement headquarters in two weeks. They had a lot of people to
thank, not to mention work to do on the production of ''Delta Boys,'' which Mr.
Berends hoped that Mr. Soffin would help him edit over the next several months.

But Mr. Soffin, having postponed his trip to Rwanda, is headed there in a few
weeks to interview survivors of that country's genocide.

''I wish he could stay,'' said Mr. Berends, a veteran filmmaker who has logged
months in Iraq but is suddenly more appreciative than ever of Mr. Soffin, the
young film editor he found through a classified advertisement when he was fresh
out of college. ''It's hard to find somebody like him.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The filmmaker Andrew Berends, left, and Aaron Soffin, the friend
and colleague who worked to get him out of Nigeria. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREA
MOHIN/THE NEW YORK TIMES) (B7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (89%);
VISUAL ARTISTS (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); US LABOR DAY
(76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); WRITERS (66%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (90%); SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); NIGER (92%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1048 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 18, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Hague: Dispute On Defense

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 93 words


In his third court appearance since being arrested in Serbia in July, the former
Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic persisted Wednesday in his demand to
conduct his own defense in his trial on charges of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes during the early 1990s. Judge Iain Bonomy of the United
Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague urged Mr. Karadzic to enlist defense
lawyers, given the enormousness of the workload. Prosecutors said they would
present a revised indictment of Mr. Karadzic in the next few days. No trial date
has been set.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
INDICTMENTS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ARRESTS (88%); LAWYERS (87%);
GENOCIDE (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (84%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%)

LOAD-DATE: September 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1060 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          September 24, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terrorism's Impact Grows As Indian Election Nears

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Hari Kumar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1051 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Politics in India, as in neighboring Pakistan and the United States, is
increasingly singed by terrorism.

India, the world's largest democracy, is reeling from four bomb attacks in four
months, the latest in the heart of the capital on Sept. 13. How to deal with
that threat has moved front and center in the campaign for the national election
early next year.

The main opposition party, the Bharatiya Janata Party, or B.J.P., has called the
administration ''soft'' on radical Islamist organizations and unable to protect
citizens from wanton strikes.

''Save India'' will be the party's campaign theme, Arun Jaitley, one of the
party's top strategists, said in an interview last week as other B.J.P. leaders
rallied near the site of one of the most recent bombings. ''How do you save
India from this kind of terrorism?'' Mr. Jaitley asked. ''The core issue will be
terrorism.''

The government is scrambling to defend its record, even as Prime Minister
Manmohan Singh acknowledges ''vast gaps'' in intelligence gathering on terrorist
networks operating in this large, fractious country.

The latest attacks have drawn attention to a larger and more dangerous problem:
a feeble criminal justice system that offers no protection for witnesses and
has a paucity of police officers, and in which suspects of  terrorism and other
crimes are regularly killed in skirmishes with law enforcement authorities,
rather than tried in courts of law.

India's fight against terrorism is complicated by a political landscape in which
parties vie for Hindu and Muslim voters' loyalty. In addition to the radical
Islamist groups blamed for the bombings, there are radical Hindu organizations
that have been accused most recently of deadly attacks on  Christians in several
states. Maoist rebels and ethnic separatist guerrillas in the northeast have
also made attacks.

Still, the blasts that shook the capital on Sept. 13 have placed the greatest
pressure on Mr. Singh's administration, if only because they struck popular
shopping and entertainment districts.

Five bombs exploded in three corners of the city, killing 24. The police
responded by stepping up security in bazaars, combing Muslim-majority areas and,
last Friday, engaging in a shootout with a young man  they described as the
mastermind of the three most recent blasts.

The New Delhi bombing was the latest in a deadly string of attacks. In late
July, the western city of Ahmedabad was struck by back-to-back blasts, first on
busy streets, then at the hospital where the wounded were taken. In all, 52
people died.

The day before, a series of similar low-intensity blasts went off in Bangalore,
killing a woman standing at a bus stop. And in May synchronized bombs were
detonated in the ancient warrens of Jaipur, a popular tourist attraction,
killing 67.

The South Asia Terrorism Portal, a research group based here, has tallied 15
terrorist attacks that it attributed to radical Islamists alone in the past
three years.

Of most concern, perhaps, is that Indian officials say they believe the attacks
have been carried out by homegrown jihadist  groups, trained or aided by
organizations based in Pakistan.

A group calling itself Indian Mujahedeen has claimed responsibility for the
latest four attacks, sending chilling e-mail warnings to Indian news media
minutes before the attacks. Written in English, the messages combine the
language of global radical Islam with distinctly Indian grievances, including
attacks on Muslims in Ahmedabad in 2002.

The police have said the group is probably tied to a radical organization called
the Students' Islamic Movement of India, or SIMI, which was banned in 2001,
before Mr. Singh took office. His Congress Party-led coalition has repeatedly
hesitated on banning SIMI. In a source of embarrassment to the government, the
man arrested in the shootout on Friday, local news reports said, is the son of a
local leader with the Samajwadi Party, a coalition partner in the government.

Meanwhile, the B.J.P. has been reluctant to ban a Hindu right-wing group, the
Bajrang Dal, which the police accuse of leading the anti-Christian violence. The
Bajrang Dal is part of a network of Hindu organizations that make up an
important base of support for the B.J.P.

Election dates have not been set, though voting must take place before May, when
Mr. Singh's five-year term ends. Whether the B.J.P.'s antiterrorism plank will
resonate in this still largely poor and agrarian society is unclear.

Terrorism resonates mostly with urban Indians, said Yogendra Yadav, a researcher
with the Center for the Study of Developing Societies who studies voting
patterns. His 2005 public opinion poll on sources of insecurity nationwide found
that terrorism ranked far lower than common crimes and communal riots.  The
opposition is calling for a resurrection of a tougher antiterrorism law that was
in place during its rule. That law allowed for longer preventive detention and
allowed confessions extracted by the police to be used in court. Human rights
groups criticized it as a tool for rounding up innocent people, largely Muslims,
and it was repealed in 2004 by Mr. Singh's administration.

A government-appointed panel has recommended new antiterrorism provisions that
resemble the old law; the government has not announced its decision.

Kapil Sibal, a member of the cabinet, argued that India's current laws, which
allow citizens to be held for as many as 90 days without being charged, were
stricter than even the Patriot Act in the United States, and said that the
government was already strengthening its intelligence and law enforcement
systems to respond to terrorism.

A veteran Congress Party politician, Mr. Sibal rattled off the numerous
terrorist attacks during the B.J.P.'s tenure. They included the infamous
hijacking of an Indian Airlines flight in 1999, in which the B.J.P. government
released Ahmed Omar Sheikh, a terrorism suspect, in exchange for the civilian
hostages. Two years later, Mr. Sheikh, the leader of a Pakistan-based group
called Jaish-e-Muhammad, played a key part in the kidnapping and beheading of
Daniel Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.

An important indicator of how India may vote will come in November, when four
important state elections are held.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Funeral pyres burned on Sept. 14 in New Delhi for some victims
of a bombing there a day earlier. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MANPREET ROMANA/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); BOMBINGS (90%); POLITICS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (79%); PRIME
MINISTERS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%);
WAR & CONFLICT (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (71%); CHRISTIANS
& CHRISTIANITY (70%); CRIMINAL LAW (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (66%); RELIGION
(63%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (63%); DESTINATIONS & ATTRACTIONS (50%)

PERSON: MANMOHAN SINGH (58%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (93%); BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); AHMEDABAD,
GUJARAT, INDIA (78%)

STATE: KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); GUJARAT, INDIA (78%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ASIA (79%); SOUTHERN
ASIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: September 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1069 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             October 3, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indians Question Police Response to Recent Bombings

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Hari Kumar contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI


Even by the standards of this fractious and sprawling country, a victim of
terrorism for at least 20 years, the spate of recent strikes has been unusual
and unsettling: seven separate attacks in four months, with a death toll of
about 150.

It has also prompted law enforcement authorities to go on an unusually
aggressive manhunt that has gripped the nation and raised anew questions about
India's police tactics, the place of its large Muslim minority and the
effectiveness of its overburdened courts.

In the last several weeks, under intense popular pressure to show results, the
police across India have made about two dozen arrests, killed a man they
described as the ''mastermind'' of several recent blasts in a dramatic shootout
in the capital and presented to the public a rare and swiftly assembled portrait
of a spectacularly well-oiled, homegrown Islamist terrorism network.

The network, Indian Mujahedeen, was described by the police as having recruited
disaffected Muslims from a rural north Indian district famous for exporting hit
men for the Mumbai underworld. It trained them in southern jungles, the police
said, and even lured urban educated youths. Its members were inspired as much by
Osama bin Laden as by specifically Indian Muslim grievances, particularly the
anti-Muslim attacks in Gujarat in 2002, they said.

Those arrested have included a scrap dealer, a preacher and several ambitious,
accomplished college students, including one described by his family of having
dreamed of joining the Indian civil service. Three of those arrested, and the
suspect killed in the shootout, were students at the acclaimed Jamia Millia
Islamia, a predominantly Muslim university in New Delhi.

But the official account of events has divided the nation, in part along
religious lines, failed to withstand the scrutiny of newspapers and civil rights
groups, and in turn revealed a general distrust of law enforcement.

More worryingly, it has uncovered a deep well of anger among India's Muslims,
who complain bitterly of being wrongfully singled out every time bombs go off.

In addition to the Jamia students arrested, several others have been picked up
for questioning and then released. The mood on the campus was ''angry but
quiet,'' Ali Hashmi, 21, a Jamia economics major, said last week. ''We have
something in our hearts,'' his friend, Syed Zuber, 22, said. ''But we are not
reacting.''

The discrepancies in the police accounts have been most glaring, critics say, in
the case of the Sept. 13 blasts in the capital, which killed 25 people and
wounded several dozen in three shopping areas in three corners of the city, just
as Hindus and Muslims went shopping in preparation for their biggest festivals
of the year.

Six days later, the police announced the first breakthrough. They stormed a
fourth-floor apartment in the Jamia university neighborhood and killed a
24-year-old college student, Atif Amin. They said he had planned at least three
recent terrorist attacks, including one in eastern Varanasi as far back as March
2006.

The police also killed one of his suspected accomplices, arrested another and
seized what they called incriminating evidence inside the apartment: two
pistols, a laptop computer and a cellphone, in which, they later said, they
found photographs of the Delhi blast sites.

The city's joint commissioner of police, Karnail Singh, said in an interview
that the laptop contained ''motivational'' material from Al Qaeda, but offered
no details.

One of New Delhi's most celebrated police officers, M. C. Sharma, who led the
raid, was also killed in the shootout. The day after his death, the local papers
reported that he had ''a kill tally'' of 75 suspected criminals, a measure of
how suspects are routinely killed in encounters with the police before they can
be brought to trial.

Within hours, the police arrested three Jamia students from the area. The police
said that they confessed to having planted two of the five bombs on Sept. 13,
and that two of them were also involved in a strike on Ahmedabad, a western city
and site of the 2002 Hindu-Muslim clashes, two months ago.

Two suspects escaped the raid.

Within days, civil rights groups, and Muslims in particular, began to question
the police account. How had two suspects escaped the raid, when the building and
the streets below were crawling with officers and national guardsmen? Why had
Detective Sharma not worn a bulletproof vest on a raid seeking such a high-value
terrorism suspect?

Also, it later turned out that one of those arrested, Saquib Nisar, a business
school student, had been taking an exam on the day of the Ahmedabad blasts.

Six days after the Delhi arrests, in a dramatic news conference of their own,
the police in Mumbai announced five additional arrests. Their suspects, they
maintained, were responsible for most of the terrorism strikes around the
country since 2005, including the ones that the Delhi police had pinned on Mr.
Amin.

The Hindustan Times quipped that the police, with their back-to-back news
conferences, looked ''as if they were launching their autumn collection.''

Tehelka, a weekly news magazine, drew up a list of contradictory police
narratives under the headline ''Sleuths in Wonderland.''

Then, on Monday, two small bombs went off in towns in western India. They
appeared to target Muslim-dominated areas and together killed five people. The
police said that they could not rule out the involvement of Hindu radical
organizations.

Whether the police account of the Sept. 13 plot will hold up in trial is
anybody's guess. Confessions to the police are not admissible in court, and the
judiciary is so woefully overburdened that the case could take years to resolve;
it took 15 years, for instance, to secure a verdict in the 1993 Mumbai serial
blasts that killed more than 260.

But in a predominantly Muslim neighborhood of New Delhi called Shaheen Bagh, the
boys on Mr. Nisar's street were seething with disbelief at everything the police
announced.

Flies buzzed through the narrow lanes on the fetid banks of a black canal. A
water vendor plied the streets; what came from the public tap was too dirty to
drink. Dozens of storefronts catered to the ambitions of Shaheen Bagh's youth,
offering computer classes and ''coaching'' to help schoolchildren ace college
entrance exams.

Mr. Nisar, 25, the son of a test-tube salesman, seems to have been one of the
neighborhood's best-known strivers. H.G.S. Dhaliwal, the city's deputy police
commissioner, described him as a ''chilled-out kind of guy'' who was a strong
academic performer and nursed big ambitions. The 2002 anti-Muslim violence bred
his rage, Mr. Dhaliwal said, and a friend from high school, Mohammed Shakeel,
had lured him into the terrorist cell.

His brother, Shariq Nisar, 18, offered a different portrait, however. The elder
Mr. Nisar had graduated with an economics degree from Jamia and was pursuing a
master's in business administration from a private university.

He worked full time at an employment agency, exercised at a gym nearby and was
determined to join the competitive Indian Administrative Service. Shariq Nisar
said his brother had met Mr. Amin at college and because Mr. Amin was looking
for a room to rent, referred him to another friend, Zia ur-Rahman, whose father
managed the apartment.

Mr. ur-Rahman and Mr. Shakeel are both under arrest. The apartment was the scene
of the shootout.

Shariq Nisar, a freshman at Jamia, said he had stopped attending classes since
his brother's arrest. Bitterness had piled up. He said his brother had been
framed.

''My brother was studying,'' he said. ''Look what kind of dreams he had. Look
what he got.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: A man cried last month at the funeral pyre of his grandson, who
was among 25 people killed in attacks in New Delhi on Sept. 13.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
ADNAN ABIDI/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); RELIGION (89%);
STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); ARRESTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SHOOTINGS
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (68%); RETAILERS (60%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (90%); MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (77%)

STATE: GUJARAT, INDIA (79%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (77%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (96%)

LOAD-DATE: October 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 4, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Completes Revision of F.B.I. Guidelines for Terrorism
Investigations

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 447 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Justice Department finalized on Friday an overhaul of rules that will give
the Federal Bureau of Investigation freer rein to begin investigations into the
possibility of terrorism, even without evidence of wrongdoing.

Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey approved the new guidelines after a review
of several months that sought to consolidate different and sometimes conflicting
standards within the F.B.I. that govern when agents can use informants, do
undercover surveillance, interview witnesses or use other investigative
techniques.

Mr. Mukasey and Robert S. Mueller III, director of the F.B.I., said the new
guidelines, which will take effect Dec. 1, ''provide the F.B.I. with the
authority and flexibility it needs to protect the nation from terrorist
threats.''

The new guidelines, reflecting the evolution of the F.B.I. in the seven years
since the Sept. 11 attacks, state that ''the F.B.I. is an intelligence agency as
well as a law enforcement agency.'' They are also one of the final steps by the
Bush administration to extend its far-reaching counterterrorism policies into
the next administration and beyond.

Earlier drafts of the guidelines met with strong criticism from civil liberties
groups concerned about the prospect for abuse. This led the Justice Department
in its final report to include what it called significant new restrictions on
the tactics that agents can use in handling large-scale demonstrations and civil
disturbances that could require federal intervention. Instead of broad approval
to use any technique considered lawful in such demonstrations and disturbances,
the final guidelines spell out the allowed tactics and limit such investigations
to 30 days.

But civil rights leaders said they remained opposed to the new rules, saying
they would give the F.B.I. greater latitude to use racial, ethnic and religious
criteria in terrorism investigations.

''The attorney general today gave the F.B.I. a blank check to open
investigations of innocent Americans based on no meaningful suspicion of
wrongdoing,'' said Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the American Civil
Liberties Union, which shared its concerns with Justice Department officials as
the guidelines were being drafted.

Among the most controversial aspects of the guidelines is a section that allows
F.B.I. agents to open so-called threat assessments to look into general patterns
or suspicions about terrorist activity without any specific evidence of
wrongdoing. Justice Department officials say  this section of the guidelines,
which remains virtually unchanged from earlier drafts, will allow agents to be
more aggressive in identifying possible terrorist threats.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW ENFORCEMENT (93%); TERRORISM (92%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(92%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%);
APPROVALS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (78%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); EXECUTIVES (75%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(94%)

PERSON: MICHAEL MUKASEY (88%); ROBERT MUELLER (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1088 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 14, 2008 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

British Lords Reject Plan To Lengthen Detentions

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: LONDON


After nearly 12 hours of debate over two days, the House of Lords overwhelmingly
rejected a Labor Government proposal on Monday evening that would have allowed
the authorities to hold terrorism suspects for 42 days without being charged.

The vote was 309 to 118, with many Labor members joining Conservatives, Liberal
Democrats and independents in opposition.

The defeat was a setback for Prime Minister Gordon Brown, who  invested
considerable political capital in getting the bill through the House of Commons
in June; it passed by only nine votes. Since Mr. Brown came to office last year,
his poll ratings have declined steadily, but he has enjoyed a slight rebound for
his response to the financial crisis.

British law already allows terrorism suspects to be held for 28 days without
charges, which is one of the longest such periods in the world. Mr. Brown and
the backers of the 42-day law have argued that extending it is necessary because
of the complex nature of terrorism investigations, which cross borders and
usually involve decrypting computer files. They also argued that the terrorism
threat in Britain had increased, which even some lords who voted against the
bill agreed with.

Opposition to the law was widespread, across the political spectrum and even
among high-level counterterrorism officials. Two former heads of MI5, Britain's
domestic spy agency, Stella Remington and Eliza Manningham-Buller, criticized
the law as wrong in principle and unneeded in practice, and cautioned that it
would alienate Muslims.

''In deciding what I believe on these matters, I have weighed up the balance
between the right to life, the most import civil liberty, the fact that there is
no such thing as complete security and the importance of our hard-won civil
liberties,'' Baroness Manningham-Buller said in a speech in the House of Lords
this year. ''And therefore on a matter of principle, I cannot support the
42-days pre-charge detention.''

Lord Goldsmith, the country's attorney general under Prime Minister Tony Blair,
called the law ''pernicious.'' The longer detention was ''not only unnecessary
but also counterproductive,'' Mr. Goldsmith said in a column Monday in The
Guardian, the liberal daily newspaper.

Writing in the conservative Daily Telegraph on Monday, the columnist Philip
Johnston described the law as ''draconian'' and said  it would ''sign away basic
freedoms which have long formed the very backbone of our society,'' going back
to the Magna Carta.

Some 40 of Britain's literary lights protested the law in poems, essays, satires
and short stories that were published online at www.42writers.com.

Most countries allow far more limited detention without charges. In the United
States, the maximum period a citizen can be held without charge under federal
law is 48 hours, although under the Patriot Act, quickly passed after the 2001
terrorist attacks, a noncitizen can be held for up to seven days without
charges.

A study by Liberty, a British human rights organization, concluded that no other
European democracy permitted  close to 28 days. The longest times allowed  are
7.5 days in Turkey, 6 in France and 5 in Russia, according to Liberty
(www.liberty-humanrights.org.uk). ''I don't really care what any other country
does,'' Lord West, the Home Office minister, said during a powerful speech in
support of the bill in the House of Lords on Monday evening. ''You're bloody
lucky to live in this country,'' he added.

The law is not dead yet. Mr. Brown may go back to the House of Commons, but it
is not clear if he will continue the struggle. In an editorial on Monday, The
Financial Times urged him to drop the idea. ''A Lords defeat should be the last
we hear of this contentious, damaging plan,'' the editorial said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on Oct. 14 about opposition to a proposal by Britain's
Labor government to toughen an anti-terrorism law misspelled the surname of a
former leader of MI5, Britain's domestic spy agency, who had criticized the
proposal. She is Dame Stella Rimington, not Remington.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (90%); LIBERALISM (89%);
WRITERS (84%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); CONSERVATISM (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); IMPORT TRADE (76%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (76%); ESPIONAGE (72%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (70%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (67%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (62%);
LITERATURE (62%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (54%); RELIGION (50%)

PERSON: GORDON BROWN (78%); TONY BLAIR (58%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1093 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           October 16, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Netherlands: Inquiry In Ethnic Cleansing

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 89 words


The United Nations' highest court on Wednesday gave Georgia a green light to
pursue a case in which it accuses Russia of carrying out a campaign of ethnic
cleansing in and around the breakaway regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The
ruling by the International Court of Justice was hailed by Georgian lawyers as a
defeat for Russia, which had argued that the court lacked jurisdiction. The
court also ordered both sides to refrain from any ethnic discrimination and to
allow the free movement of civilians and of humanitarian aid.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (86%);
JURISDICTION (86%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (85%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (58%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); GEORGIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%)

LOAD-DATE: October 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1101 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 17, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Two Generals, Still Maneuvering

BYLINE: By CHARLES McGRATH

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; EXHIBITION
REVIEW 'GRANT AND LEE IN WAR AND PEACE'; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 1375 words


''Grant and Lee in War and Peace,'' which opens on Friday at the New-York
Historical Society, is a rejiggering of an exhibition mounted last year by the
Virginia Historical Society in Richmond, where it was called ''Lee and Grant.''
The flip-flop in billing is partly a nod to local bias and to the fact that
Grant is, after all, buried right here in New York, where he was a bit of a
substance abuser and lost a fortune on Wall Street -- he was one of us, in other
words -- while in Richmond they prefer the white-bearded patriarch who seemingly
had no faults at all. But the title switch is also a reflection of the way these
two generals, implacable opponents on the battlefield, have been linked by
posterity in push-me-pull-you fashion, so that the reputation of one can't go up
unless the other's sinks.

For most of the last 140 years Lee, or a romanticized version of him, has been
on top. This Lee is the tragic and valorous embodiment of the Lost Cause, a
mythic South that fought not so much to defend slavery as to protect states'
rights and a noble, superior way of life, while Grant becomes a drunken butcher,
a slaughterer of his own men and a failed, scandal-plagued president who belongs
in the company of Warren G. Harding.

The scale had so far tilted that by 1920 or so, when John Leon Gerome Ferris
painted his famous depiction of the surrender at Appomattox, ''Let Us Have
Peace, 1865'' -- which is in the show -- he put Lee, regal and imposing, bathed
in light, in the center of the picture, while a shadowy, supplicant Grant, in
muddy boots, approaches from the left. If you didn't know better, you would
think Lee had won.

Only in the last few years have historians tried to address the balance a little
-- demolishing the long-cherished notion that Lee was personally opposed to
slavery, for example, and arguing that it was he who was reckless about
casualties and that overaggressiveness contributed to his defeat. In this light
Grant starts to look a little better. Even his drinking has been exaggerated,
some biographers now claim. The Historical Society show incorporates some of the
latest scholarship pointing to Grant's advanced views on civil rights and Indian
policy, and even suggests that the failures of Reconstruction were not his so
much as those of the nation, which lacked the political will to follow his lead.

But ''Grant and Lee'' does not, strictly speaking, weigh the merits of one
versus the other; nor is it really a Civil War show. Die-hard buffs and Civil
War re-enactors seeking to learn more, say, about campfire cookery or latrine
excavation at Manassas will probably be a little disappointed, though there is
an extensive display examining the Wilderness campaign of 1864-65. And, as
always at the New-York Historical Society, there is a lot of excellent stuff on
view, some of it borrowed, some of it from the society's own vast troves.

Looking for one of Zachary Taylor's spurs or a shako from the Mexican War? No
problem. The New-York Historical Society has everything you need right there in
the attic at 170 Central Park West. Also on display are Lee's tiny dancing
slippers (he was a compulsive flirt and ladies' man), his sword and revolver
(courtesy of the Museum of the Confederacy) and Grant's high-pommeled Mexican
saddle. There are some audiovisual presentations, and a computer screen that
lets you flip through a sketchbook kept by Capt. Abner Doubleday during the
Mexican War, a few years after he supposedly invented baseball.

''Grant and Lee'' tries to take a longer view of the two men, putting them in a
context that carries right up to the present. As Louise Mirrer, the president of
the Historical Society, said last week, the organization recently did two big
shows on slavery and felt that it had to offer something that went beyond the
traditional Civil War narrative. So the new show explores larger questions about
the origins and growth of the military in the United States and about the proper
role of the army in a civilian, democratic society.

The exhibition begins at West Point, pointing out that when Grant (Class of
1843) and Lee (Class of 1829) went there it was as much an engineering school,
where cadets learned to sketch, paint, survey and draw maps, as it was a proving
ground for future soldiers. (There are samples of both men's work, and Grant,
though otherwise a dismal, demerit-ridden student, turns out to have been a
better artist than Lee, just as he proved to be by far the better writer.)

And fully a third of the show looks at the Seminole Wars, the crisis of Bleeding
Kansas and the Mexican War in ways that are meant to draw parallels with
American involvement in Vietnam and in Bosnia and Kosovo, and with current
debates over immigration.

It's a provocative arrangement, especially at the end of the show, where the
viewer is encouraged to think about the challenges of Reconstruction in light of
American efforts to stabilize and rebuild Iraq. And yet thinking about the army
this way, as a tool of policy, risks underplaying the degree to which the Civil
War was not just another military engagement, but, as Drew Gilpin Faust has
argued in her recent book ''The Republic of Suffering,'' something approaching
massacre on an organized scale.

This was a conflict that fundamentally changed the nature of the American
military, turning it into a bureaucracy dependent on political favor and
patronage, and that changed the nature of warfare itself. Slaughter became
ruthlessly efficient, as did economic war, and in the brand-new arena of public
relations, battles began to be waged of the sort that provoke museum exhibitions
a century and a half later.

Though the exhibition doesn't dwell on the personalities of the two generals,
they keep asserting themselves nonetheless. The differences between them are
apparent in the very first gallery, where a portrait of Lee, the West Point
graduate, commissioned by his wealthy plantation family, hangs next to a
reproduction of a little daguerreotype that was all the Grant family of Point
Pleasant, Ohio, could afford.

Lee, brown-haired and clean-shaven except for a dashing mustache, looks like a
Byronic hero, while Grant appears to be squirming under a pair of epaulets the
size of scrub mops. Lee's uniform coat, in a case down the hall, is trimly
tailored and festooned with gold braid; Grant's, next to it, is made of
shapeless black sackcloth and is devoid of decoration. Unlike Lee, Grant never
looked the part of a general -- he sometimes seemed uncomfortable in his own
skin, let alone in a uniform -- and that he was so good at generalship is
something of a miracle. The wall labels play down the extent to which he had
been a failure at just about everything else.

The show suggests that the style of each general was partly shaped by his
commanding officer in the Mexican War, in which Lee's mentor was Winfield Scott,
Old Fuss and Feathers, while Grant was a protege of Zachary Taylor, Old Rough
and Ready,  but the viewer senses that the differences were deeper than that.

In some photographs taken near the end of his life, Lee already looks marmoreal
-- a statue of himself -- as if he has become trapped in a myth of his own
making, while Grant remained a pragmatist and a self-inventor to the end. In
1884, broke and dying of throat cancer, Grant reluctantly sat down and wrote his
autobiography, hoping it would sell well enough to leave his wife a legacy.

Fittingly, a copy of his ''Personal Memoirs,'' which became one of the
best-selling books of the 19th century, is in a case at the end of the show,
though the wall label quotes from Whitman and not from Grant's own prose, which
was something new at the time, free of the false piety and flannel-mouthed
rhetoric that characterized so much Civil War literature. Grant's book, like its
author, was clear, concise, no-nonsense and scrupulously honest, and it's the
best exhibit we have of what this war was really like. The only thing he was
wrong about was his conviction that it would deter us from ever having another
one.

''Grant and Lee in War and Peace'' continues through March 29 at the New-York
Historical Society, 170 Central Park West, at 77th Street; (212) 873-3400,
nyhistory.org.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Grant and Lee in War and Peace A New York Times supplement
commemorating the 50th anniversary of the Civil War's end is at the New-York
Historical Society. (THE NEW YORK TIMES, 1915/NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY)(C27)
An 1865 Mathew Brady photograph of Civil War casualties at the New-York
Historical Society. (LIBRARY OF CONGRESS)
Portraits of Robert E. Lee, left, and Ulysses S. Grant. (PHOTOGRAPHS, LEFT TO
RIGHT BY, WASHINGTON AND LEE UNIVESITY
 NEW-YORK HISTORICAL SOCIETY)(C32)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HISTORY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%);
EXHIBITIONS (78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (77%); MEN (74%); BIOGRAPHICAL
LITERATURE (73%); SCANDALS (70%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (70%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBRARY OF CONGRESS (59%)

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (93%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1102 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 17, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Orders Investigation Of Executions In Franco Era

BYLINE: By DALE FUCHS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 509 words

DATELINE: MADRID


The crusading investigative judge Baltasar Garzon opened Spain's first criminal
investigation into Franco-era executions and repression with an order Thursday
to open 19 mass graves, including one believed to contain the remains of the
poet Federico Garcia Lorca.

Judge Garzon, who has focused on terrorism cases in recent years, is often
praised for his failed attempt to prosecute Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the Chilean
dictator, in 1998 for crimes against humanity. But his order on Thursday raised
an immediate controversy within Spain itself. Silence and a so-called pact of
forgetting about past atrocities were the pillars of the peaceful transition to
democracy after the nearly 40-year dictatorship of Franco, who died in 1975.

In a 68-page court document, Judge Garzon accepted a petition to investigate the
forced disappearances of thousands of people who, like Garcia Lorca, were on or
linked to the losing Republican side of the Spanish Civil War. The petition was
filed by 13 associations of victims' families.

Garcia Lorca was executed in Granada, where he was born, by a firing squad at
the start of the war, which ran from 1936 to 1939. The grave his remains are
believed to lie in, along with those of a schoolteacher and two union leaders,
is in a nearby village, Viznar. It has become a pilgrimage site for lovers of
Garcia Lorca's tragic, passionate verse, as well as for students of Spanish
history -- many of whom leave flowers or notes at the site.

The conservative opposition argues that the investigation, along with recent
government legislation offering symbolic reparations to Republican victims,
opens old wounds. State prosecutors believe the disappearances are immune to
prosecution under the Amnesty Law of 1977 and plan to appeal.

Earlier this month Judge Garzon requested information from churches and city
halls around the country, as well as the Catholic hierarchy, to compile a
definitive list of victims' names, which now totals 114,266, according to the
court document. The judge has now also requested proof from the Interior
Ministry that 35 generals and ministers in the early years of Franco's
dictatorship are dead.

The Franco regime, Judge Garzon wrote, ''used all its resources to locate,
identify and grant reparations to the victims from the winning side but did not
give the same respect to the losers, who were persecuted, jailed, disappeared
and tortured.'' The disappearances, he concluded, constitute ''crimes against
humanity.''

Garcia Lorca's family had long opposed opening the grave, despite petitions by
the granddaughter of one of the other victims believed to be buried in the same
grave. But his niece said that they would not fight the judge's order.

''We don't believe that the exhumation will add anything new to the information
about the circumstances of his death, but we will not appeal,'' the niece, Laura
Garcia Lorca, said in a telephone interview on Thursday.

The family, she added, believes the reputed grave should remain intact as a
testimony to the atrocities committed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A mass grave in Spain. A judge on Thursday ordered the opening
of 19 Franco-era mass graves.
 One of the mass graves that is to be opened is believed to contain the remains
of the executed poet Federico Garcia Lorca.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY SERGIO
TORRES/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (94%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
JUDGES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
PETITIONS (88%); HISTORY (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); POETRY (77%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (77%); AMNESTY (73%); CONSERVATISM (73%); CIVIL WAR
(73%); TERRORISM (72%); WRITERS (72%); GRANDCHILDREN (67%); RELIGION (65%)

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: SPAIN (94%); CHILE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1120 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            October 31, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Questioning 'Dirty Bomb' Plot, Judge Orders U.S. to Yield Papers on Detainee

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 814 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Saying he questioned the government's claim that a Guantanamo Bay detainee had
planned a radioactive-bomb attack in the United States, a federal district judge
ordered the Justice Department on Thursday to give the detainee's lawyers
documents on his treatment.

The documents are central to the claim of the prisoner, Binyam Mohamed, that he
falsely confessed to the dirty-bomb plot and other offenses only after being
tortured in Morocco at the direction of the United States.

''My concern is getting to the truth,'' the judge, Emmet G. Sullivan, said at a
hearing.

The case of Mr. Mohamed, an Ethiopian-born former British resident, has drawn
international attention and been at the center of diplomatic tensions between
the United States and Britain. This week, British officials said they had
referred questions about his treatment for possible criminal investigation by
their law enforcement authorities.

The tension between the governments has intensified in recent weeks after the
Pentagon dropped war crimes charges against Mr. Mohamed and the Justice
Department said it would no longer rely on its dirty-bomb claims as a
justification for holding him.

At the Thursday hearing, Judge Sullivan asked why, after more than six years,
the government had stepped away from its claims about a dirty-bomb plot. ''That
raises a question as to whether or not the allegations were ever true,'' the
judge said.

In 2002, John Ashcroft, then the attorney general, announced that a plot to
detonate a radioactive bomb in the United States had been foiled and an American
citizen, Jose Padilla, detained. The Pentagon has claimed that Mr. Mohamed
assisted Mr. Padilla.

After Mr. Padilla was held for three and a half years in a naval brig, the
Justice Department abandoned its dirty-bomb claims against him. He was convicted
of other charges in 2007.

Pressed by Judge Sullivan on Thursday as to whether the government stood behind
its assertion of a dirty-bomb plot, a Justice Department lawyer, Andrew I.
Warden, said, ''The short answer is yes.''

But Mr. Warden said the government could prove that Mr. Mohamed was being
properly held without evidence of that plot. Military prosecutors have said they
will file new charges against Mr. Mohamed with the Guantanamo war crimes
tribunal, but they have not said whether the bomb plot will be among those
charges.

The government claims Mr. Mohamed confessed to the plot and to attending Qaeda
training camps.

But Zachary Katznelson, a lawyer for Mr. Mohamed, said in court Thursday that
all his confessions were made after ''he was tortured again and again and again
until he just parroted what his torturers wanted him to say.'' In Morocco, Mr.
Katznelson said, Mr. Mohamed was beaten and repeatedly cut with razor blades on
his genitals and elsewhere.

Mr. Mohamed's lawyers have laid out a detailed argument that he was subjected to
the government's program of rendition to other countries. They say  evidence
shows that  American intelligence agents transferred him to Morocco.

The documents Judge Sullivan directed the government to turn over concern Mr.
Mohamed's treatment during the two years he was held in Pakistan, Morocco and
Afghanistan after he was first detained at the airport in Karachi, Pakistan, in
2002. Mr. Katznelson said evidence of torture would prove that Mr. Mohamed had
never voluntarily admitted to the dirty-bomb plot or any other involvement with
Al Qaeda.

The government has said Mr. Mohamed's claims of torture are not credible. A
Moroccan consular official, Karim  el-Mansouri, said in an interview that he had
no details on Mr. Mohamed's case but that Morocco protected human rights. Paul
Gimigliano, a spokesman for the Central Intelligence Agency, said: ''The C.I.A.
does not conduct or condone torture. Nor does it transport individuals anywhere
for the purpose of torture.''

Last week, a British court ruled that 35 documents in British intelligence files
concerning Mr. Mohamed's treatment should be turned over to his lawyers. The
court said the documentation ''lends some support to his claim that the
confession was obtained after a period of two years incommunicado detention
during which he was tortured.''

The material  Judge Sullivan has now ordered the  government to turn over would
be any additional information about Mr. Mohamed's treatment.

The British court had said it would wait to order the actual release of the 35
documents, to give Judge Sullivan an opportunity to rule on the issue first. By
the time they arrived in court Thursday, however, Justice Department lawyers had
turned over those documents. That followed a letter Tuesday from a British
government lawyer to the British court's judges that said the home secretary had
referred to law enforcement officials in Britain ''the question of possible
criminal wrongdoing'' in the treatment of Mr. Mohamed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Binyam Mohamed in 2000.(PHOTOGRAPH BY REPRIEVE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (93%); JUDGES (92%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); DIRTY BOMBS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); TORTURE (89%); MILITARY
COURTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (73%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); MOROCCO (93%); CUBA (88%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

LOAD-DATE: October 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1127 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 2, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Seeks Wiretapping Documents

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A judge has ordered the Justice Department to produce White House memorandums
that provide the legal basis for the Bush administration's post-Sept. 11
warrantless wiretapping program.

The judge, Henry H. Kennedy Jr. of Federal District Court in Washington, signed
the order Friday. It requires the department to produce the memorandums by the
White House legal counsel's office by Nov. 17. He said he would review the
memorandums to determine whether any information could be released publicly
without violating attorney-client privilege.

The order  came in response to lawsuits by civil liberties groups in 2005 after
news reports disclosed the wiretapping.

The department had argued that the memorandums were protected attorney-client
communications.

But Judge Kennedy said that argument was ''too vague.''

A spokesman for the Justice Department, Dean Boyd, said Saturday the department
was reviewing the opinion and would ''respond appropriately in court.''

Shortly after the Sept. 11 attacks, President Bush authorized the National
Security Agency to spy on calls between people in the United States and
terrorism suspects abroad without obtaining court warrants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WIRETAPPING (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); LAWYERS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); TERRORISM (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); ATTORNEY
CLIENT PRIVILEGE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); LITIGATION (73%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); NATIONAL SECURITY (65%); ARREST WARRANTS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (91%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1147 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 11, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistanis Mired in Brutal Battle to Oust Taliban

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ and PIR ZUBAIR SHAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2166 words

DATELINE: LOE SAM, Pakistan


When Pakistan's army retook this strategic stronghold from the Taliban last
month, it discovered how deeply Islamic militants had encroached on -- and
literally dug into -- Pakistani territory.

Behind mud-walled family compounds in the Bajaur area, a vital corridor to
Afghanistan through Pakistan's tribal belt, Taliban insurgents created a network
of tunnels to store arms and move about undetected.

Some tunnels stretched for more than half a mile and were equipped with
ventilation systems so that fighters could withstand a long siege. In some
places, it took barrages of 500-pound bombs to break the tunnels apart.

''These were not for ordinary battle,'' said Gen. Tariq Khan, the commander of
the Pakistan Frontier Corps, who led the army's campaign against the Taliban in
the area.

After three months of sometimes fierce fighting, the Pakistani Army controls a
small slice of Bajaur. But what was initially portrayed as a paramilitary action
to restore order in the area has become the most sustained military campaign by
the Pakistani Army against the Taliban and its backers in Al Qaeda since
Pakistan allied itself with the United States in 2001.

President-elect Barack Obama has pledged to make the conflicts in Afghanistan
and Pakistan a top priority. The Bajaur campaign serves as a cautionary tale of
the formidable challenge that even a full-scale military effort faces in
flushing the Taliban and Al Qaeda from rugged northern Pakistan.

Pakistani officials describe the area as the keystone of an arc of militancy
that stretches across the semiautonomous tribal region of Pakistan and into
Afghanistan.

Under heavy pressure from the United States, Pakistani officials are vowing to
dislodge the Taliban fighters and their Qaeda allies who have taken refuge in
the tribal areas.

But a two-day visit to Loe Sam and Khar, the capital of Bajaur, arranged for
foreign journalists by the Pakistani military, suggested that Pakistan had
underestimated a battle-hardened opponent fighting tenaciously to protect its
mountainous stronghold.

Taliban militants remain entrenched in many areas. Even along the road to Loe
Sam, which the army laboriously cleared, sniper fire from militants continues.

The Pakistanis have also resorted to scorched-earth tactics to push the Taliban
out, an approach that risks pushing more of their own citizens into the
Taliban's embrace.

After the Frontier Corps failed to dislodge the Taliban from Loe Sam in early
August, the army sent in 2,400 troops in early September to take on a Taliban
force that has drawn militants from across the tribal region, as well as a flow
of fighters from Afghanistan.

Like all Pakistani soldiers, the troops sent here had been trained and
indoctrinated to fight in conventional warfare against India, considered the
nation's permanent enemy, but had barely been trained in counterinsurgency
strategy and tactics.

A Heap of Rubble

To save Loe Sam, the army has destroyed it.

The shops and homes of the 7,000 people who lived here are a heap of gray
rubble, blown to bits by the army. Scraps of bedding and broken electric fans
lie strewn in the dirt.

As Pakistani Army helicopters and artillery fired at militants' strongholds in
the region, about 200,000 people fled to tent camps for the displaced in
Pakistan, to relatives' homes or across the border into Afghanistan.

The aerial bombardment was necessary, Pakistani military officials say, to root
out a well-armed Taliban force.

The Pakistani Army and the Frontier Corps, the paramilitary force responsible
for security in the tribal areas, say  83 of their soldiers have died  and 300
have been wounded  since early August. That compares with 61 dead among forces
of the American-led coalition  in Afghanistan in the first four months of 2008.

At some point, probably over a period of several years, though no official could
explain exactly when, the militants dug the series of well-engineered,
interconnected tunnels.

The military now believes such tunnels lace much of Bajaur, where the militants
still control large swaths of territory, General Khan said in an interview at
his headquarters in Peshawar, the capital of North-West Frontier Province.

Bajaur is no ordinary prize. The militants seized it because of its strategic
location beside Kunar Province in Afghanistan, where American and coalition
forces are fighting the Taliban.

The area serves as a gateway to Kunar for Taliban fighters from other parts of
the tribal belt, particularly Waziristan, to attack American forces.

Bajaur provides access south to Peshawar, one of the nation's major cities,
which is under threat from the Taliban.

And it offers a land bridge to more settled parts of Pakistan, like the Swat
Valley to the east, where the army is struggling to contain the Taliban.

The fight is now a test of strength between the army and Tehrik-i-Taliban, the
umbrella group of the Pakistani Taliban, allied with Al Qaeda, General Khan
said.

The army will fight until it has captured all of Bajaur, he said.

Arabs, Uzbeks, Tajiks and Afghans form the hard core of its opponents, enlisting
young, unemployed local men who join the militants for money and the prestige of
sitting armed with a rifle in a double-cabin pickup, the favored Taliban
vehicle, General Khan said.

American officials have said they believe some important Qaeda leaders are
hiding in Bajaur.

In 2006, a United States missile attack from a remotely piloted aircraft on the
village of Damadola was aimed at killing the top deputy to Osama bin Laden,
Ayman al-Zawahri.

Villagers in the Mohmand tribal agency, adjacent to Bajaur, said that they saw
Mr. Zawahri in the northern part of Mohmand in September and that he had arrived
with his wife to inspect a house, stayed the night, then left in a convoy of
vehicles.

Advance of the Taliban

It was in response to the 2006 strike that the Taliban started taking over
Bajaur, according to the government's senior civilian official in the area,
Shafirullah Khan.

Its  methods were ruthless. Homeowners were coerced or paid to allow the
militants  to use their premises as bases, Mr. Khan said. Those who resisted
were killed, often by beheading.

A well-known Afghan Taliban fighter, Zia ur-Rehman, directed and fortified the
operation with his own men, bringing hundreds of fighters from Afghanistan last
November, Mr. Khan said.

By last December, the Taliban had pushed government-armed local tribesmen, known
as levees, out of their checkpoint at Loe Sam. By June, the Taliban had
destroyed more than half of the 72 checkpoints in Bajaur.

The Taliban disrupted the workings of the civilian government, staging a suicide
bombing of a truck carrying the salaries for teachers, and robbing a major bank,
Mr. Khan said.

In August, as Pakistan's resolve to take on the insurgents hardened, the army
dispatched Maj. Ijaz Hussain and nearly 150 Frontier Corps troops to recapture
the strategic junction of Loe Sam.

They had little idea what they were in for. With scarce ammunition and little
water in fierce heat, they fought the Taliban in close combat but were quickly
surrounded.

Two convoys sent to rescue them were decimated by militants, who attacked from
their tunnels.

Ordered to retreat, the corpsmen escaped under cover of night through cornfields
in sloshing rain, evading Taliban pursuers and gunfire from government
helicopters.

In the failed recapture attempt, 29 Frontier Corps soldiers were killed and
others were severely wounded, Col. Shahbaz Rasul of the Frontier Corps said.

Panic spread. A few days later, the crenellated fortress walls of the government
compound in Khar were in danger of being overrun. More than 300 of the levees
protecting the compound fled, leaving 35, Mr. Khan said.

''One of the basic problems of our fighting system is the intelligence
failures,'' said General Khan, the Frontier Corps commander. ''Aggressive
patrolling should have been done. It wasn't done.''

Interviews with Pakistani Army officers, and a ride under army escort along the
road from Khar to Loe Sam, showed that many of the soldiers seemed to be
unprepared to fight a fast-moving, highly motivated and well-disguised insurgent
force.

General Khan and other Pakistani military officials complained that they did not
have the proper weapons and equipment to take on the militants, including radar
and current intelligence.

The Taliban fighters, meanwhile, had heavy weapons and communications systems
that could disguise their whereabouts, as well as the ability to home in on army
radios.

Lt. Col. Javed Baluch, whose troops were sent to Bajaur in early September, said
that even the terrain had surprised them. The khaki-colored earth dips and
swerves every 25 yards; crevices suddenly become hillocks, and scattered clumps
of trees and bushes can conceal snipers.

The militants were king, because the civilians had been ordered out of the area
by the army in early August, in anticipation of the fight.

''The enemy had a lot of advantage,'' Colonel Baluch said. ''They knew the area
completely. We were told we would meet foreign fighters and local fighters
supporting them. The resistance unfolded differently.''

His mission was to clear Taang Khatta, a place thick with militants. It was a
spot where the Frontier Corps forces had faced stiff resistance in August.

On the first day that his soldiers advanced on foot along the road to Taang
Khatta, they were ambushed, he said.

The insurgents were invisible, hidden behind the thick mud walls of the
compounds, their rifles  poking through narrow slits.

''Small arms have no effect on the walls, and that's what we were carrying,''
Colonel Baluch said. ''We did not know where to fire back.''

The attack came from three directions, but the guerrillas made a mistake.

''When they shouted,  'God is great,' it was helpful to us,'' Colonel Baluch
said. The voices gave away their location.

In the end, it took five days and the loss of four men to conquer Taang Khatta,
a mere bend in the road, just about a mile from the Khar headquarters.

Still,  Colonel Baluch  was lucky, he said. The push to capture another tiny
place, Nisarabad, farther up the road, left 12 soldiers dead and 46 wounded.

The final assault on Loe Sam was led by Maj. Anwar Saeed, 37, who was
experienced in fighting the Taliban in North Waziristan, the base of the most
hardened militant fighters in the tribal belt.

It was ultimately captured on Oct. 21, and reduced to ruins in the process.

''When you capture a compound, the adjacent one becomes a firefight,'' he said.
''They were fighting and firing, and throwing grenades at us from 25 meters
away.''

Yes, he knew the people who had lived here were now bereft. ''I know many have
suffered because of our actions,'' Major Saeed said. ''But the government is
going to take care of them.''

What Lies Ahead

In Peshawar, however, some of the store owners from Loe Sam whose property was
crushed said there were limits to their understanding.

They had heard no word about their return or about reconstruction, said Hajji
Shakir, the owner of two stores in Loe Sam, as he sat on the floor of a crowded
house with a group of fellow merchants, clutching the account books that he had
escaped with.

''If the government doesn't rebuild, we will be thieves, suicide bombers,'' he
said. ''We will be forced to do these things.''

Mr. Khan, the chief government representative in Bajaur, said he had funds,
provided by the United States Agency for International Development, for
rebuilding. But he did not know when it would begin.

Some of the displaced said they were also angered by the high number of civilian
deaths, many of them incurred when Pakistani jet fighters and helicopter
gunships attacked Taliban redoubts.

The military said last week that 95 civilians had been killed in the Bajaur
conflict, but the Human Rights Commission of Pakistan said that the number
seemed low.

There is no reliable count, because the commission was barred from
investigating.

Similarly, there is little agreement about how many militants the army has
killed in the three months of the Bajaur campaign.

The army says 1,500. But two officers, speaking on condition of anonymity
because they were contradicting their superiors, said that  the number appeared
excessive. One army captain involved in the fighting said 300 seemed closer.

While the resistance had been reduced on the flat land, one thing was certain:
as the military prepares to fight the militants in the mountainous areas in
Bajaur, progress will be more difficult.

In his wood-paneled office, Col. Nauman Saeed, the officer in charge of
day-to-day operations at the headquarters in Khar, said he was mired in a
classic guerrilla conflict.

In September, he said, Taliban leaders in Bajaur had replenished their forces
with 950 more men from Afghanistan.

''You keep killing them,'' Colonel Saeed said, ''but you still have them
around.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A Pakistani tank in Loe Sam on Oct. 25. Four days earlier, the
government forces had finally ousted the Taliban from the town, which is at a
strategic crossroads.
 Pakistani soldiers in the ruins of Loe Sam. Many of the 7,000 residents have
fled to Afghanistan or refugee camps. (POOL PHOTOS BY EMILIO MORENATTI)(A12)
MAP: The Pakistani Army vows to fight until it controls all of Bajaur. Map
details Loe Sam, Pakistan.(A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (93%); ARMIES (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR
& CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); RELIGION (73%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (53%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2009


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1150 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 15, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times: November 15, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2262 words


International

HAMAS FIRES ROCKETS INTO ISRAEL;

18 Hospitalized as Tensions Rise

Hamas, the Palestinian rulers of Gaza, fired a barrage of rockets into southern
Israel as part of what it called retaliation for the killing of 11 militants
over the past 11 days and the increased closings of Gaza crossings by Israel.
The rockets sent 18 Israelis to the hospital with mild injuries and shock and
has increased tensions between Hamas and Israel. Hamas said that it wanted to
continue the five-month-old truce but that Israel's actions showed they did not.
Page A7

TWO REPORTERS HURT IN PAKISTAN

A Japanese journalist and an Afghan colleague were wounded in a shooting during
a botched kidnapping in Peshawar. The attempt came after the men had conducted
interviews with Taliban fighters in the nearby tribal region, the police and
local journalists said. The attack followed several others, all part of a surge
of militant violence in Peshawar, including the assassination of an American aid
worker on Wednesday.  Page A6

RUSSIA MOVES TO EXTEND LIMITS

It was the old-timers from the Communist Party who stepped in with the only word
of protest as Russia neared passing a bill to extend the presidential term to
six years from four. The bill's rapid trip through the lower house of Parliament
has drawn harsh criticism from opposition leaders. But the opposition has little
presence in the house, so the bill is almost nearly assured of becoming law,
leaving the Communists as virtually the only dissenters.  Page A8

PILOT ERROR IN MEXICO PLANE CRASH

The authorities said that a Mexican government Learjet crashed last week,
killing the interior minister, because it flew too close behind a jumbo jet and
lost control in the turbulence created by the larger plane. The report on the
crash, which killed all nine people on board and five on the ground, said that
the pilot and co-pilot appeared to be confused about how to operate the
Learjet's controls.  Page A8

UNDER PINOCHET, THE WHOLE STORY

Heraldo Munoz was willing to die for an insurrection that never materialized and
life under the Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet. He later became Chile's
permanent representative to the United Nations and head of the Security
Council's antiterrorism committee. His book, published this fall, ''The
Dictator's Shadow: Life Under Augusto Pinochet,'' offers the whole story, even
an anecdote about creeping through Santiago with unstable dynamite strapped to
his chest.  Page A6

National

CONCERNS OVER GUANTaNAMO

As New Administration Nears

As Senator Barack Obama moves closer to assuming responsibility for the
Guantanamo Bay prison, his vows to close it are bringing to the fore thorny
questions his advisers are now considering. For example, what if some detainees
are acquitted or cannot be prosecuted at all? That concern is at the center of a
debate among national security, human rights and legal experts that has
intensified since the election.  PAGE A13

HEATED SENATE RACE IN MINNESOTA

The vote gap between the incumbent Republican senator, Norm Coleman, and his
Democratic challenger, the comedian Al Franken, in Minnesota's still-undecided
Senate race has narrowed since Election Day, but the hostility and vitriol
surrounding the race seem to grow by the hour. Stakes are high, because with
three Senate races yet to be decided, Democrats still have a chance of winning
the 60 seats needed to break Republican filibusters in Washington.   PAGE A13

ANOTHER BLOW DEALT TO GALVESTON

Still struggling to recover from Hurricane Ike, the battered economy of
Galveston Island suffered another severe blow this week when the University of
Texas decided to lay off 3,800 people, a third of the work force, from the
medical center that is the largest employer on the island.   PAGE A10

REVAMPING THE SPACE STATION

While previous NASA missions have often focused on adding modules or solar
panels to the International Space Station, a 15-day shuttle mission is devoted
to work on the $100 billion orbiting outpost to transform the inside so that
crew size can be doubled to six. A crew of six will allow more scientific work
to be performed, and will change the dynamic of life in orbit.  PAGE A10

Obituaries

ROSETTA REITZ, 84

An ardent feminist, she scavenged through the early history of jazz and the
blues to resurrect the music of long-forgotten women and to create a record
label, Rosetta Records, dedicated to them. ''My hope and dream,'' she said, ''is
that there won't be a need for a women's record company.''  PAGE B10

CARL D. KEITH, 88

He was a co-inventor of the three-way automotive catalytic converter -- a major
advance in eliminating the toxic tailpipe emissions that once blanketed cities
in smog.  PAGE B10

New York

RUMORS OF CLINTON APPOINTMENT

Create Anxious Buzz in New York

When word passed that Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton was a contender to serve as
President-elect Barack Obama's secretary of state, it set off a buzz of
speculation in New York -- who would replace her? According to New York election
law, Gov. David A. Paterson would appoint her successor if she takes the job.
Two people close to the governor said that Mr. Paterson believes he might have
to do so.  Page A15

WINNING DESIGN FOR BIKE RACKS

A circle struck through by a bar, sort of like the Ghostbusters logo, except not
red, and well, no ghost either. Actually, never mind, they're not much alike. A
new bike rack created by Ian Mahaffey and Maarten De Greeve, two designers from
Copenhagen, has won the CityRacks Design Competition, officials announced. It
will become the city's new standard bicycle rack.  Page A15

PHASING OUT A LEGENDARY THUG

It's hard out here for a thug -- the only job he managed to land was getting
shot at by the police, and he may be facing retirement. For four decades, the
Police Department firing ranges have been using ''the Thug,'' a silhouette
target created in the 1960s. Initially designed to make it harder to gauge where
shots hit the target, it is being phased out in favor of one that makes it
easier to score from a distance, a police spokesman said. Page A15

Sports

YANKEES MAKE A RECORD OFFERING

While Prowling Free Agent Market

The Yankees have been laying in the cut for a while. They passed  on trading for
Johan Santana, eager to slip another ace into their hand while not giving up
their best prospects, and Friday they got their chance, making an offer to C. C.
Sabathia that would be a record figure for a pitcher. According to two people
with intimate knowledge of the deal, the six-year offer is worth $140 million,
an amount that exceeds the  $137.5 million deal the Mets gave Santana.  Page D1

LAW'S TALK TO JETS BEFORE WIN

The night before the Jets triumphed in fine fashion over New England, Ty Law, a
day into his tenure with the team, gave his new teammates a window into the
Patriots' opinion of the Jets: that given enough space, they would find a way to
lose. Mr. Law spent nine seasons with New England and was himself responsible
more than once for serving up defeat to the Jets. They now have a chance to rise
above their previous collapses, and  a superior quarterback to help them do so.
Page D2

Business

THE OPTIONS ARE GETTING THINNER

For Corporate Health Care

It's that time of year again, when corporate America gets to choose medical
plans for the coming year. But even if employees are in the enviable position of
having a job, when so many positions have been trimmed, using the word choice
for their medical options should maybe be in quotes. The menu is short. Another
typical new feature is a health plan with a high annual deductible that is
likely to reach $1,100 for an individual and even more for family coverage.
Page B1

WALL STREET CLOSES ON LOW NOTE

After late trading slowly inched shares toward positive territory, Wall Street
did a 180-degree turn and shares sank back, deeply in the red, where they had
spent most of the day. On this occasion, a last-minute sell-off of stocks
absorbed most of the gains from the rally on Thursday, when major exchanges
closed more than 5 percent ahead. Experts called it ''almost a classic bear
market,'' adding that taking a piece of that back before the weekend was to be
expected. Page B5

INSURANCE AND RELATED WORRIES

When the American International Group became a household name two months ago, a
small-time fear began to creep into the minds of policy holders at all kinds of
insurance companies. That fear heightened when A.I.G. increased its bailout
needs to $150 billion and Goldman Sachs suggested that some companies might go
under entirely, leaving policy holders to fret over what to do and ways to
protect themselves. Page B1

AT LEAST THE STASH OF SPAM IS SAFE

We named one of the most obnoxious side-effects of the digital age after it --
Spam. A rubbery processed food made of pork and ham, it has a reputation as a
notorious hard-times food. And in a struggling economy with a dark financial
future, the Hormel Foods factory that makes the stuff has been working around
the clock to manufacture more, seven days a week since July, as Americans
explore more cheap foods. Page B1

NONPROFIT, EMPHASIS ON THE 'NON'

With people gripping ever tighter to their purse strings, imagine the effect
this has had on charities and nonprofit groups that depend on private donations.
While the average person has been allowed the luxury of waiting for the other
financial shoe to fall, nonprofit groups and charities have not. That shoe has
fallen -- fast, hard and on their necks. Coupled with the demand for their
services growing sharply, the decline is even grimmer. Page B6

Arts

BELOVED TAXIDERMIST LOST,

Parisians to the Rescue

When a fire ripped through Deyrolle, the 177-year-old taxidermist in Paris, last
February, it was as if a dagger had been plunged into the heart of the city.
Ninety percent of the shop's stock, including a celebrated fossil collection and
a 19th-century diorama of more than 100 birds, was lost. But Paris has since
come together in an unusual display of solidarity to save the store. Hermes
reissued a limited-edition scarf to raise money, and private donations have
included 50 boxes of butterflies, and a bull's head.  PAGE C1

FOLLOWING MARCO POLO'S FOOTSTEPS

Back in 1993, Denis Belliveau and Francis O'Donnell, two friends from Queens,
decided it would be fun to try to follow the trail supposedly blazed by Marco
Polo more than 700 years earlier. The adventure crossed thousands of miles and
lasted two years, and more than a decade later their vacation has become a film,
''In the Footsteps of Marco Polo,'' which is being broadcast this Sunday on
WLIW.  PAGE C7

WHAT'S NEXT FOR CABLE NEWS?

Over the last three months of the 2008 presidential campaign, ratings for the
cable news channel MSNBC were up 158 percent over the same period a year
earlier. They were up 101 percent for the Fox News Channel. For cable channels
with strong points of view, it was a very good election. But for all the media
outlets that set viewership records in recent months, the looming question after
Senator Barack Obama's election is: What happens now?  PAGE C5

This Weekend

BOOK REVIEW

Roy Blount Jr. wrote ''Alphabet Juice,'' which is probably all some people need
to know. If you need more recommendation, Jack Shafer praises it for ''its
erudition, its grand fun and its contrary view of what constitutes good
writing.''  PAGE 9

ARTS

Playing the hard-living, emotionally scarred singer Etta James, Beyonce Knowles
-- one of the few pop stars left with a wholesome, good-girl image -- swaggers
and swears her way through the new film ''Cadillac Records.'' It represents a
stark new range since her most significant previous role in ''Dreamgirls'' in
2006.   PAGE 1

TRAVEL

They're known as highpointers, hopscotching the country to visit the places of
highest elevation in a state. No big deal in Florida (345 feet). Much bigger
deal in Alaska (20,320 feet, take along your mountain gear).   PAGE 3

Editorial

SAVING DETROIT FROM ITSELF

A messy bankruptcy filing by any of the Big Three auto companies would likely
cost the government, and the economy, more than trying to keep them afloat. But
if Congress is going to risk billions more of the taxpayers' money on these
companies it must also insist on sweeping changes in the way they do business.
Page A20

WHEN WALL STREET RUNS DRY

The reason Gov. David Paterson is cutting budget untouchables like Medicaid and
school aid is that New York is in a terrible hole. Anybody who won't acknowledge
this is simply hiding under the desk. Which is where some Senate Republicans and
union leaders can be found these days.  Page A20

SONAR OVER WHALES

The Supreme Court showed extreme and troubling deference to the views of the
military, deciding to lift two restrictions on the Navy's use of sonar in
training exercises off the California coast.  Page A20

Op-ed

BOB HERBERT

Rather than letting Detroit's Big Three further undermine an already failing
economy, we should fashion a recovery plan that is tough, smart and points the
way to energy security.  Page A21

GAIL COLLINS

My little Obama hyperpartisans: You spent a year of your lives trying to keep
Hillary Clinton out of the White House because she voted to let the Bush
administration invade Iraq. And now, your man is talking about letting her be
the point person on foreign policy. What happened to transformative change?
Page A21

CHARLES M. BLOW

If the Republican Party wants to move forward, it should look back to 1980.
Page A21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%);
JOURNALISM (89%); WRITERS (89%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (87%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (86%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (77%); TALIBAN
(77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); SHOOTINGS (73%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (73%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); POLITICS (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%); PRISONS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (74%)

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); ISRAEL (94%); CHILE (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); MEXICO (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); CUBA (66%)

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1152 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 15, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan: Darfur Arrest Warrants Sought

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AFRICA; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 150 words


The prosecutor of the International Criminal Court said Friday that he would
seek arrest warrants for war crimes in Darfur including, for the first time,
actions by Sudanese rebels. The prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said the
warrants would involve attacks on African Union peacekeepers in September 2007,
in which 12 were killed. Speaking in The Hague, the prosecutor did not disclose
the names and number of suspects, but earlier he had said that two rebel
factions carried out the attacks. The court previously issued arrest warrants
for a former government minister, Ahmad Harun, and for Ali Kushayb, a leader of
the government-backed janjaweed militia. In July, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo requested
the arrest of the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, on charges of
genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity, but the court is still
reviewing the evidence and has not issued a warrant for him.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARREST WARRANTS (94%); ARRESTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); EVIDENCE (88%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
PEACEKEEPING (73%); GENOCIDE (73%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); AFRICAN UNION (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); NETHERLANDS (73%); AFRICA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: November 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1168 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            November 21, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Saving the World In Less Than a Day

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; TELEVISION
REVIEW '24: REDEMPTION'; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 905 words


Kiefer Sutherland is back as Jack Bauer in ''24: Redemption'' this Sunday on
Fox, but the title is a bit misleading. It really should be called ''2,'' not
''24,'' because this time the ticking-clock countdown is only two hours long,
and it's hard for even the most ardent ''24'' believers to accept that national
security can be imperiled and saved in less time than it takes to cook a roast.

The word ''Redemption,'' on the other hand, is quite apt. The title refers to
Bauer's efforts to expiate past sins with good works, but it also suggests that
the writers have embarked on a self-improvement regimen. Set in the middle of a
harrowing civil war in the barely fictional African country Sangala,
''Redemption'' is a more sober, stripped-down version of ''24,'' and that's
refreshing. It could almost serve as a case study for those economists who argue
that the ailing auto industry could be helped best by filing for bankruptcy.

In this case, at least, a myriad of extraneous characters, locations and
subplots have been cut, and the result is a more compact and far more satisfying
vehicle for action-adventure escapism.

Perhaps to justify the steep price Fox is no doubt charging advertisers for
spots and product placements, the network has labeled ''Redemption'' a
television ''event.'' (Advertisers do get their money's worth. In one shot the
close-up on the dashboard of a Hyundai Genesis is so long and intense that
viewers will brace themselves for a car bomb explosion.)

There is no exactly right word to describe the show, since it's not really a
stand-alone movie. And it's too good to be dismissed merely as a very long
teaser for the seventh season of ''24,'' which begins in January, though it does
set up a new premise and a fresh set of characters for the season premiere.
''Redemption'' is a mini-series in the true sense of that made-up word: a
television series in miniature.

The Counter Terrorism Unit in Los Angeles has been disbanded, and that alone
relieves writers from the strain of pretending, season after season, that
Southern California is the No. 1 target of Islamic terrorists -- and the
fiendish Western capitalists who are so often behind the many veils of
conspiracy.

This time, plotters in high places seek to manipulate and exploit tribal wars
and civil unrest in Sangala. The villainous mastermind, Jonas Hodges (Jon
Voight), is cartoonish, but the depiction of the conflict is highly realistic
and compelling. A warlord intent on supplying the rebel army with troops rounds
up boys and turns them into child soldiers, training -- and drugging -- them to
be ruthless killers.

Bauer is working at a school in Sangala run by an old friend, Carl Benton
(Robert Carlyle), a Special Forces veteran turned missionary. Bauer is also on
the lam, running from a subpoena to testify before a Senate committee
investigating the illegal use of torture by antiterrorist squads.

The filming was finished before the financial markets collapsed and the
presidential election was decided. In this alternate reality the economy is not
in recession, and the nation is imperiled not by the shortsighted greed of many
but by the long-simmering malevolence of a few power brokers.

In Washington a new president is about to take the oath of office, but this is
not a preview of a Barack Obama inauguration; Cherry Jones plays Allison Taylor,
the first female president. The scene of her making history with her hand on the
Bible may pain some Hillary Clinton supporters, but ''24'' has already had a
black president -- two to be precise -- so gender was this series's next glass
ceiling.

Even in this short-form version there are hints and reminders of what makes
''24'' simultaneously exhilarating and irritating: exquisitely choreographed
violence and suspense come alongside clunky if gratifying caricatures. The
United Nations peacekeeper with a foreign accent is an appeaser and a coward; a
State Department envoy is officious and sadistic.

Joel Surnow, one of the creators of ''24,'' has left the series, but its
jingoistic political slant has not been lifted. This is the world according to a
Chuck Norris movie. Heroes like Jack Bauer can save the nation from near
extinction over and over, but they will still be persecuted for niggling human
rights violations by pantywaist bureaucrats.

''Redemption'' is at its best when it focuses on action, not the after-action
reports, and its best is awfully good. If nothing else, this two-hour version of
''24'' proves that downsizing is not necessarily a bad thing.

24: REDEMPTION

Fox, Sunday night at 8, Eastern and Pacific time; 7, Central time.

Created by Joel Surnow and Robert Cochran; directed by Jon Cassar; written by
Howard Gordon; Mr. Gordon, Evan Katz, Mr. Cassar, Kiefer Sutherland, Brian
Grazer, Manny Coto and David Fury, executive producers; Stephen Kronish, Juan
Carlos Coto, Alex Gansa, Brannon Braga and Brad Turner, co-executive producers.
Produced by Real Time Productions and Imagine Television in association with
20th Century Fox Television.

WITH: Kiefer Sutherland (Jack Bauer), Robert Carlyle (Carl Benton), Gil Bellows
(Frank Tramell), Jon Voight (Jonas Hodges), Cherry Jones (President-elect
Allison Taylor),  Colm Feore (Henry Taylor), Bob Gunton (Ethan Kanin), Eric
Lively (Roger Taylor), Powers Boothe (President Noah Daniels), Carly Pope
(Samantha Ross), Peter MacNicol (Tom Lennox) and Tony Todd (Juma).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: 24: Redemption (TV Program)>; 24: Redemption (TV Program)>

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: 24: Redemption:  Kiefer Sutherland returns as Jack Bauer, on
Sunday on Fox.(PHOTOGRAPH BY KELSEY McNEAL/FOX)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NETWORK TELEVISION (89%); TERRORISM (86%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (86%);
TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (78%); ARMIES (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%);
WRITERS (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); ACTION & ADVENTURE FILMS (73%); BOMBINGS
(73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); RELIGION (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(71%); AUTOMOTIVE SECTOR PERFORMANCE (71%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES
(69%); PRODUCT PLACEMENT (69%); TELEVISION ADVERTISING (69%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (68%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (68%); CASE STUDIES (67%); VISUAL &
PERFORMING ARTS (67%); PRODUCT PROMOTION (64%); COUNTERTERRORISM (63%);
INSOLVENCY & BANKRUPTCY (51%)

PERSON: KIEFER SUTHERLAND (93%)

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (66%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (66%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (66%)

LOAD-DATE: November 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1174 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 25, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Wins Convictions in Retrial of Terrorism-Financing Case

BYLINE: By GRETEL C. KOVACH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: DALLAS


On their second try, federal prosecutors won sweeping convictions Monday against
five leaders of a Muslim charity in a retrial of the largest terrorism-financing
case in the United States since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.

The five defendants, all leaders of the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and
Development, based in Richardson, a Dallas suburb, were convicted on all 108
criminal counts against them, including support of terrorism, money laundering
and tax fraud. The group was accused of funneling millions of dollars to the
Palestinian militant group Hamas, an Islamist organization the government
declared to be a terrorist group in 1995.

''Money is the lifeblood of terrorism,'' Richard B. Roper, the United States
attorney whose office prosecuted the case, said Monday in a statement. ''The
jury's decision demonstrates that U.S. citizens will not tolerate those who
provide financial support to terrorist organizations.''

The defendants argued that the Holy Land Foundation, once the largest Muslim
charity in the United States, was engaged in legitimate humanitarian aid for
community welfare programs and Palestinian orphans.

The jury, which deliberated for eight days, reached a starkly different result
than the jury in the first trial, which ended in a mistrial on most charges in
October 2007, after nearly two months of testimony and 19 days of deliberations.

The government shuttered the Holy Land Foundation in December 2001 and seized
its assets, a move President Bush heralded at the time as ''another step in the
war on terrorism.''

The charity's leaders -- Ghassan Elashi, Shukri Abu-Baker, Mufid Abdulqader,
Abdulrahman Odeh and Mohammad El-Mezain -- were not accused in the 2004
indictment of directly financing suicide bombings or terrorist violence.
Instead, they accused of illegally contributing to Hamas after the United States
designated it a terrorist group.

The defendants could be sentenced to 15 years on each count of supporting a
terrorist group, and 20 years on each count of money laundering. Leaders of the
foundation, which is now defunct, might also have to forfeit millions of
dollars.

Khalil Meek, a longtime spokesman for  a coalition of Holy Land Foundation
supporters called Hungry for Justice, which includes national Muslim and civil
rights groups, said supporters were ''devastated'' by the verdict.

''We respect the jury's decision, but we disagree and we think the defendants
are completely innocent,'' Mr. Meek said. ''For the last two years we've watched
this trial unfold, and we have yet to see any evidence of a criminal act
introduced to a jury. This jury found that humanitarian aid is a crime.''

He added, ''We intend to appeal the verdict, and we remain convinced that we
will win.''

The prosecutor, Barry Jonas, told jurors in closing arguments last week that
they should not be deceived by the foundation's cover of humanitarian work,
describing the charities it financed as terrorist recruitment centers that were
part of a ''womb to the tomb'' cycle.

After the mistrial last year, critics said the government had offered a weak,
complicated case and had failed to recognize that juries were not as quick to
convict Muslim defendants accused of supporting terrorism as they had once been.
Prosecutors spent more time in the second trial explaining the complexities of
the case and painting a clearer picture of the money trail. They also dropped
many of the original charges.

''Today's verdicts are important milestones in America's efforts against
financiers of terrorism,'' Patrick Rowan, assistant attorney general for
national security, said in a statement. Mr. Rowan added that the prosecution
''demonstrates our resolve to ensure that humanitarian relief efforts are not
used as a mechanism to disguise and enable support for terrorist groups.''

Nancy Hollander, a lawyer from Albuquerque who represented Mr. Abu-Baker, said
the defendants would appeal based on a number of issues, including the anonymous
testimony of an expert, which she said was a first.

''Our clients were not even allowed to review their own statements because they
were classified -- statements that they made over the course of many years that
the government wiretapped,'' Ms. Hollander said. ''They were not allowed to go
back and review them. There were statements from alleged co-conspirators that
included handwritten notes. Nobody knew who wrote them; nobody knew when they
were written. There are a plethora of issues.''

Noor Elashi, a 23-year-old writer who is the daughter of Ghassan Elashi, said
she was ''heartbroken'' that jurors had accepted what she called the
fear-mongering of the prosecution.

''I am utterly shocked at this outcome,'' Ms. Elashi said. ''This is a truly low
point for the United States of America.'' She said supporters  would not rest
until the verdict was overturned.

''My dad is a law-abiding citizen who was persecuted for his humanitarian work
in Palestine and his political beliefs,'' Ms. Elashi said. ''Today I did not
shed a single tear. My dad's smile was radiant. That's because he saved lives,
and now he's paying the price.''

According to freedomtogive.com, a Web site that calls itself the voice of the
defendants' relatives and friends, the foundation ''simply provided food,
clothes, shelter, medical supplies and education to the suffering people in
Palestine and other countries.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Zolfa Elaydi, center, with her children Fidaa, left, and Jihad,
reacting to news that the leaders of a Muslim charity had been convicted on
Monday in Dallas.
Ghassan Elashi, left, and Shukri Abu-Baker, two of the five leaders of the Holy
Land Foundation convicted on Monday. (PHOTOGRAPHS, ABOVE, JIM MAHONEY/THE DALLAS
MORNING NEWS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS
BELOW LEFT, IRWIN THOMPSON/THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS
 BELOW RIGHT, JESSICA RINALDI/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
JURY TRIALS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(90%); VERDICTS (89%); HAMAS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); CHARITIES (78%);
WAR ON TERROR (78%); MISTRIAL (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); MONEY LAUNDERING (78%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (78%);
TESTIMONY (77%); TAX FRAUD (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%); WAR & CONFLICT (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: DALLAS, TX, USA (94%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1175 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           November 25, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Rules That Suspects Cannot Be Detained Because of Ethnicity

BYLINE: By LIZ ROBBINS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 821 words


A federal judge in Brooklyn ruled on Monday that the United States government
could not use ethnicity as justification for detaining two Egyptian-born men who
were questioned for four hours after a  cross-country flight in 2004.

The two men, Tarik Farag, a former  New York City police officer, and Amro
Elmasry, who was working in Egypt for General Electric, sued the government,
saying the questioning was unjustified. The government said that the men, who
were arrested but not charged with any crime, had acted strangely during their
flight from San Diego to Kennedy International Airport and that two
counterterrorism agents had observed them switching seats, checking their
watches often and speaking in Arabic.

The government said that the men's ethnicity was a factor in deciding to detain
them, and argued that it was an acceptable factor.

But Judge Frederic Block of United States District Court in Brooklyn disagreed.
In response to the government's request for a determination without a trial,
the judge said there was enough merit for the case to continue.  He cited the
internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II in saying that the 9/11
terrorist attacks should not justify detaining a suspect based on race.

It was unclear if or how the judge's ruling -- which may be appealed -- would
affect law enforcement; advocates on both sides of the issue considered the
ruling to be significant, even if it was only an initial step in defining the
parameters of surveillance in the context of security versus civil rights.

''This case is important because, for the first time, a federal court has
squarely rejected the claim that Arabs can be stopped and detained as suspected
terrorists because of their race,'' said Christopher Dunn, associate legal
director of the New York Civil Liberties Union. ''Hopefully this will mark a
turning point in the ethnic profiling that has pervaded law enforcement in the
aftermath of 9/11.''

Judge Block wrote that he understood the way the 9/11 attacks had altered the
mind-sets of airline passengers and necessitated strict enforcement of security.
Yet he cautioned that ''fear cannot be a factor to allow for the evisceration of
the bedrock principle of our Constitution that no one can be arrested without
probable cause that a crime has been committed.''

Robert Nardoza, a spokesman for the United States attorney's office in the
Eastern District of New York, said it was reviewing the ruling, which the judge
called the ''first post-9/11 case to address whether race may be used to
establish criminal propensity under the Fourth Amendment.''

Andrew C. McCarthy, a senior fellow at the Foundation for the Defense of
Democracies and a former federal prosecutor, said the ruling ''sharpens a
question that needs to be addressed: What is the proper consideration of factors
like ethnicity in questions of surveillance?

''The police officers want to know what the rules are. It may turn out to be bad
to the American people if it tells them to do something that is counter to
common sense.''  Common sense, Mr. McCarthy said, dictated that the police
should be able to take race and ethnicity into account in surveillance.

Judge Block said that ''it is beyond question that perceived ethnicity alone
cannot give rise to reasonable suspicion or probable cause.'' He added,
''Otherwise, officers would be entitled to qualified immunity for arresting
airline passengers solely for conversing in their native language.''

In this case, Judge Block also dismissed the government's other reasons for
putting the plaintiffs under legal arrest, which included the men's switching
seats to be closer to each other on the airplane, talking loudly in Arabic and
erasing phone numbers on a cellphone upon landing.

He wrote that ''the two men were met at the gate when the plane landed by at
least 10 armed police officers in SWAT gear with shotguns and police dogs,
ordered to raise their hands, frisked, handcuffed and taken to a police station,
where they were placed in jail cells.''

''There was just no reason for the arrest,'' said Anthony C. Ofodile, the lawyer
for Mr. Farag, who was 36 at the time, and Mr. Elmasry, who was 37. ''No crime
was committed; they did not suspect that any crime was being committed for an
arrest. If they wanted to monitor them, they could have done that without
putting them through the trouble they put them through at the airport.''

Mr. Farag worked as a correction officer for the United States Bureau of Prisons
after leaving the Police Department.  Mr. Elmasry worked for General Electric in
Egypt and had a valid United States visa.

''I am happy that they agreed with us that people cannot just be arrested based
on their ethnic background because 9/11 happened,'' Mr. Ofodile said. ''I expect
that there will be an appeal, but we are prepared to defend it. I have not lost
any case on appeal that I prevailed in before.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (93%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (89%); TERRORISM (89%); ETHNICITY (89%); PROBABLE CAUSE (89%); RACIAL
PROFILING (78%); AIRPORTS (77%); ARRESTS (77%); AIRLINES (77%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); POLICE FORCES (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%); ASIAN
AMERICANS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (65%); WORLD WAR II (52%)

COMPANY: GENERAL ELECTRIC CO (57%)

TICKER: GNE (PAR) (57%); GEC (LSE) (57%); GE (SWX) (57%); GE (NYSE) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (57%);
NAICS335222 HOUSEHOLD REFRIGERATOR & HOME FREEZER MANUFACTURING (57%);
NAICS335210 SMALL ELECTRICAL APPLIANCE MANUFACTURING (57%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EGYPT (94%)

LOAD-DATE: November 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1177 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          November 26, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Muslims Taken Aback By a Charity's Conviction

BYLINE: By LAURIE GOODSTEIN; Stephanie Strom contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 714 words


American Muslim groups responded with uncustomary silence on Tuesday to the news
that leaders of a Muslim charity shut down by the federal government had been
convicted in a retrial of money laundering, tax fraud and supporting terrorism.

The case against the charity, the Holy Land Foundation for Relief and
Development, had long revealed a divide among Muslim Americans, leaders say.
Some saw the prosecution of the foundation primarily as evidence of anti-Muslim
bias by the American government, while others suspected that the charity might
indeed have operated as an overly politicized money funnel for Hamas in the
1990s.

The federal government declared Hamas to be a terrorist group in 1995. When the
government shuttered Holy Land, which was based in a suburb of Dallas, and
seized its assets in 2001, it was said to be the largest Muslim charity in the
United States.

''I do believe the community was divided, and I believe the community will
continue to be divided,'' said Dr. Ziad J. Asali, a retired physician who is the
founder and president of the American Task Force on Palestine, an advocacy group
in Washington that supports a two-state solution for Israel and the
Palestinians.

The jury's conviction of five Holy Land leaders on all 108 criminal counts took
many Muslim leaders by surprise because a previous trial last year ended in a
hung jury.

''So far, the reaction has been one of shock more than anything else,'' said
Imad-ad-Dean Ahmad, president of the Minaret of Freedom Institute, an advocacy
group based in Bethesda, Md. ''Even the people who are usually very quick to
comment on events, positively or negatively, are so stunned by this that they
seem to be at a loss for words.''

Mr. Ahmad said the verdict would further confuse donors to Islamic charities,
many of whom have been wary of giving to Islamic groups since Sept. 11.

''It seems to give a green light for further intimidation of Muslim charities,''
he said. ''It makes people even more unsure of what they are supposed to do to
avoid having a problem.''

Following the Sept. 11 attacks, the government designated dozens of Muslim
charities, mostly international relief agencies, as financiers of terrorism.
Muslim groups struggled for years to persuade the Treasury Department to produce
some kind of  seal of approval for legitimate charities that adhered strictly to
humanitarian work. For Muslims, giving to charity is a religious obligation.

Part of the reason for the silence from Muslim leaders on Tuesday, some of them
said, is that the government publicly named more than 300 individuals and
American Muslim organizations as ''unindicted co-conspirators,'' without
allowing them to hear the evidence against them or defend themselves in court.

The American Civil Liberties Union is representing two of those groups, the
Islamic Society of North America and the North American Islamic Trust, in trying
to get a judge to strike their names from the list.

Hina Shamsi, a lawyer with the National Security Project of the A.C.L.U., said,
''The Islamic Society of North America does a lot of outreach and interfaith
dialogue, and works in cooperation with the F.B.I., and yet, as a result of this
stigma, its reputation has been deeply harmed.''

''The irony is obviously that this is the very community whose cooperation the
government most needs for effective counterterrorism,'' she added.

Since the indictment of the Holy Land leaders, Muslim organizations have been
working with the government to create mechanisms to ensure that humanitarian aid
to Palestinians is not diverted to terrorism.

The American Task Force on Palestine recently created the American Charities for
Palestine, and signed an agreement with the United States Agency for
International Development in August, Dr. Asali said.

Under the agreement, American Charities will only make donations to educational
and health institutions in the Palestinian occupied territories that have been
vetted and approved by Usaid, Dr. Asali said. He just returned from taking the
first donation, of 1,000 laptop computers, to Palestinian students.

''We wanted to be able to go to the donors and say, if you donate to this entity
you don't have to worry about someone accusing you of terrorism,'' Dr. Asali
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIM AMERICANS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); CHARITIES (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); HAMAS (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME
(90%); TAX FRAUD (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); RELIGION
(89%); VERDICTS (89%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); MONEY LAUNDERING (78%);
CONSPIRACY (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); MISTRIAL (77%); TAX LAW (77%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CHARITABLE GIVING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (68%); APPROVALS (66%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (83%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1185 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 2, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nominee Would Lead ID Program She Opposed

BYLINE: By MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 411 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As governor of Arizona, Janet Napolitano, President-elect Barack Obama's choice
for homeland security secretary, pledged that her state would not cooperate with
a major domestic security initiative, the Real ID drivers' license program.

The program, which she would direct if confirmed as secretary, imposes stringent
requirements on states for confirming the identity and legal residency of people
who want drivers' licenses. Ms. Napolitano said the law would impose huge costs
on the states without reimbursement from Washington.

In June, she signed into law a bill that forbids Arizona from cooperating with
the federal requirements. The state law had no immediate effect, because Arizona
already had a federal waiver allowing it to delay enactment until 2009.

Last year, as the chairwoman of the National Governors Association, Ms.
Napolitano testified before a Senate committee that the program would cost the
states $11 billion.  Since then, Congress has appropriated $100 million to meet
some of the costs.

Real ID follows the recommendations of the 9/11 Commission; it was passed
without hearings or debate, attached to a mostly unrelated bill.

Janice L. Kephart, a staff member for the 9/11 Commission, said, ''I'm hoping
she will see this program from the federal government side and see it with new
eyes.''

A stronger national driver's license system would help the states improve
highway safety by assuring that drivers do not obtain more than one license, Ms.
Kephart said, and it could cut Medicare and Medicaid fraud.

Hani Hanjour, the hijacker  flew the plane that crashed into the Pentagon on
Sept. 11, 2001, had an Arizona license, she said.

The federal government has said that people carrying drivers' licenses that do
not comply with its requirements will not be allowed into federal buildings and
will have difficulty boarding planes. The American Civil Liberties Union and
some state legislators say that the program amounts to a national identification
card, with civil liberties and privacy implications. Ms. Napolitano, however,
has mostly focused on the cost. Mr. Obama, as a candidate, did the same.

The rules issued by the Bush administration require each state to verify the
authenticity of an applicant's documents and keep copies, along with digital
photos, so the information can be shared with other states. The department
issued the regulations so late that nearly all the deadlines fall after Mr. Bush
leaves office.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DRIVERS LICENSES (91%); LICENSES & PERMITS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(90%); GOVERNORS (90%); US REAL ID ACT OF 2005 (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TRANSPORTATION LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (89%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); NATIONAL
IDENTITY CARDS (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); ROAD TRANSPORTATION SAFETY (77%);
LEGISLATION (76%); REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (76%); MEDICARE (76%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (73%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (72%); MEDICARE FRAUD (64%); AIRCRAFT
ACCIDENTS (64%); HIJACKING (64%); MEDICAID (58%); HIGHWAYS & STREETS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (84%)

PERSON: JANET NAPOLITANO (92%); BARACK OBAMA (89%)

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1192 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 4, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times, Dec. 4, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2360 words


Foreign

TERRORIST ATTACKS IN MUMBAI LAY BARE SECURITY DEFICIENCIES

Tens of thousands of Indians marched in Mumbai showing an unprecedented rage at
the government for not having done more, a response to what last week's attacks
on the city made clear: India's security forces and intelligence agencies are so
unprepared that the country can not prevent, or respond adequately to, terrorist
attacks. As if to drive home the point, the police just found, a week after the
attacks, a 17-pound bomb that the terrorists left in the central train station.
PAGE A18

ZIMBABWE POLICE BREAK UP PROTEST

Riot police brandishing batons charged into a group of 100 doctors and nurses in
Harare, the capital of Zimbabwe, breaking up a demonstration for better working
conditions and more pay. Earlier in the day, armed men identifying themselves as
police officers took a human rights activist from her home. The assault on
dissent comes amid an epidemic of cholera, an economy in free fall and a
government paralyzed by a stalemated power-sharing deal.  PAGE A16

GAZANS BLOCKED OUT OF PILGRIMAGE

For the first time since the 1973 Arab-Israeli war, no Palestinians from Gaza
are making the sacred annual pilgrimage to Mecca this year because of a power
struggle over which Palestinian government is legitimate.  PAGE A6

PARLIAMENT UPSTAGES THE QUEEN

The ceremony at which Queen Elizabeth II opens Parliament was overshadowed by an
uproar there over a raid last week in which Scotland Yard's counterterrorism
squad searched a member's parliamentary office. It was the Commons' first
opportunity to respond formally to what many members have described as the most
threatening assault on Britain's parliamentary sovereignty in memory. PAGE A8

NATO CHIEF DEFENDS RUSSIA POLICY

The NATO secretary general strongly defended the alliance's decision to begin
''a conditional and graduated re-engagement'' with Moscow, saying that ''Russia
is such an important factor in geopolitical terms that there is no alternative
for NATO than to engage Russia.'' But the secretary general, Jaap de Hoop
Scheffer, also said Russia's sense of grievance and encirclement, genuine or
not, was difficult for the alliance to assuage. PAGE A10

FIGHT WITH KURDS DEEPENS IN IRAQ

A power struggle between Iraq's prime minister and the Kurdish regional
government intensified when Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki rejected Kurdish
arguments that he could not create tribal councils that would answer to his
government. The dispute cuts to the heart of a broader one: Kurds are trying to
expand their autonomous political control in the north, but many Iraqi Arabs say
they want to remain under the central government. PAGE A14

NATIONAL

REALITY AND THE MILITARY INTRUDE ON OBAMA'S WAR PLEDGE

President-elect Barack Obama's campaign pledge to end the war in Iraq has
evolved into an approach that allows for leaving behind tens of thousands of
American troops in Iraq even if he can make good on his promise to withdraw all
combat forces within 16 months. That sound coming from the Pentagon and the
military headquarters in Iraq is the senior officer corps letting out its
collective breath. News Analysis.  PAGE A31

PARDONS NOT NEEDED, MUKASEY SAYS

Attorney General Michael B. Mukasey said he saw no need for President Bush to
issue blanket pardons for officials involved in some of the administration's
most controversial counterterrorism policies. The comments appeared intended to
tamp down speculation that Mr. Bush might issue pre-emptive pardons to protect
administration officials from any potential legal jeopardy under a Democratic
administration.   PAGE A22

HEPATITIS THERAPY FAULTED

Many patients who do not initially respond to standard drug therapy for
treatment of hepatitis C are placed on maintenance therapy, which is expensive
and can be both physically and psychologically grueling, in hopes that long-term
treatment will keep the disease in check. The practice is ineffective and
possibly harmful, a new study says.   PAGE A27

TOWN PARTNERS WITH GOWNS

Starksboro, a small farming town in Vermont, wanted the sense of its residents
to help determine how to preserve its uniqueness in the face of growth. But not
everyone goes to meetings or speaks up otherwise. So Starksboro asked students
from nearby Middlebury College to spend the semester interviewing its residents
to document what they value most about the place. The town intends to use the
results to influence decisions about its future.  PAGE A22

OBITUARIES

OLIVER G. SELFRIDGE, 82

An innovator in early computer science and artificial intelligence, he was
credited with coining the term ''intelligent agents,'' for software programs
capable of observing and responding to changes in their environment but
theorized about far more.  PAGE B13

RAMON S. VELEZ, 75

The son of a poor Puerto Rican farmer, he became the baron of a sweeping array
of poverty programs in the South Bronx.  PAGE B13

SPORTS

GIANTS' PLAN FOR BURRESS

Includes Straight and Narrow

The Giants have said that although Plaxico Burress is done for the season, he
will be back in 2009 if he survives a blizzard of legal issues that could land
him in prison, and ''plays by Giants rules.'' That is something he has had
trouble doing before. ''I'm all for compassion,'' William C. Rhoden writes,
''but there is a thin line between compassion and enabling self-destructive
behavior.'' Sports of The Times.   PAGE B14

A BAND OF TWO BROTHERS

As Army renews its college football rivalry with Navy this weekend, Doug
Larsen's mind will surely drift back to the game in 2000 when he played
defensive line for Army and his close friend, Ronnie Winchester, was playing the
offensive line for Navy. Larsen in a captain in the Army now, returned from his
first combat tour in Iraq in April. But Winchester never returned from his tour.
Above, Larsen and Winchester in a picture taken in front of Doug's house seven
or eight years ago.    PAGE B14

FAVRE NO SNOWMAN

Brett Favre's says his legend as a bad-conditions quarterback -- built with the
Packers while compiling a 35-0 record with the temperature no higher than 34 --
is basically about the weather as equalizer. He grew up in South Mississippi and
never saw snow until arriving in Green Bay.  PAGE B15

BEHIND THE MAN BEHIND THE WHEEL

In the last three years while Jimmie Johnson has been winning the Nascar Cup
championships, there has been one not always obvious constant: Chad Knaus has
been Johnson's crew chief. Coincidence? No.   PAGE B15

NEW YORK

A LONGER AMBULANCE RIDE

For Cardiac Arrest Victims

Starting on Jan. 1, New York City ambulances will take many cardiac arrest
patients only to hospitals that use a delicate cooling therapy believed to
increase the chances of survival and to reduce the chances of brain damage. The
move amounts to an endorsement by the Bloomberg administration of a
still-developing therapy that smaller community hospitals say they lack the
staffing and financial wherewithal to provide.  PAGE A33

POLICE SUPPORT, OR INTIMIDATION?

Police officers attending the trials of defendants accused of killing officers
say the purpose is to support the victims' families and remember colleagues. But
their presence can sometimes be a delicate issue. ''They're there to intimidate
-- the jury, the lawyers, the judge,'' said a defense lawyer for a man convicted
of killing two detectives in Brooklyn in 2004.   PAGE A32

BUSINESS

INDIA HIGH-TECH INDUSTRY

Feels Unfamiliar Uncertainty

One theory has it that the global slowdown will benefit high-tech companies in
India because Western businesses seeking to cut costs will move jobs overseas.
That theory has not yet permeated the Indian tech sector, though, which is
gripped by an unfamiliar sense of uncertainty. ''There is a lot of introspection
about what does this mean and when does it end,'' an industry official said.
PAGE B1

SHAKE-UPS FOR BIG PUBLISHERS

In moves that signaled how bad bookstore sales have gotten, Random House
announced a sweeping reorganization aimed at trimming costs, while Simon &
Schuster laid off 35 people, including the head of its children's book
publishing unit.  PAGE B1

HOLIDAY WEB SALES ARE UP

The retail industry got some rare good news: e-commerce sites had a strong
holiday weekend, with online sales from Friday through Monday up 13 percent
compared with last year. Still, strong Web sales are unlikely to bail out the
retail industry. E-commerce now accounts for only 7 percent of overall sales,
and online sales were down 2 percent for the season so far.   PAGE B3

FINDING WAYS TO LURE CUSTOMERS

With customers at a premium, small-business owners are looking for effective --
and cheap -- ways to get people into their stores. Like the owner of a futon
store who started running comedy shows. And the owner of lingerie shop who is
planning a number of events, including a men's night this month, where employees
will model the store's offerings and offer ''man food.''   PAGE B8

HOME

HOW GREEN IS YOUR TREE?

Depends on the Grower

If you buy a Christmas tree that is certified organic by the Department of
Agriculture or is a Certified Naturally Grown tree you can count on it having
been raised without synthetic pesticides or fertilizers. But many trees are
sprayed with pesticides, and how much residue is left for you  is anybody's
guess. Above, Curtis Buchanan and his dad, John, run an organic tree farm in
North Carolina.   PAGE D1

AVOIDING HOLIDAY DANGERS

Last holiday season there were about 200 Christmas tree fires in American homes,
resulting in 10 deaths and more than $10 million in property loss. About 10,000
people are treated at emergency rooms for injuries from falls, cuts or shocks
while hanging lights or decorations. But there are ways to avoid becoming part
of those figures. (For starters, beware of candles.)   PAGE D2

Styles

LUXURY STORES FEEL THE PINCH

Just Like Everyone Else

''The world is a strange place right now,'' a salesman at Bergdorf Goodman said
as shoppers pawed through handbags that had been marked down 40 percent and are
likely to go lower as the season's sale days tick by. There is nothing new about
retailers cutting prices at holiday time. But few in the luxury goods trade can
recall a time when the price-slashing started so soon or was so severe.  PAGE E1

BEWARE OF THE NANO

It sounds like the plot of a science-fiction novel. Skin care companies make new
creams that contain microscopic ingredients. For example. Cor soap, above, uses
50-nanometer particles of silver and silica that can enter a skin pore to kill
bacteria. But here is when the scary music starts. Those particles have a
drawback: the ability to penetrate the skin and overwhelm organs like the liver.
The prospect has unleashed a new side effect: nanophobia.  PAGE E1

Swapping Suits for Sweats  E8

arts

SUNDANCE TAKES A TUG AT ATTENDEES' EMOTIONS

Don't forget to pack the hankies for Sundance next year. The organizers of the
film festival announced a schedule of competition films that, in their view,
reflect an unusual tilt toward the emotional -- maybe even melodramatic -- side
of independent cinema. The director of the festival even described one entry,
''The Greatest,'' about a family dealing with the loss of a teenage son, as
''three-hankie, if not more.'' Alienation is out. Engagement is in, Michael
Cieply writes.   PAGE C1

SOUNDS OF PUERTO RICO IN JAZZ

When the jazz saxophonist and composer Miguel Zenon visits his native Puerto
Rico, he rarely hears any jazz. Instead, he is surrounded by plena, a
century-old Afro-Caribbean music, a kind of movable street-corner folk song. Mr.
Zenon took an investigative dive into the Puerto Rican music and put what he
found in ''Esta Plena,'' which will be performed for the first time this week at
the Jazz Gallery in the South Village.   PAGE C8

BREAKING MANY BARRIERS

The walls come tumbling down in ''Opening Night,'' Ivo van Hove's wild and
woolly stage version of the 1977 John Cassavetes movie about a Broadway-bound
play in crisis. And it's not just the fabled fourth wall, the invisible barrier
between the actors and the audience. Mr. van Hove, who has taken stylized
wrecking balls to a host of classic plays, has never made more purposeful or
appropriate use of his anarchic skills, Ben Brantley writes.   PAGE C5

Family Discord Over Punk Club  C1

Editorial

GLOOM, BUT NOT DOOM

President-elect Barack Obama is inheriting a world that is more complicated and
more frightening than the one George W. Bush found in 2001. But while the trends
may be apparent, the  results are not inevitable. Decisions Mr. Obama and other
leaders make will matter more.  PAGE A42

RESCUE THE CENSUS

The census requires years of planning, but preparations -- for reasons of
incompetence or political gain -- have been systematically sidetracked during
the Bush years. To ensure an accurate count, President-elect Barack Obama should
nominate a strong, new census director as soon as possible.  PAGE A42

LIFE OF AN ANTARCTIC ARCHIPELAGO

Life on this planet always surprises us. Animals turn out to be smarter or
biological interrelationships more intricate than we predict. The latest example
is a survey that shows greater biodiversity than scientists had expected.  PAGE
A42

Op-Ed

GAIL COLLINS

Ed Rendell's misadventures with a live microphone   made it sound as if he was
saying that unmarried people, like the homeland security nominee Janet
Napolitano, exist in a state so dark and barren that the empty hours can only be
filled  by guarding the nation's borders against terrorists.   PAGE A43

NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

Of all the ways to help impoverished people worldwide, there is one miracle
substance that is cheap and actually makes people smarter. Unfortunately, it has
one appalling side effect: it's so boring that few people pay attention to it or
set aside money for it. It's iodized salt.  PAGE A43

NOT EVERY VOTE COUNTS

Charles Seife, an Op-Ed contributor, argues that a recount in Minnesota's
too-close-to-call Senate race is a waste of time -- the margin is so small, we
will never know the real winner. PAGE A43

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); MUMBAI TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS
(78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
RIOTS (76%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); RELIGIOUS
PILGRIMAGES (71%); BRITISH MONARCHS (70%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (70%); SEPARATISM
& SECESSION (68%); TROPICAL DISEASES (67%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LANDS &
GOVERNMENT (63%); POLICE FORCES (57%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (63%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (58%); ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE
UNITED KINGDOM (50%); JAAP DE HOOP SCHEFFER (50%)

CITY: MUMBAI, MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (93%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
HARARE, ZIMBABWE (79%)

STATE: MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (93%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); INDIA (94%); IRAQ (94%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); ZIMBABWE (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1195 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 6, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justices to Rule on Detainee Held in U.S. in Terror Case

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1148 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The Supreme Court agreed on Friday to decide the most fundamental question yet
concerning executive power in the age of terrorism: May the president order the
indefinite military detention of people living legally in the United States?

The case concerns Ali al-Marri, the only person on the American mainland being
held as an enemy combatant, who is in custody at the Navy brig in Charleston,
S.C. Mr. Marri, a citizen of Qatar, was legally in the United States when he was
arrested in December 2001 in Peoria, Ill., where he was living with his family
and studying computer science at Bradley University.

Eighteen months later, when Mr. Marri was on the verge of a trial on credit card
fraud and other charges, President Bush declared him an enemy combatant, moving
him from the custody of the Justice Department to military detention. The
government says Mr. Marri, who has been held in isolation for more than five
years without being charged, is a Qaeda ''sleeper agent'' sent to the United
States to commit mass murder and disrupt the banking system.

The central question in the case is whether Mr. Marri should be treated as an
enemy soldier who may be held until hostilities end or as a criminal like
Timothy J. McVeigh, who was convicted in a civilian court of blowing up the
Oklahoma City federal building.

Matthew Waxman, a former Defense Department official with responsibility for
detainee affairs, said the answer to the question in Mr. Marri's case could
affect some prisoners being held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who also have not been
accused of fighting American armed forces on behalf of a foreign nation or
group.

''The main legal issue at stake here,'' said Mr. Waxman, who is now a law
professor at Columbia, ''is what does it mean to be an enemy combatant in a war
against Al Qaeda?''

The case, which will probably be argued in March, will present the Obama
administration with a series of difficult strategic choices. It can continue to
defend the Bush administration's expansive interpretation of executive power,
advance a more modest one or short-circuit the case by moving it to the criminal
justice system or by deporting Mr. Marri.

In a statement, Brooke Anderson, a policy adviser and spokeswoman for Barack
Obama's transition team, declined to comment on the case. Ms. Anderson said Mr.
Obama would decide how to handle detainees when his full national security and
legal teams were in place.

A Justice Department spokesman, Dean Boyd, said only that ''we look forward to
making our case to the Supreme Court.''

Jonathan Hafetz, a lawyer for Mr. Marri with the American Civil Liberties Union,
said the Bush administration's assertion that it had the power to detain lawful
residents indefinitely and without charges must be addressed.

''This assertion should never have been made, should never be made again and
should be struck down,'' Mr. Hafetz said.

Last July, the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in
Richmond, Va., issued a fractured decision in the case. In one 5-to-4 ruling,
the court said the president had the legal authority to detain Mr. Marri.

But a second, overlapping 5-to-4 majority of the court ruled that Mr. Marri must
be given an additional opportunity to challenge his detention in federal court.
An earlier court proceeding, in which the government had presented only a sworn
statement from a defense intelligence official, was inadequate, the second
majority ruled.

The government had urged the Supreme Court to put off consideration of the case,
Al Marri v. Pucciarelli, No. 08-368, until the trial court proceeding was
redone.

Two other men have been held as enemy combatants on the American mainland since
the Sept. 11 attacks. Rulings in their cases will inform the Supreme Court's
treatment of Mr. Marri.

In Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, five justices of the Supreme Court said in 2004 that
Congress had granted the president power to detain at least those enemy
combatants captured on the battlefield in Afghanistan, even if they were
American citizens, for the duration of hostilities there. But the detainee in
that case, Yaser Hamdi, was freed and sent to Saudi Arabia not long after the
court's decision, which also allowed him to challenge his detention.

Based on the Hamdi decision, the Fourth Circuit in 2005 upheld the detention of
Jose Padilla, an American arrested at a Chicago airport. Although Mr. Padilla
was said to have ties to Al Qaeda, the Fourth Circuit decision largely turned on
his activities on the battlefield in Afghanistan. Just before the Supreme Court
was to decide whether to hear his case for a second time, Mr. Padilla was
transferred to the criminal justice system. He was convicted last year on
charges related to terrorism.

The Supreme Court's decision in Mr. Marri's case may be quite limited, given his
unique status, or quite broad.

The divided three-judge Fourth Circuit panel that ruled in June 2007 for Mr.
Marri, in a decision later vacated by the full court, based its ruling on a
proposition that could be applied broadly should the Supreme Court adopt it.
Judge Diana Gribbon Motz wrote for the majority that Mr. Marri was a civilian
and may not be detained by the military.

Because Mr. Marri was not alleged to have fought with the Taliban or the armed
forces of any enemy nation or to have engaged in combat with United States
forces, Judge Motz reasoned, President Bush was powerless to have the military
detain him, just as he could not have ordered the military detentions of ''the
Unabomber or the perpetrators of the Oklahoma City bombing.''

In a recent brief, the government provided the justices with a sworn 2004
statement from Jeffrey N. Rapp, the military intelligence official. The
statement, declassified in 2006, said Mr. Marri had met with Osama bin Laden and
Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, the chief 9/11 plotter, in the summer of 2001.
''Al-Marri offered to be an Al Qaeda martyr or to do anything else that Al Qaeda
requested,'' Mr. Rapp said. The Qaeda leaders told Mr. Marri, the statement
said, to leave for the United States and to make sure he got there before Sept.
11.

The government's brief said Congress must have intended to allow the detention
of people like Mr. Marri and called a contrary interpretation absurd. Such a
reading, the brief said, ''relies on the assumption that when Congress
authorized the use of military force to respond to the Sept. 11 attacks, it did
not intend to reach individuals virtually identically situated to the Sept. 11
hijackers.''

In a brief filed last month, lawyers for Mr. Marri said the court should not
delay consideration of the case.

''Since the nation's founding,'' the brief said, ''persons lawfully residing in
this country have correctly understood that they can be imprisoned for suspected
wrongdoing only if the government charges them with a crime and tries them
before a jury.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Ali al-Marri, arrested in 2001.(PHOTOGRAPH BY PEORIA JOURNAL
STAR)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
SUPREME COURTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); DEPORTATION (77%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (77%); ARRESTS (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); LAW SCHOOLS (75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); PUBLIC POLICY
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (70%); BANKING & FINANCE (69%); CREDIT
CARDS (69%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (55%)

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (57%); BRADLEY UNIVERSITY (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: PEORIA, IL, USA (91%); CHARLESTON, SC, USA (90%); COLUMBIA, SC, USA (79%);
OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (91%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (68%)

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1197 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 6, 2008 Saturday
                                National Edition

Sweden: Bosnian Denied Release

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 112 words


The only woman to be convicted of war crimes in the Balkans, Biljana Plavsic,
has had her request for an early release rejected for the second time by the
government of Sweden, where she is serving an 11-year sentence. Mrs. Plavsic,
78, a former president of Bosnia, surrendered to the war crimes tribunal in The
Hague in 2001 and pleaded guilty to persecution, a crime against humanity. She
was among the promoters of the violent Serbian campaign of ethnic separation
that killed tens of thousands of Muslims and Croats in the 1990s. She asked to
be released in 2004 and asked again this year, citing her age and poor health.
Sweden gave no reason for refusing her request.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SENTENCING (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); GUILTY PLEAS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); RELIGION (52%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (69%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SWEDEN (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);
CROATIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1201 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 7, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Notable Books of 2008

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; HOLIDAY BOOKS; Pg. 54

LENGTH: 565 words


WABI SABI By Mark Reibstein. Illustrated by Ed Young. Little, Brown & Company
Books for Young Readers. $16.99. (Ages 3 to 6)

In this book of ingeniously layered text -- both narrative and haiku -- and
gorgeous collage art, a cat named Wabi Sabi sets out to discover the meaning of
her name. Chosen by The Times as a Best Illustrated Children's Book of 2008.

THE KINGDOM ON THE WAVES The Astonishing Life of Octavian Nothing, Traitor to
the Nation, Volume 2. By M. T. Anderson. Candlewick Press. $22.99. (Ages 14 and
up)

This sequel completes the story of race and revolution told in ''The Pox
Party.'' As Octavian Nothing, escaped from slavery, joins up with British forces
in Boston, his story encompasses both the comic and the tragic with sweeping
ambition.

SUNRISE OVER FALLUJAH By Walter Dean Myers Scholastic Press. $17.99. (Ages 12
and up)

An idealistic young soldier lands in Iraq's deadly hall of mirrors, in a kind of
sequel to Myers's 1988 Vietnam novel, ''Fallen Angels.'' In this powerful new
book, laced with violence but also warmth and humor, the narrator faces
humanitarian missions that turn into deadly ambushes (a detonator is concealed
in a tub of flour) and bears witness to the killing of friend and enemy alike.

THE HUNGER GAMES By Suzanne Collins Scholastic Press. $17.99. (Ages 12 and up)

A brilliantly plotted tale that begins after North American society has been
decimated by climate change and war. In this world, children fight to the death
in ritual games -- a form of both repression and entertainment in the country of
Panem. When her younger sister is picked to compete, Katniss Everdeen, a skilled
hunter, makes the fateful choice to take her place.

LITTLE BROTHER By Cory Doctorow Tor/Tom Doherty Associates. $17.95. (Ages 13 and
up)

A near-future terrorist attack hits San Francisco, and Marcus Yallow, 17,
playing hooky from high school, is detained in the crackdown that follows. The
experience leads him into an ingenious program of resistance and civil rights
activism in a novel that is at once an entertaining thriller, a thoughtful
polemic and a practical handbook of digital-age self-defense.

ABC3D By Marion Bataille Neal Porter/Roaring Brook Press. $19.95. (Ages 5 and
up)

A simple but sophisticated idea animates this small, chunky pop-up book, which
does wonders with the letters A through Z. In Bataille's paper engineering, B
doubles as 3, C flips over to become a D, U is a perfect parabola, and so on,
all in bold black, white and red. This stylish and interactive work of art can
be read again and again.

TEN LITTLE FINGERS AND TEN LITTLE TOES By Mem Fox. Illustrated by Helen Oxenbury
Harcourt Children's Books. $16. (Ages 3 to 5)

A witty and winsome look at babies around the world that has a toe-tapping
refrain: the words sound easy and familiar, as though they have been handed down
to children forever. And the story ends with a pitch-perfect moment: one little
baby who is ''mine, all mine.''

THE DISREPUTABLE HISTORY OF FRANKIE LANDAU-BANKS By E. Lockhart Hyperion.
$16.99. (Ages 12 and up)

A nominee for a National Book Award in young people's literature, E. Lockhart's
latest concerns ''a nice girl'' who remakes herself as a ''near-criminal
mastermind,'' with pranks that upend her school's oppressive power structure
(created by and for boys). It's a homage to girl power, with a protagonist who
is fearless.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWINGS (DRAWINGS FROM ''ABC3D''
 ''WABI SABI'')

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE (90%); CHILDREN (89%); NOVELS
& SHORT STORIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (74%);
SLAVERY (69%); TERRORISM (66%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (66%)

COMPANY: LITTLE BROWN & CO INC (91%); CHILDREN'S BOOK PRESS (57%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (91%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (56%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (76%); UNITED KINGDOM (71%); UNITED STATES (56%)

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1203 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 9, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

5 Charged in 9/11 Attacks Seek to Plead Guilty

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1264 words


GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba -- The five Guantanamo detainees charged with coordinating
the Sept. 11 attacks told a military judge on Monday that they wanted to confess
in full, a move that seemed to challenge the government to put them to death.

The request, which was the result of hours of private meetings among the
detainees, appeared intended to undercut the government's plan for a
high-profile trial while drawing international attention to what some of the
five men have said was a desire for martyrdom.

But the military judge, Col. Stephen R. Henley of the Army, said a number of
legal questions about how the commissions are to deal with capital cases had to
be resolved before guilty pleas could be accepted.

The case is likely to remain in limbo for weeks or months, presenting the Obama
administration with a new issue involving detainees at the naval base at
Guantanamo Bay to resolve when it takes office next month.

At the start of what had been listed as routine proceedings Monday, Judge Henley
said he had received a written statement from the five men dated Nov. 4 saying
they planned to stop filing legal motions and ''to announce our confessions to
plea in full.''

Speaking in what has become a familiar high-pitched tone in the cavernous
courtroom here, the most prominent of the five, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, said,
''we don't want to waste our time with motions.''

''All of you are paid by the U.S. government,'' continued Mr. Mohammed, who has
described himself as the mastermind of the 2001 attacks. ''I'm not trusting any
American.''

Mr. Mohammed and the others presented their decision almost as a dare to the
American government. When Judge Henley raised questions about the procedure for
imposing the death penalty after a guilty plea, some of the detainees
immediately suggested they might change their minds if they could not be assured
they would be executed.

The announcement Monday sent shockwaves through the biggest case in the war
crimes system here -- the case for which some government officials say the
system was expressly devised. With the case suddenly at a critical juncture,
President-elect Barack Obama may find it more complicated to carry out his
pledge to close the detention camp here.

Brooke Anderson, a spokeswoman for the presidential transition office, declined
to comment.

Military prosecutors have sought the death penalty against all five men since
filing charges last February in the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, which killed
nearly 3,000 people.

Mr. Mohammed has emerged as the outspoken leader of the detainees in the
courtroom and, presumably, behind closed doors. In September, Mr. Mohammed
requested permission for the men -- three of whom are defending themselves -- to
meet without lawyers to plan their defense. A military judge granted the request
with the approval of the prosecution, and the men met several times for a total
of 27 hours and prepared a written statement.

On Monday, Judge Henley methodically questioned each man to determine if he
agreed with the joint statement.

One of the five detainees, Ramzi bin al-Shibh, told the judge, ''We the
brothers, all of us, would like to submit our confession.'' Mr. bin al-Shibh is
charged with being the primary contact between the operation's organizers and
the Sept. 11 hijackers.

National security specialists said the strategy appeared orchestrated by Mr.
Mohammed, who has repeatedly tried to turn to the legal process into an
international platform.

''These guys are smart enough to know that they're not ever going to see the
light of day again,'' said Andrew C. McCarthy, a former federal terrorism
prosecutor who is chairman of the Center for Law and Counterterrorism in
Washington. ''I think they're trying to make as big a publicity splash as they
can.''

For the first time, the Pentagon arranged for relatives of 9/11 victims to
travel to Guantanamo to attend the session. A group of them, who spoke to
reporters afterward, said they were struck by the extensive rights accorded the
accused men. One of the relatives, Hamilton Peterson, said he was offended by
the detainees, who he said were sneering and laughing in the courtroom. ''They
seemed to view these proceedings as a joke,'' Mr. Peterson said.

In an outburst, Mr. bin al-Shibh said he wanted to congratulate Osama bin Laden,
adding, ''We ask him to attack the American enemy with all his power.''

Some lawyers who have been following the prosecutions said the timing of the
effort to plead guilty was significant, coming in what may have been the last
major hearing here in the Bush administration. Mr. Obama has suggested that he
might end the military commissions and charge the detainees in existing American
courts.

Vijay Padmanabhan, an assistant professor at Cardozo Law School who was until
July a State Department lawyer with responsibility for detainee issues, said the
five detainees had worked to use criticism of the military tribunals to their
advantage.

''They are trying to ensure their martyrdom in a manner that continues to attack
the credibility of the legal system challenging them,'' Mr. Padmanabhan said.

In Monday's session, which was covered by an international press corps from the
Arab world, Spain, Brazil, Japan and elsewhere, Judge Henley directed
prosecutors to submit full legal arguments by Jan. 4 on the procedures in
capital cases outlined by the Military Commissions Act, which governs
proceedings here.

Among other fundamental issues, Judge Henley asked for analysis of whether the
men could be sentenced to death if they pleaded guilty instead of being found
guilty by a panel of military officers. Because this week's proceedings were to
consider legal motions to be decided by the judge, no panel was present.

Another potential hurdle to guilty pleas was a claim by lawyers for two of the
detainees that they may not be mentally competent to represent themselves.

The judge ruled that those two detainees could not make decisions about their
cases on Monday. The two are Mr. bin al-Shibh and Mustafa al-Hawsawi, charged as
a Qaeda financial operative. In addition to Mr. Mohammed, the other detainees
are Walid bin Attash, who is accused of selecting many of the hijackers, and
Ammar al-Baluchi, a nephew of Mr. Mohammed who is said to have been one of his
key deputies in the Sept. 11 plot.

The judge said the competency issues might not be resolved for a substantial
period. The three detainees who are representing themselves said they would wait
to enter a plea, as Mr. Mohammed put it, ''until a decision is made about our
brothers.''

The judge ruled that he would permit the three men who represent themselves to
withdraw motions filed on their behalf, which would set the stage for a guilty
plea.

Human rights groups monitoring the proceedings said the judge's uncertainty
about the procedures for accepting guilty pleas in a death-penalty case here
illustrated the difficulties of using a new legal system to prosecute terrorism
suspects.

''It is indicative about the last four years of a failed commission process,''
said Anthony D. Romero, the executive director of the American Civil Liberties
Union.

But a Pentagon spokesman, Cmdr. Jeffrey D. Gordon, said, ''These are
extraordinarily complex issues, and we have worked hard to ensure that those
accused of war crimes get full and fair trials.''

Alice Hoagland, the mother of Mark Bingham, who was killed on Sept. 11, said she
was pleased that the military judge had not rushed to allow guilty pleas. The
detainees ''do not deserve to be dealt with as martyrs,'' Ms. Hoagland said.
''They do not deserve the glory of execution.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ramzi bin al-Shibh, left, Walid bin Attash and Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed on Monday at a hearing in Guantanamo Bay.(POOL PHOTO BY JANET HAMLIN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%);
GUILTY PLEAS (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); CAPITAL CRIMES (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(88%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); ARMIES (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
MILITARY BASES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); LAWYERS (74%); WAR CRIMES (73%);
ARMED FORCES (73%); NAVIES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2011


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1210 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          December 10, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tactics Used In U.S. Raids Draw Claims Of Brutality

BYLINE: By DAMIEN CAVE and YOLANNE ALMANZAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 28

LENGTH: 419 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Advocates for immigrants here demanded an investigation Tuesday into a series of
federal raids last month that they said left at least six Guatemalan men
bloodied and bruised in a roundup of nearly 100 people.

Immigration and Customs Enforcement denied all accusations of misconduct by
agents in the raids on Nov. 19 in three South Florida counties, noting that the
operation focused on sex trafficking and led to charges against seven people and
the release of several women.

But lawyers working with other detainees said they were concerned that the
agency was using human trafficking laws as a front for broader operations, and a
cover for harsh tactics.

''There is a way that these operations should be conducted,'' said Jose
Rodriguez, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union of Miami-Dade
County. ''And this is not it.''

At a news conference, Mr. Rodriguez and others said agents had relied on vaguely
worded warrants to invade people's homes and arrest nearly anyone who looked
Hispanic. In all, according to the federal agency, 77 illegal immigrants were
detained in the operation, and only a handful appear to have been charged with a
crime.

In the case involving the accusations of beatings, none of the men have been
charged with sex trafficking. Lawyers working with the men said the agents used
excessive force:  bursting into their home in Homestead about 8:30 p.m., pulling
their guns in front of a 4-year-old girl, then forcing all 10 or 11 men inside
onto the floor in handcuffs.

No guns or drugs were found. All the men were Guatemalan immigrants, and the
advocates said at least six of them arrived at a nearby detention center with
bruises and cuts.

The wife of one detainee, the mother of the 4-year-old girl, said she saw agents
kick her husband and others while they were on the floor. She declined to give
her name because she feared retribution.

Agency officials, in a statement denying the accusations of abuse and the
display of a weapon near a child, said they were required to arrest anyone found
to be violating immigration law, regardless of the circumstances.

The statement also said the accusations would be forwarded to the agency's
Office of Professional Responsibility for review.

But the advocates said that was not enough. Witnesses have already been
deported, they said, and without a robust investigation by the agency's
inspector general or the United States attorney's office in Miami, agents who
might have violated the law might never be punished.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CONTUSIONS (89%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); MISCONDUCT
(78%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(78%); SEX OFFENSES (77%); SEX TRAFFICKING (76%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (92%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1212 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           December 11, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Darfur, Another Year Later

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 48

LENGTH: 505 words


In January, President Bush said this about Darfur: ''My administration called
this genocide. Once you label it genocide, you obviously have to do something
about it.''

Yet, last week -- nearly one year later -- this is what the International
Criminal Court prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, told the United Nations Security
Council about Darfur: ''Genocide continues. Rapes in and around the camps
continue. Humanitarian assistance is still hindered. More than 5,000 displaced
persons die each month.'' How can this still be?

The world has long declared its revulsion at the atrocities committed by Sudan's
government and its proxy militias in Darfur and done almost nothing to stop it.
It took years of political wrangling to get the Security Council to approve a
strengthened peacekeeping force with deployment set for Jan. 1. More than 11
months later, the Security Council has managed to send only 10,000 of the
promised 26,000 peacekeepers. Large-scale military attacks against populated
areas continue.

Much of the fault lies with Sudan's cynically obstructionist president, Omar
Hassan al-Bashir. But Russia and especially China -- which has major oil
interests in Sudan -- have shamefully enabled him. So have African leaders. The
United States and its allies also bear responsibility for temporizing, most
recently over how to transport troops and equipment to the conflict zone.

President Bush said on Wednesday that the United States was prepared to provide
airlift. So why has this taken so long?

Now, the war crimes charges Mr. Moreno-Ocampo has brought against the Sudanese
leader for his role in masterminding Darfur's horrors (the burning of villages,
bombing of schools and systematic rape of woman) may -- may -- be changing the
calculus in Khartoum.

Mr. Bashir recently agreed to peace talks mediated by Qatar and pledged to
punish anyone guilty of crimes in Darfur. Until proved otherwise, the world must
assume that all of this is theater designed to fool the Security Council into
delaying his reckoning at the Hague.

The African Union and the Arab League, seeking to protect one of their own, are
pressing the Security Council to delay a formal indictment and arrest warrant,
saying it would hurt chances for a negotiated peace. The Bush administration has
threatened to block such a move and we hope it stands firm. President-elect
Barack Obama and his advisers have called for strong action to end the Darfur
genocide. We hope the next administration moves quickly. But have no doubt:
Fixing Darfur, which is increasingly engulfed in inter-rebel warfare, gets
harder by the day. The indictment, expected in February, is undeniably deserved.
United Nations officials say that up to 300,000 people have been killed in the
Darfur conflict and that 2.7 million have been driven from their homes.

Still it might be worth delaying if Mr. Bashir called off his murderous
militias, stopped obstructing deployment of a strengthened peacekeeping force
and began serious peace talks. The world is waiting.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (76%); DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); ARMED FORCES (73%); ARREST WARRANTS
(72%); ARRESTS (72%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (72%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (69%);
APPROVALS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (68%); BOMBINGS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT (58%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (92%); CHINA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1223 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 21, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Never Again, For Real

BYLINE: By MADELEINE K. ALBRIGHT and WILLIAM S. COHEN.

Madeleine K. Albright, the secretary of state from 1997 to 2001, and William S.
Cohen, the secretary of defense from 1997 to 2001, are the co-chairmen of the
Genocide Prevention Task Force.

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTORS TRANSITIONS;
Pg. 12

LENGTH: 590 words


SOME we see; others remain invisible to us. Some have names and faces; others we
do not know. They are the victims of genocide and mass atrocities, their numbers
too staggering to count.

This month was  the 60th anniversary of the Convention on the Prevention and
Punishment of the Crime of Genocide. It has been 20 years since the United
States became a party to the treaty. Despite six decades of efforts to prevent
and halt systematic campaigns of massacres, forced displacements and mass rapes,
such atrocities persist. Why are we still lacking the necessary institutions,
policies and strategies?

It is not because the public doesn't care. We have seen a surge in interest in
this country, galvanized by the  crisis in Darfur and driven in large part by
students and faith-based organizations. And it is not because our leaders do not
care. Over the years, many champions in Congress and successive administrations
have demanded more action to stop genocide.

When we were in the Clinton administration, we experienced firsthand the
challenges of responding to such crises, sometimes because the political will
was lacking, but more often  because the American government simply does not
have an established, coherent policy for preventing and responding to  mass
atrocities.

Moreover, a lack of dedicated resources for prevention and the absence of
bureaucratic mechanisms allowing  rapid analysis and response have impeded
timely action. What is needed is a national blueprint to prevent genocide and
mass atrocities.

Barack  Obama should demonstrate at the outset of his presidency that preventing
genocide is a national priority. No matter how one calculates American
interests,  national borders today provide little sanctuary from international
problems. Left unchecked, genocide will undermine American security.

First, genocide fuels instability -- usually in weak, undemocratic, corrupt
states. It is in these states that we find terrorist recruitment and training,
human trafficking and civil strife.

Second, genocide and mass atrocities have long-lasting consequences that go far
beyond the states in which they occur. Refugees flow into bordering countries
and then across the globe. The need for humanitarian aid can quickly exceed the
capacities and resources of a generous world. The international community,
including the United States, is called on to absorb  displaced people and to
undertake  relief efforts. And the longer we wait to act, the higher the price
tag.

Third, America's standing in the world is eroded when we are perceived as
bystanders to genocide. Yes, we must understand that preventing mass killings
may eventually require military intervention, but this is always at the end of
the list of intervention options, not the beginning. We must learn to recognize
the early warning signs of genocide and move quickly to marshal international
cooperation, to bring diplomatic and economic pressure to bear against those who
violate the norms of civilized behavior.

Success will require that the president summon political will  not only during a
crisis but before one emerges. This means taking on inertia within the
government, investing political capital, doing the heavy lifting of persuasion.
It means fending off critics and cynics. It means taking risks.

We are keenly aware that the incoming president's agenda will be daunting from
Day One. But preventing genocide and mass atrocities is not an idealistic
addition  to our core foreign policy agenda. It is a moral and strategic
imperative.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY NICK DEWAR)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DISPLACED PERSONS
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (76%); TERRORISM
(73%); CORRUPTION (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (72%); REFUGEES (71%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); ANNIVERSARIES (57%); RELIGION (54%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (50%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (50%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SUDAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1225 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 22, 2008 Monday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Deferring the Darfur Case

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 149 words


To the Editor:

Re ''Darfur, Another Year Later'' (editorial, Dec. 11):

We should not use the possibility of International Criminal Court indictments as
a carrot and stick in seeking to end the violent conflict in Darfur. Deferring
the case against President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan for crimes against
humanity would establish a catastrophic precedent whereby politics dictates the
course of justice. Amnesty International has advocated against such interference
in the I.C.C.'s actions from the court's inception.

More important, we must not forget what Darfuris directly affected by nearly six
years of state-sponsored terrorism want -- justice. Tens of thousands of
Darfuris have signed petitions asking that the case against Mr. Bashir not be
deferred. We must listen to them.

Denise Bell  New York, Dec. 12, 2008

The writer is a Darfur campaigner with Amnesty International USA.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); WRITERS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (72%); PETITIONS (72%); TERRORISM (52%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%)

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1230 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            December 28, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

MORE THAN 225 DIE IN GAZA AS ISRAEL STRIKES AT HAMAS

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ETHAN BRONNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza, and Ethan Bronner from Jerusalem. Isabel Kershner contributed
reporting from Netivot, Israel, and Robert Pear from Crawford, Tex.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1390 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Waves of Israeli airstrikes destroyed Hamas security facilities in Gaza on
Saturday in a crushing response to the group's rocket fire, killing more than
225 -- the highest one-day toll in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in decades.

Israeli military officials said the airstrikes, which went on into the night,
were the start of what could be days or even months of an effort to force Hamas
to end its rocket barrages into southern Israel. The operation could include
ground forces, a senior Israeli security official said.

Palestinian officials said that most of the dead were security officers for
Hamas, including two senior commanders, and that at least 600 people had been
wounded in the attacks.

After the initial airstrikes, dozens of rockets were fired into southern Israel,
where an emergency was declared. Thousands of Israelis hurried into bomb
shelters amid the hail of rockets, including some longer-range models that
reached farther north than ever before. One man was killed in the town of
Netivot, the first death from rocket fire since it intensified a week ago, and
four were wounded.

A number of governments and international officials, including leaders of
Russia, Egypt, the European Union and the United Nations, condemned Israel's use
of force and also called on Hamas to end the rocket fire. But in strong terms,
the Bush administration blamed Hamas for the violence and demanded that it stop
firing rockets.

A military operation  had been forecast and demanded by Israeli officials for
weeks, ever since a rocky cease-fire between Israel and Hamas fully collapsed a
week ago, leading again to rocket attacks in large numbers against Israel and
isolated Israeli operations here.

Still, there was a shocking quality to Saturday's attacks, which began in broad
daylight as police cadets were graduating, women were shopping at the outdoor
market, and children were emerging from school.

The center of Gaza City was a scene of chaotic horror, with rubble everywhere,
sirens wailing, and women shrieking as dozens of mutilated bodies were laid out
on the pavement and in the lobby of Shifa Hospital so that family members could
identify them.  The dead included civilians, including several construction
workers and at least two children in school uniforms.

By afternoon, shops were shuttered, funerals began and mourning tents were
visible on nearly every major street of this densely populated city.

The leader of the Hamas government in Gaza, Ismail Haniya, said in a statement
that ''Palestine has never witnessed an uglier massacre.'' Later, in a televised
speech, he vowed to fight Israel. ''We say in all confidence that even if we are
hung on the gallows or they make our blood flow in the streets or they tear our
bodies apart, we will bow only before God and we will not abandon Palestine,''
he said.

In Damascus, Syria, Hamas's supreme leader, Khaled Meshal, said in an interview
with Al Jazeera television that he was calling for a new Palestinian intifada
against Israel, including the resumption of suicide attacks within Israel for
the first time since 2005. Hamas, he said, had accepted ''all the peaceful
options, but without results.''

Ehud Barak, the Israeli defense minister and chairman of the Labor Party, said
the military operation in Gaza would expand and deepen as necessary, adding,
''There is a time for calm and a time for fighting, and this is the time for
fighting.''

''We wanted to attack military targets while the terrorists were inside the
facilities and before Hamas was able to get its rockets out that were stored in
some of the targets,'' said a top Israeli security official, briefing a group of
reporters by telephone on condition of anonymity.

''Right now, we have to hit Hamas hard to stop the launching,'' he added. ''I
don't see any other way for Hamas to change its behavior. Hamas is not just a
terrorist organization. It actually rules Gaza and is well supported by Iran
with some of its leadership in Syria.''

Hamas had in recent weeks let it be known that it doubted Israel would engage in
a major military undertaking because of its coming elections. But in some ways
the elections have made it impossible for officials like Mr. Barak not to react,
because the public has grown anxious and angry over the rocket fire, which while
causing no recent deaths and few injuries is deeply disturbing for those living
near Gaza.

Israeli officials said that anyone linked to the Hamas security structure or
government was fair game because Hamas was a terrorist group that sought
Israel's destruction. But with work here increasingly scarce because of an
international embargo on Hamas, young men are tempted by the steady work of the
police force without necessarily fully accepting the Hamas ideology. One of the
biggest tolls on Saturday was at a police cadet graduation ceremony in which 15
people were killed.

Spokesmen for Hamas officials, who have mostly gone underground, called on
militants to seek revenge and fight to the last drop of blood. Several compared
what was happening to the 2006 war between Israel and the Lebanese militia
Hezbollah, when Israel reacted to the capture and killing of soldiers along its
northern border with air raids, followed by a ground attack. Hezbollah is widely
viewed as having withstood those assaults and emerged much stronger politically.

The Arab League initially called an emergency meeting for Sunday in Cairo with
all the foreign ministers from the member states, but later postponed it to
Wednesday to give ministers time to respond.

Governments that dislike Hamas, like Egypt's, Jordan's and the Palestinian
Authority in the West Bank, are in a delicate position. They blame Hamas for
having taken over Gaza by force 18 months ago in the aftermath of its election
victory in the Palestinian Parliament, and they oppose its rocket fire on
Israeli towns and communities.

But the sight of scores of Palestinians killed by Israeli warplanes outraged
their citizens, and anti-Israel demonstrations broke out across the region.

President Mahmoud Abbas of the Palestinian Authority angrily condemned the
Israeli airstrikes. Egypt, worried about possible efforts by Palestinians to
enter the country, has set up machine guns along the Gaza border. But on
Saturday it temporarily opened the Rafah border crossing in order to allow the
wounded to be brought to Egyptian hospitals.

In the West Bank and in some Arab parts of Jerusalem and Israel, Palestinians
threw stones, causing some injuries.

Hamas is officially committed to Israel's destruction, and after it took over
Gaza in 2007, it said it would not recognize Israel, honor previous Palestinian
Authority commitments to it or end its violence against Israelis.

Israel, backed by the United States, Europe, Egypt and the Palestinian
Authority, has sought to isolate Hamas by squeezing Gaza economically, a policy
that human rights groups condemn as collective punishment. Israel and Egypt,
which control routes into and out of Gaza, have blocked nearly all but
humanitarian aid from going in.

The result has been the near death of the Gazan economy. While enough food has
gone in to avoid starvation, the level of suffering is very high and getting
worse each week, especially in recent weeks as Israel closed the routes entirely
for about 10 days in reaction to daily rocket fire.

Opening the routes to commerce was Hamas's main goal in its cease-fire with
Israel, just as ending the rocket fire was Israel's central aim.But while rocket
fire did go down drastically in the fall to 15 to 20 a month from hundreds a
month, Israel said it would not permit trade to begin again because the rocket
fire had not completely stopped and because Hamas continued to smuggle weapons
from Egypt through desert tunnels. Hamas said this was a violation of the
agreement, a sign of Israel's real intentions and cause for further rocket fire.
On Wednesday, some 70 rockets hit Israel over 24 hours, in a distinct increase
in intensity.

The United Nations Security Council met late Saturday night to discuss the
situation.

Envoys of the 15-nation council were discussing what diplomats said was a
Russian-drafted statement calling for a halt to Israeli military operations in
Gaza as well as a halt to rocket attacks upon Israel, Reuters reported.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: An injured Palestinian was helped from the rubble after an
Israeli airstrike hit Rafah in the Gaza Strip on Saturday.(PHOTOGRAPH BY HATEM
OMAR/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(A1)
Palestinians in Gaza City on Saturday gathered around the bodies of people
killed by Israeli airstrikes, launched in response to recent Hamas rocket
attacks.(PHOTOGRAPH BY MAHMUD HAMS/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 A relative of a victim wept outside a hospital in Gaza City after the Israeli
airstrikes, which hit Hamas security facilities.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ABID KATIB/GETTY
IMAGES)(A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (91%); BOMBINGS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); HAMAS
(90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (88%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); INTERVIEWS (75%); CITY LIFE (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (66%);
POPULATION DENSITY (62%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (99%); UNITED STATES
(79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%); SYRIA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(70%)

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1239 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 2, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gaza Is Tense as It Tallies Casualties

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza, and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 676 words

DATELINE: GAZA


Gaza remained tense on Tuesday after a night of clashes between Hamas and Fatah
gunmen.

Seven Palestinians were killed and 40 wounded in the clashes late Monday and
early Tuesday, said Dr. Muawiya Hassanein, director of the emergency medical
service in Gaza. He said 25 had been wounded by gunfire, and the rest had been
beaten.

A spokesman for the Hamas-run Interior Ministry, Ehab al-Ghsein, blamed Fatah
for the violence, saying it started when Fatah supporters shot at worshipers
leaving a mosque in Khan Yunis, killing a local Hamas leader, Mahmoud Abu Taha,
and a 10-year-old boy.

The clashes spread to Beit Lahiya, in the north, Gaza City and other areas, as
Fatah marked its 43rd anniversary.

Hamas had prohibited Fatah from holding large anniversary rallies, following a
Fatah ban on Hamas celebrations in the West Bank of its 20th anniversary  last
month. Mr. Ghsein said that the Hamas rulers of Gaza had agreed with Fatah to
allow limited activities ''on condition that they wouldn't harm security.'' But
in the days before the anniversary, Hamas policemen confiscated Fatah items and
arrested Fatah advocates.

Among the dead late Monday and early Tuesday were a Hamas policeman and two
civilians, Mr. Ghsein said. In Gaza City, Fatah officials would not comment.

Wael Abu Najja, the son of Ibrahim Abu Najja,  a Fatah leader in Gaza, accused
Hamas of abducting his father on Monday night, and of shaving his head and
mustache to humiliate him before dropping him at his house. Hamas officials
said the kidnappers had been Fatah men who blamed him for taking them off the
Palestinian Authority payroll.

In a speech Monday evening for the Fatah anniversary,  Mahmoud Abbas, the
Palestinian president,  called on those who initiated Hamas's military takeover
of Gaza last June ''to open a new page'' and to reach a new agreement on
Palestinian unity through dialogue. He asked Hamas to consider early elections.
A Hamas leader, Mahmoud Zahar, rejected that idea here on Tuesday. He said  that
Hamas ''welcomes new ideas regarding a dialogue without preconditions,'' and
that it should occur under ''Arab auspices.'' Egypt and Saudi Arabia have
previously mediated between the sides.

No breakthrough appeared imminent.

At least one Palestinian militant was killed Tuesday by Israeli Army fire  near
the border fence along Gaza. An army spokeswoman said that ground forces had
fired at armed men approaching the fence. Hamas said the dead man was on its
security force. Members of the Hamas military wing approach the fence to monitor
Israeli activity or to fire mortar shells.

A new report by Israel's Shin Bet internal security agency indicated a decline
in attacks on Israelis in 2007, saying the number of casualties from them was
the lowest since the outbreak of the intifada in 2000. According to the Shin Bet
figures published Tuesday in the Israeli news media, 13 Israelis were killed in
attacks in 2007 -- seven civilians and six soldiers. In 2006, 24 Israelis were
killed, and in 2002, at the height of the intifada, 426.

A total of 1,263 Qassam rockets and 1,511 mortar shells were fired at Israel
from Gaza in 2007, the report said.

A report by Btselem, an Israeli human rights group, said Israeli security forces
killed 373 Palestinians in 2007, 290 of them in Gaza and 83 in the West Bank, 53
among them minors. In 2006, 657 Palestinians were killed, including 140 minors,
Btselem said.

The percentage of Palestinian civilians killed who were not involved in
hostilities also declined in 2007, to 35 percent, from 54 percent in 2006,
Btselem said.

Israel on Monday released details about  two Palestinians in the custody of the
Palestinian Authority who are said to have confessed to the Dec. 29 killing of
two Israeli settlers  in the West Bank. The Israeli prime minister's office said
the two were Fatah advocates in their 20s from Hebron. One is said to have been
''in contact'' with the Palestinian General Intelligence service, and the other
to have been  a member of Mr. Abbas's national security force.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AL FATAH (95%); HAMAS (91%); ANNIVERSARIES (91%); SHOOTINGS (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (78%); WAR
& CONFLICT (78%); MARTIAL LAW (77%); MILITARY RULE (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(72%); ARMIES (71%); BORDER CONTROL (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (95%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1241 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 4, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bhutto's Deadly Legacy

BYLINE: By WILLIAM DALRYMPLE.

William Dalrymple is the author, most recently, of ''The Last Mughal: The Fall
of a Dynasty, Delhi, 1857.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: New Delhi


WHEN, in May 1991, former Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi of India was killed by a
suicide bomber, there was an international outpouring of grief. Recent days have
seen the same with the death of Benazir Bhutto: another glamorous,
Western-educated scion of a great South Asian political dynasty tragically
assassinated at an election rally.

There is, however, an important difference between the two deaths: while Mr.
Gandhi was assassinated by Sri Lankan Hindu extremists because of his policy of
confronting them, Ms. Bhutto was apparently the victim of Islamist militant
groups that she allowed to flourish under her administrations in the 1980s and
1990s.

It was under Ms. Bhutto's watch that the Pakistani intelligence agency,
Inter-Services Intelligence, first installed the Taliban in Afghanistan. It was
also at that time that hundreds of young Islamic militants were recruited from
the madrassas to do the agency's dirty work in Indian Kashmir. It seems that,
like some terrorist equivalent of Frankenstein's monster, the extremists turned
on both the person and the state that had helped bring them into being.

While it is true that the recruitment of jihadists had started before she took
office and that Ms. Bhutto was insufficiently strong -- or competent -- to have
had full control over either the intelligence services or the Pakistani Army
when she was in office, it is equally naive to believe she had no influence over
her country's foreign policy toward its two most important neighbors, India and
Afghanistan.

Everyone now knows how disastrous the rule of the Taliban turned out to be in
Afghanistan, how brutally it subjected women and how it allowed Al Qaeda to
train in camps within its territory. But another, and in the long term perhaps
equally perilous, legacy of Ms. Bhutto's tenure is often forgotten: the turning
of Kashmir into a jihadist playground.

In 1989, when the insurgency in the Indian portion of the disputed region first
began, it was largely an amateur affair of young, secular-minded Kashmiri
Muslims rising village by village and wielding homemade weapons -- firearms
fashioned from the steering shafts of rickshaws and so on. By the early '90s,
however, Pakistan was sending over the border thousands of well-trained, heavily
armed and ideologically hardened jihadis. Some were the same sorts of exiled
Arab radicals who were at the same time forming Al Qaeda in Peshawar, in
northwestern Pakistan.

By 1993, during Ms. Bhutto's second term, the Arab and Afghan jihadis (and their
Inter-Services Intelligence masters) had really begun to take over the uprising
from the locals. It was at this stage that the secular leadership of the Jammu
and Kashmir Liberation Front began losing ground to hard-line Islamist outfits
like Hizbul Mujahedeen.

I asked Benazir Bhutto about her Kashmir policy and the potential dangers of the
growing role of religious extremists in the conflict during an interview in
1994. ''India tries to gloss over its policy of repression in Kashmir,'' she
replied. ''India does have might, but has been unable to crush the people of
Kashmir. We are not prepared to keep silent, and collude with repression.''

Hamid Gul, who was the head of the intelligence agency during her first
administration, was more forthcoming still. ''The Kashmiri people have risen
up,'' he told me, ''and it is the national purpose of Pakistan to help liberate
them.'' He continued, ''If the jihadis go out and contain India, tying down
their army on their own soil, for a legitimate cause, why should we not support
them?''

Benazir Bhutto's death is, of course, a calamity, particularly as she embodied
the hopes of so many liberal Pakistanis. But, contrary to the commentary we've
seen in the last week, she was not comparable to Myanmar's Daw Aung San Suu Kyi.
Ms. Bhutto's governments were widely criticized by Amnesty International and
other groups for their use of death squads and terrible record on deaths in
police custody, abductions and torture. As for her democratic bona fides, she
had no qualms about  banning rallies by opposing political parties while in
power.

Within her own party, she declared herself the president for life and controlled
all decisions. She rejected her brother Murtaza's bid to  challenge her for its
leadership and when he persisted, he was shot dead in highly suspicious
circumstances during a police ambush outside the Bhutto family home.

Benazir Bhutto was certainly a brave and secular-minded woman. But the
obituaries painting her as dying to save democracy distort history. Instead, she
was a natural autocrat who did little for human rights, a calculating politician
who was complicit in Pakistan's becoming the region's principal jihadi paymaster
while she also ramped up an insurgency in Kashmir that has brought two nuclear
powers to the brink of war.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY ILENE WINN-LEDERER)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); RELIGION
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); TALIBAN (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (88%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); FOREIGN POLICY (70%);
ARMIES (69%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (68%)

PERSON: BENAZIR BHUTTO (92%)

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KASHMIR (94%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (92%)

COUNTRY: INDIA (94%); ASIA (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1244 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reform Stalls in Chinese Factories

BYLINE: By DAVID BARBOZA

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1625 words

DATELINE: GUANGZHOU, China


Nearly a  decade after  some of the most powerful companies in the world  --
often under considerable criticism and consumer pressure -- began an effort to
eliminate sweatshop labor conditions in Asia,  worker abuse is still commonplace
in many of the Chinese factories that supply Western companies, according to
labor rights groups.

The groups  say some Chinese companies routinely shortchange their employees on
wages, withhold health benefits and expose their workers  to dangerous machinery
and harmful chemicals, like lead, cadmium and mercury.

''If these things are so dangerous for the consumer, then how about the
workers?'' said Anita Chan, a labor rights advocate who teaches at the
Australian National University. ''We may be dealing with these things for a
short time, but they deal with them every day.''

And so while American and European consumers worry about exposing their children
to Chinese-made toys coated in lead, Chinese workers, often as young as 16, face
far more serious hazards. Here in the Pearl River Delta region near Hong Kong,
for example, factory workers lose or break about 40,000 fingers on the job every
year, according to a study published a few years ago by the Shanghai Academy of
Social Sciences.

Pushing to keep big corporations honest, labor groups regularly smuggle
photographs, videos, pay stubs, shipping records and other evidence out of
factories that they say violate local law and international worker standards. In
2007, factories that supplied more than a dozen corporations, including
Wal-Mart, Disney and Dell, were accused of unfair labor practices, including
using child labor, forcing employees to work 16-hour days on fast-moving
assembly lines, and paying workers less than minimum wage. (Minimum wage in this
part of China is about 55 cents an hour.)

In recent weeks, a flood of reports detailing labor abuse have been released, at
a time when China is still coping with last year's wave of product safety
recalls of goods made in China, and as it tries to change workplace rules with a
new labor law that took effect on Jan. 1.

No company has come under as harsh a spotlight as Wal-Mart, the world's biggest
retailer, which sourced about $9 billion in goods from China in 2006, everything
from hammers and toys to high-definition televisions.

In December,  two nongovernmental organizations, or NGOs, documented what they
said were abuse and labor violations at 15 factories that produce or supply
goods for Wal-Mart -- including the use of child labor at Huanya Gifts, a
factory here in Guangzhou that makes Christmas tree ornaments.

Wal-Mart officials say they are investigating the allegations, which were in a
report issued three weeks ago by the National Labor Committee, a New York-based
NGO.

Guangzhou labor bureau officials said they recently fined Huanya for wage
violations, but also said they found no evidence of child labor.

A spokesman for Huanya, which employs 8,000 workers, denied that the company
broke any labor laws.

But two workers interviewed outside Huanya's huge complex in late December said
that they were forced to work long hours to meet production quotas in harsh
conditions.

''I work on the plastic molding machine from 6 in the morning to 6 at night,''
said Xu Wenquan, a tiny, baby-faced 16-year-old whose hands were covered with
blisters. Asked what had happened to his hands,  he replied,  the machines are
''quite hot, so I've burned my hands.''

His brother, Xu Wenjie, 18, said the two young men left their small village in
impoverished Guizhou Province four months ago and traveled more than 500 miles
to find work at Huanya.

The brothers said they worked 12 hours a day, six days a week, for $120 to $200
a month,  far less than they are required to be paid by law.

When government inspectors visit the factory, the young brothers are given the
day off, they said.

A former Huanya employee who was reached by telephone gave a similar account of
working conditions, saying many workers suffered from skin rashes after working
with gold powders and that others were forced to sign papers ''volunteering'' to
work overtime.

''It's quite noisy, and you stand up all day, 12 hours, and there's no
air-conditioning,'' he said. ''We get paid by the piece we make but they never
told us how much. Sometimes I got $110, sometimes I got $150 a month.''

In its 58-page report, the National Labor Committee scolded Wal-Mart for not
doing more to protect workers. The group charged that last July, Huanya
recruited about 500 16-year-old high school students to work seven days a week,
often 15 hours a day, during peak production months for holiday merchandise.

Several students interviewed at the Guangzhou Technical School, less than two
miles from Huanya, confirmed that classmates ages 16 to 18 had spent the summer
working at the factory.

Some high school students later went on strike to protest the harsh conditions,
the report said. The students also told labor officials that at least seven
children, as young as 12 years old, were working in the factory.

''At Wal-Mart, Christmas ornaments are cheap, and so are the lives of the young
workers in China who make them,'' the National Labor Committee report said.

Jonathan Dong, a Wal-Mart spokesman in Beijing, said the company would soon
release details of its own investigation into working conditions at Huanya.

Labor rights groups have also criticized Disney and Dell. Officials of Disney
and Dell declined to comment on specific allegations, but both companies say
they carefully monitor factories in China and take action when they find
problems or unfair labor practices.

''The Walt Disney Company and its affiliates take claims of unfair labor
practices very seriously and investigates any such allegations thoroughly,'' the
company said in a statement. ''We have a strong commitment to the safety and
well-being of workers, and fair and just labor standards.''

Many multinationals were harshly criticized in the 1990s for using suppliers
that maintained sweatshop conditions. Iconic brand names, like Nike, Mattel and
Gap, responded by forming corporate social responsibility operations and working
with contractors to create a system of factory audits and inspections. Those
changes have won praise in some quarters for improving worker conditions.

But despite spending millions of dollars and hiring thousands of auditors, some
companies acknowledge that many of the programs are flawed.

''The factories have improved immeasurably over the past few years,'' says Alan
Hassenfeld, chairman of the toy maker Hasbro and co-chairman of Care, the
ethical-manufacturing program of the International Council of Toy Industries.
''But let me be honest: there are some bad factories. We have bribery and
corruption occurring but we are doing our best.''

Some factories are warned about audits beforehand and some factory owners or
managers bribe auditors. Inexperienced inspectors may also be a problem.

Some major Western auditing firms working in China even hire college students
from the United States to work during the summer as inspectors, an indication
that they are not willing to invest in more expensive or sophisticated auditing
programs, critics say.

Chinese suppliers regularly outsource to other suppliers, who may in turn
outsource to yet another operation, creating a supply chain that is hard to
follow  -- let alone inspect.

''The convoluted supply chain is probably one of the most underestimated and
unrecognized risks in China,'' says Dane Chamorro, general manager for Greater
China at Control Risks, a risk-consulting firm. ''You really have to have
experienced people on the ground who know what they're doing and know the
language.''

Many labor experts say part of the problem is cost: Western companies are
constantly pressing their Chinese suppliers for lower prices while also
insisting that factory owners spend more to upgrade operations, treat workers
properly and improve product quality.

At the same time, rising food, energy and raw material costs in China -- as well
as a shortage of labor in the biggest southern manufacturing zones  -- are
hampering factory owners' ability to make a profit.

The situation may get worse before it improves. The labor law that took effect
on Jan. 1 makes it more difficult to dismiss workers and creates a whole new set
of laws that experts say will almost certainly increase labor costs. Yet it may
become more difficult for human rights groups to investigate abuses. Concerned
about the growing array of threats to profitability, as well as embarrassing
exposes, factories are heightening security, harassing labor rights groups and
calling the police when journalists show up at their gates.

At the center of the problem is a labor system that relies on young migrant
workers, who often leave small rural villages for two- or three-year stints at
factories, where they hope to earn enough to return home to start  families.

As long as life in the cities promises more money than in rural areas, they will
brave the harsh conditions in factories in this and other Chinese cities. And as
long as China outlaws independent unions and proves unable to enforce its own
labor rules, there is little hope for change.

''This is a problem that has been difficult to solve,'' Liu Kaiming, the
director of the Institute on Contemporary Observation, which aids migrant
workers in nearby Shenzhen,  said of sweatshop labor. ''China has too many
factories. The workers' bargaining position is weak and the government's
regulation is slack.''

There is little that any Western company can do about those issues, no matter
how seriously they take corporate social responsibility -- other than leaving
China.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: In Hebei Province in northern China, a worker drags a barrel in
a chemical factory. Below, a dormitory at a steel company in the province.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY ODED BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS
CHANG W. LEE/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
A worker recycling batteries at a factory in Fuyang, China. A labor law that
took effect on Jan. 1 has provisions to protect workers. (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIANAN
YU/REUTERS)
 Workers at a toy factory in Guangzhou. Although some companies have won praise
for labor efforts begun after outcries against sweatshops in the 1990s, critics
say more change is needed. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TIMOTHY O'ROURKE FOR THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (91%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); SWEATSHOPS
(90%); CHILD WELFARE (89%); MINIMUM WAGE (89%); WAGES & SALARIES (89%); CHILD
LABOR (89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CHILD LABOR LAWS (88%);
CONSUMER LAW (78%); PRODUCT SAFETY (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); FACTORY WORKERS
(77%); WAGE VIOLATIONS (77%); CHILDREN (76%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (76%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%); RETAILERS (73%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (72%);
RESEARCH REPORTS (72%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (69%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (65%); CHRISTMAS (64%); TELEVISION EQUIPMENT (60%); HIGH
DEFINITION TELEVISION (50%); PRODUCT RECALLS (50%)

CITY: GUANGZHOU, GUANGDONG, CHINA (94%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%)

STATE: GUANGDONG, CHINA (94%); SOUTH CHINA (93%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); NEW
YORK, USA (79%); EAST CHINA (79%); HEBEI, CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); ASIA (88%); UNITED STATES (79%); HONG KONG (79%);
AUSTRALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1249 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 9, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Civilians Were Killed Needlessly, Ex-Marine Testifies

BYLINE: By PAUL von ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 404 words

DATELINE: CAMP LEJEUNE, N.C.


A former member of an elite Marine combat unit that operated last year in
eastern Afghanistan testified Tuesday that his comrades appeared to have
needlessly killed civilians after their convoy was attacked by a suicide car
bomb.

Nathaniel Travers, a former Marine intelligence sergeant assigned to the 30-man
Special Operations convoy that was patrolling on March 4 last year, testified in
a military court here that a few marines fired at civilians and other unarmed
noncombatants after the suicide bomber struck.

No marines have been charged with a crime in the episode. The hearing was held
to determine whether troops had violated the laws of war.

The three judges on the Marine Corps court of inquiry are examining the actions
of two officers who led the elite unit,  Company F, Second Battalion, Marine
Corps Forces Special Operations Command. They are Maj. Fred C. Galvin, the
company commander, and Capt. Vincent J. Noble, the platoon leader.

Shortly after the March 4 shootings near Jalalabad,  Company F was ordered to
leave Afghanistan by Lt. Gen. Frank Kearney of the Army, the commander at the
time of all Special Operations in the Middle East and Afghanistan.

Weeks later, an Army Special Operations commander in Afghanistan publicly
apologized to the families of 19 people who he said had been unjustifiably
killed by members of the Marine unit.

But the Army apology, given before military investigators had concluded their
inquiry, was later condemned by senior Marine commanders as inappropriate and
premature.

Mr. Travers, the first witness to testify, said the unit's trip from its base at
Jalalabad to the Pakistani border and back was uneventful until a minivan
detonated near the convoy's second Humvee. After the blast, Mr. Travers said, he
heard gunfire and saw bodies in at least two vehicles as the Marine convoy sped
away.

Only a few gunners in the heavily armed convoy fired, he said, until Captain
Noble radioed a command to the entire convoy to stop firing.

The account by Mr. Travers, who left the Marines last year, contrasts sharply
with those given by the American military and the Afghanistan Independent Human
Rights Commission.

The commission, which conducted its own inquiry, said marines had fired
indiscriminately at pedestrians and people in cars, buses and taxis over a
10-mile stretch of road after the attack. No marines were seriously wounded in
the suicide bombing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%);
WITNESSES (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES (76%); LAW OF WAR
(76%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (72%); MOTOR VEHICLES (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (56%)

CITY: JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (91%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1258 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 14, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistan Expels Writer of Article on Taliban

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 436 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Pakistan has expelled an American journalist who wrote in The New York Times
Magazine about the rise of pro-Taliban militants in this major American ally, a
news media rights group said Saturday.

A Pakistani official denied that the journalist, Nicholas Schmidle, had been
deported, however, and said that he  lacked a journalist's visa. Mr. Schmidle, a
visiting scholar at Pakistan's state-run Institute of Strategic Studies in the
capital, Islamabad, occasionally wrote articles.

A statement issued by the New York-based Committee to Protect Journalists said
the Interior Ministry issued a deportation order to Mr. Schmidle last Tuesday
--  two days after his report ''Next-Gen Taliban'' appeared in The New York
Times Magazine.

''C.P.J. is unfortunately accustomed to reporting on the government's attacks on
the local media, but now harassment seems to be spreading to foreign journalists
as well,'' said Joel Simon, the Committee to Protect Journalists'  executive
director.

Mr. Schmidle's article, published Jan. 6, was based on interviews with some of
the officials, clerics and fugitive militant leaders who were on the run or
fighting security forces in the Swat Valley  and in tribal areas along the
Afghan border.

To write it, he ''secretly traveled'' to militant strongholds, prompting the
authorities to expel him, said a security official, who like some others who
provided information spoke on the  condition of anonymity because he was not
authorized to speak to reporters.

An official at the press information department said  Mr. Schmidle was not in
the country on a journalist visa.

The official said the Information Ministry had served a deportation order on Mr.
Schmidle because he had traveled to ''sensitive areas''  -- but then withdrew
it. He did not say why. Mr. Schmidle then left Pakistan of his own accord, he
said.

Journalists must seek permission from the Interior Ministry before traveling to
volatile northwest Pakistan, where the   leader of Al Qaeda, Osama bin Laden,
and his top deputy, Ayman al-Zawahri, are thought to be hiding, and where
Taliban militants are believed to gather to plan attacks  in Afghanistan.

Speaking from London on Friday, Mr. Schmidle told the Committee to Protect
Journalists that he was ''extremely disappointed at being asked to leave
Pakistan,'' and that his visa contained ''no restrictions whatsoever,'' the
statement said.

An editor at the magazine, Scott Malcomson, told the committee that the
authorities had not explained to Mr. Schmidle why he was being deported, but he
said that the move had been  clearly connected to his writing.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF PRESS (91%); TALIBAN (91%); JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%);
DEPORTATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MAGAZINE PUBLISHING (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); TERRORISM (78%); RESEARCH
INSTITUTES (71%); EXECUTIVES (67%)

COMPANY: NEW YORK TIMES CO (91%)

TICKER: NYT (NYSE) (91%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS519130 INTERNET PUBLISHING & BROADCASTING & WEB SEARCH PORTALS
(91%); NAICS515210 CABLE & OTHER SUBSCRIPTION PROGRAMMING (91%); NAICS511110
NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (91%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1261 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Suicide Bomb Kills 6 at Luxury Hotel in Afghan Capital

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan


A suicide bomb attack on Monday evening at a Kabul luxury hotel frequented by
foreigners killed at least six people, including an American and a Norwegian
journalist, and appears to be one of the most brazen assaults by the Taliban in
the heavily protected heart of the Afghan capital, officials said.

The United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, said the intended target had
been  the Norwegian foreign minister, who was meeting at the hotel at the time
but was not hurt.

The attackers walked into the Serena Hotel, the only five-star hotel in
Afghanistan, around 6 p.m. and set off a bomb that was heard two miles away. The
explosion was followed by gunfire, according to Ezmary Bashary, a spokesman for
the Afghan Interior Ministry.

Six people were wounded, including two foreigners, he said. Most of the victims
were staff members and guards at the hotel, which is popular among diplomats and
is often used for conferences. A Seattle woman who was in the hotel said she saw
a  body and pools of blood in the lobby, The Associated Press reported.

The Taliban claimed responsibility for the attack, which it said was carried out
by four militants and was aimed at foreigners.

The Afghan government did not dispute that claim on Monday night, but provided
no further details. Mr. Bashary described the assault as a ''rare type of attack
and a new tactic.''

The Taliban have claimed responsibility for hundreds of suicide attacks in
Afghanistan since the American-led coalition drove them from power in 2001, but
most have been aimed at Afghan and foreign military forces. The attack on Monday
was the first on a Kabul hotel.

In Washington, two State Department officials said  at least one American was
among the dead, The A.P. reported. The victim's identity  was being withheld
until relatives  could be notified.

A journalist from the Oslo daily newspaper Dagbladet, Carsten Thomassen, 38, was
killed,  the  newspaper's Web site reported.

A Taliban spokesman, Zabihullah Mujahid, said, ''The man who carried out the
blessed duty was from southeastern province of Khost, and his name was Farooq.''
Three other militants who accompanied the bomber burst into the hotel firing
guns and managed to escape, Mr. Mujahid said.

Hundreds of Afghan police officers blocked main roads around the hotel, and
dozens of American soldiers were seen at the site helping Afghan security
forces.

Speaking to reporters at the United Nations in New York, Mr. Ban said he was
''very much surprised by this terrorist attack against the foreign minister of
Norway.'' He did not say why he thought the minister was the target but called
the attack ''a serious crime against humanity.''

Al Qaeda, a Taliban ally, has previously called on its supporters to carry out
attacks against Norway because it participated in the invasion of Afghanistan.
Norway  has 500 peacekeepers stationed in the country.

Norway's foreign minister, Jonas Gahr Stoere, who was attending a meeting in the
hotel basement, told Norwegian reporters that everyone was ordered to lie on the
floor, according to The A.P. ''Our security guards undertook an armed
evacuation, where we went from corner to corner in the cellar until we reached a
safe area,'' Mr. Stoere  said.

The White House press secretary, Dana Perino, said the attack ''underscores the
reason we have to stay on the offense against the extremists in places like
Kabul but also in other places around the world,'' The A.P. said.

Suzanne Griffin, 62, a Seattle resident who works with the aid agency Save the
Children, said she was in the hotel gym's locker room when the attack began.
''Thank God I didn't get into the shower because then we heard gunfire, a lot of
it,'' she told The A.P. ''It was very close, close enough that plaster came off
the ceiling. We all just sat on the floor and got as far as we could from any
glass and huddled on the floor.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Policemen patrolling Monday night after a bombing at the Serena
Hotel in Kabul, Afghanistan. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MASSOUD HOSSAINI/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); BOMBINGS (91%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(91%); HOTELS & MOTELS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); TALIBAN
(90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); WRITERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORISM (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); VIOLENT
CRIME (77%); AL-QAEDA (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (70%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%);
ARMED FORCES (64%); WEB SITES (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (56%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); OSLO, NORWAY (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); NORWAY (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1263 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Militants Escape Control Of Pakistan, Officials Say

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3037 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Pakistan's premier military intelligence agency has lost control of some of the
networks of Pakistani militants it has nurtured since the 1980s, and is now
suffering the violent blowback  of that policy, two former senior intelligence
officials and other officials close to the agency say.

As the military has moved against them, the militants have turned on their
former handlers, the officials said. Joining with other extremist groups, they
have battled Pakistani security forces and helped militants carry out a record
number of suicide attacks last year, including some aimed directly at army and
intelligence units as well as prominent political figures, possibly even Benazir
Bhutto.

The growing strength of the militants, many of whom now express support for Al
Qaeda's global jihad, presents a grave threat to Pakistan's security, as well as
NATO efforts to push back the Taliban in Afghanistan. American officials have
begun to weigh more robust covert operations to go after Al Qaeda in the lawless
border areas because they are so concerned that the Pakistani government is
unable to do so.

The unusual disclosures regarding Pakistan's leading military intelligence
agency -- Inter-Services  Intelligence, or the ISI -- emerged in interviews last
month with former senior Pakistani intelligence officials. The disclosures
confirm some of the worst fears, and suspicions, of American and Western
military officials and diplomats.

The interviews, a rare glimpse inside a notoriously secretive and opaque agency,
offered a string of other troubling insights likely to refocus attention on the
ISI's role as Pakistan moves toward elections on Feb. 18 and a battle for
control of the government looms:

One former senior Pakistani intelligence official, as well as other people close
to the agency, acknowledged that the ISI led the effort to manipulate Pakistan's
last national election in 2002, and offered to drop corruption cases against
candidates who would back President Pervez Musharraf.

A person close to the ISI said Mr. Musharraf had now ordered the agency to
ensure that the coming elections were free and fair, and denied that the agency
was working to rig the vote. But the acknowledgment of past rigging is certain
to fuel opposition fears of new meddling.

The two former high-ranking intelligence officials acknowledged that after Sept.
11, 2001, when President Musharraf publicly allied Pakistan with the Bush
administration, the ISI could not rein in the militants it had nurtured for
decades as a proxy force to exert pressure on India and Afghanistan. After the
agency unleashed hard-line Islamist beliefs, the officials said, it struggled to
stop the ideology from spreading.

Another former senior intelligence official said dozens of ISI officers who
trained militants had come to sympathize with their cause and had had to be
expelled from the agency. He said three purges had taken place since the late
1980s and included the removal of three ISI directors suspected of being
sympathetic to the militants.

None of the former intelligence officials who spoke to The New York Times agreed
to be identified when talking about the ISI, an agency that has gained a
fearsome reputation for interfering in almost every aspect of Pakistani life.
But two former American intelligence officials agreed with much of what they
said about the agency's relationship with the militants.

So did other sources close to the ISI, who admitted that the agency had
supported militants in Afghanistan and Kashmir, although they said they had been
ordered to do so by political leaders.

The former intelligence officials appeared to feel freer to speak as Mr.
Musharraf's eight years of military rule weakened, and as a power struggle for
control over the government looms between Mr. Musharraf and opposition political
parties.

The officials were interviewed before the assassination of Ms. Bhutto, the
opposition leader, on Dec. 27. Since then, the government has said that
Pakistani militants linked to Al Qaeda are the foremost suspects in her killing.
Her supporters have accused the government of a hidden hand in the attack.

While the author of Ms. Bhutto's death remains a mystery, the interviews with
the former intelligence officials made clear that the agency remained unable to
control the militants it had fostered.

The threat from the militants, the former intelligence officials warned, is one
that Pakistan is unable to contain. ''We could not control them,'' said one
former senior intelligence official, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''We
indoctrinated them and told them, 'You will go to heaven.' You cannot turn it
around so suddenly.''

The Context

After 9/11, the Bush administration pressed Mr. Musharraf to choose a side in
fighting Islamist extremism and to abandon Pakistan's longtime support for the
Taliban and other Islamist militants.

In the 1990s, the ISI supported the militants as a proxy force to contest
Indian-controlled Kashmir, the border territory that India and Pakistan both
claim, and to gain a controlling influence in neighboring Afghanistan. In the
1980s, the United States supported militants, too, funneling billions of dollars
to Islamic fighters battling Soviet forces in Afghanistan through the ISI,
vastly increasing the agency's size and power.

Publicly, Mr. Musharraf agreed to reverse course in 2001, and he has received
$10 billion in aid for Pakistan since then in return. In an interview in
November, he vehemently defended the conduct of the ISI, an agency that,
according to American officials, was under his firm control for the last eight
years while he served as both president and army chief.

Mr. Musharraf dismissed criticism of the ISI's relationship with the militants.
He cited the deaths of 1,000 Pakistani soldiers and police officers in battles
with the militants in recent years -- as well as several assassination attempts
against himself -- as proof of the seriousness of Pakistan's counterterrorism
effort.

''It is quite illogical if you think those people who have suffered 1,000 people
dead, and I who have been attacked thrice or four or five times, that I would be
supportive towards Taliban, towards Al Qaeda,'' Mr. Musharraf said. ''These are
ridiculous things that discourages and demoralizes.''

But some former American intelligence officials have argued that Mr. Musharraf
and the ISI never fully jettisoned their militant proteges, and instead carried
on a ''double-game.'' They say Mr. Musharraf cooperated with American
intelligence agencies to track down foreign Qaeda members while holding Taliban
commanders and Kashmiri militants in reserve.

In order to undercut major opposition parties, he wooed religious conservatives,
according to analysts. And instead of carrying out a crackdown, Mr. Musharraf
took half-measures.

''I think he would make a decision when a situation arises,'' said Hasan Askari
Rizvi, a leading Pakistani military analyst, referring to militants openly
confronting the government. ''But before that he would not alienate any side.''

There is little dispute that Pakistan's crackdown on the militants has been at
best uneven, but key sources interviewed by The Times disagreed on why.

Most Western officials in Pakistan say they believe, as Pakistani officials,
including President Musharraf, insist, that the agency is well disciplined, like
the army, and is in no sense a rogue or out-of-control organization acting
contrary to the policies of the leadership.

A senior Western military official in Pakistan said that if the ISI was covertly
aiding the Taliban, the decision would come from the top of the government, not
the agency. ''That's not an ISI decision,'' the official said. ''That's a
government-of-Pakistan decision.''

But former Pakistani intelligence officials insisted that Mr. Musharraf had
ordered a crackdown on all militants. It was never fully carried out, however,
because of opposition within his government and within ISI, they said.

One former senior intelligence official said that some officials in the
government and the ISI thought the militants should be held in reserve, as
insurance against the day when American and NATO forces abandoned the region and
Pakistan might again need them as a lever against India.

''We had a school of thought that favored retention of this capability,'' the
former senior intelligence official said.

Some senior ministers and officials in Mr. Musharraf's government sympathized
with the militants and protected them, former intelligence officials said. Still
others advised a go-slow approach, fearing a backlash against the government
from the militants.

When arrests were ordered, the police refused to carry them out in some cases
until they received written orders, believing the militants were still protected
by the ISI, as they had been for years.

Inside the ISI, there was division as well. One part of the ISI hunted down
militants, the officials said, while another continued to work with them. The
result was confusion.

In interviews in 2002, Kashmiri militants in Pakistan said they had been told by
the government to maintain a low profile and wait. But as Pakistani military
operations in the tribal areas intensified, along with airstrikes by
C.I.A.-operated drones, militant groups there issued highly charged and
sometimes exaggerated accounts of women and children being killed.

The first suicide bombing attack on a military target outside the tribal areas
came days after an airstrike on a madrasa in the tribal area of Bajaur in
October 2006 killed scores of people.

Another turning point came last July when Pakistani forces stormed the Red
Mosque in Islamabad, where militants  had armed themselves in a compound less
than a mile from ISI headquarters and demanded the imposition of Islamic law.
Government officials said that more than 100 people died. The militants have
insisted that thousands did.

Several weeks later, militants carried out the first direct attacks on ISI
employees. Suicide bombers twice attacked buses ferrying agency employees,
killing 18 on Sept. 4 and 15 more on Nov. 24. According to Pakistani analysts,
the attacks signaled that enraged militants had turned on their longtime
patrons.

The Militant

One militant leader, Maulana Masood Azhar, typifies how extremists once trained
by the ISI have broken free of the agency's control, turned against the
government and joined with other militants to create powerful new networks.

In 2000, Mr. Azhar received support from the ISI when he founded
Jaish-e-Muhammad, or Army of Muhammad, a Pakistani militant group fighting
Indian forces in Kashmir, according to Robert Grenier, who served as the Central
Intelligence Agency station chief in Islamabad from 1999 to 2002. The ISI
intermittently provided training and operational coordination to such groups, he
said, but struggled to fully control them.

Mr. Musharraf banned Jaish-e-Muhammad and detained Mr. Azhar  after militants
carried out an attack on the Indian Parliament building in December 2001. Indian
officials accused Jaish-e-Muhammad and another Pakistani militant group of
masterminding the attack. After India massed hundreds of thousands of troops on
Pakistan's border, Mr. Musharraf vowed in a nationally televised speech that
January to crack down on all militants in Pakistan.

''We will take strict action against any Pakistani who is involved in terrorism
inside the country or abroad,'' he said. Two weeks later, a British-born member
of Mr. Azhar's group, Ahmed Omar Sheikh, kidnapped Daniel Pearl, a reporter for
The Wall Street Journal who was beheaded by his captors. Mr. Sheikh surrendered
to the ISI, the agency that had supported Jaish-e-Muhammad, and was sentenced to
death for the kidnapping.

After Mr. Pearl's killing, Pakistani officials arrested more than 2,000 people
in a crackdown. But within a year, Mr. Azhar and most of the 2,000 militants who
had been arrested were freed. ''I never believed that government ties with these
groups was being irrevocably cut,'' said Mr. Grenier, now a managing director at
Kroll, a risk consulting firm.

At the same time, Pakistan seemingly went ''through the motions'' when it came
to hunting Taliban leaders who fled into Pakistan after the 2001 American
invasion of Afghanistan, he said.

Encouraged by the United States, the Pakistanis focused their resources on
arresting senior Qaeda members, he said, which they successfully did from 2002
to 2005. Since then, arrests have slowed as Al Qaeda and other militant groups
have become more entrenched in the tribal areas.

Asked in 2006 why the Pakistani government did not move against the leading
Taliban commander Jalaluddin Haqqani, and his son Sirajuddin, who are based in
the tribal areas and have long had links with Al Qaeda, one senior ISI official
said it was because Pakistan needed to retain some assets of its own.

That policy haunts Mr. Musharraf and the United States, according to American
and Pakistani analysts. Today Pakistan's tribal areas are host to a lethal stew
of foreign Qaeda members, Uzbek militants, Taliban, ISI-trained Pakistani
extremists, disgruntled tribesmen and new recruits.

The groups carried out a record number of suicide bombings in Pakistan and
Afghanistan last year and have been tied to three major terrorist plots in
Britain and Germany since 2005.

Mr. Azhar, who once served his ISI mentors in Kashmir, is thought to be hiding
in the tribal area of Bajaur, or nearby Dir, and fighting Pakistani security
forces, according to one former intelligence official. Militants who took part
in the Red Mosque siege in Islamabad in July were closely affiliated with Mr.
Azhar's group. This fall, his group fielded fighters in the Swat Valley, the
famous tourist spot, where the militants presented a challenge of new
proportions to the government, seizing several districts and mounting battles
against Pakistani forces that left scores dead.

One militant from a banned sectarian group who joined Mr. Azhar's group, Qari
Zafar, now trains insurgents in South Waziristan on how to rig roadside bombs
and vests for suicide bombings, according to the former intelligence official.

Cooperation against the Taliban fighting in Afghanistan has improved since 2006,
and three senior Taliban figures have been caught, according to Western
officials and sources close to the ISI. Yet doubts remain about the Pakistani
government's intentions.

Senior provincial ISI officials continue to meet with high-level members of the
Taliban in the border provinces, according to one Western diplomat. ''It is not
illogical to surmise that cooperation is on the agenda, and not just
debriefing,'' the diplomat said.

''There are groups they know they have lost control of,'' the Western diplomat
added. But the government moved only against those groups that have attacked the
Pakistani state, the diplomat said, adding, ''It seems very difficult for them
to write them off.''

The Agency Now

Western officials say that before Mr. Musharraf resigned as army chief in
December, he appointed a loyalist to run the ISI and appears determined to
retain power over the agency even as a civilian president.

''For as long as he can, Musharraf will keep trying to control these
organizations,'' a Western diplomat said. ''I don't think we should expect this
man to become an elder statesman as we know it.''

That puts Mr. Musharraf's successor as army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani,
who headed the ISI from 2004 to 2007, in a potentially pivotal position. General
Kayani, a pro-American moderate, is loyal to Mr. Musharraf to a point, according
to retired officers. But he will abandon him if he thinks Mr. Musharraf's
actions are significantly undermining the standing of the Pakistani army.

Mr. Musharraf will maintain control over the agency as long as his interests
coincide with General Kayani's, they said, while the new civilian prime minister
who emerges from February's elections is likely to have far less authority over
the agency. Opposition political parties already accuse the agency of meddling
in next month's election. The Western diplomat called the ISI ''the army's dirty
bag of tricks.''

Since Ms. Bhutto's assassination, members of her party have accused government
officials, including former ISI agents, of having a hidden hand in the attack or
of knowing about a plot and failing to inform Ms. Bhutto.

American experts played down the chances of a government conspiracy against Ms.
Bhutto. They also said it was unlikely that low-level or retired officers
working alone or with militants carried out the attack.

But nearly half of Pakistanis said in a recent poll that they suspected that
government agencies or pro-government politicians had assassinated Ms. Bhutto.
Such suspicion stems from decades of interference in elections and politics by
the ISI, according to analysts, as well as a high level of domestic
surveillance, intimidation and threats to journalists, academics and human
rights activists, which former intelligence officials also acknowledged.

Pakistani and American experts say that distrust speaks to the urgent need to
reform a hugely powerful intelligence agency that Pakistan's military rulers
have used for decades to suppress political opponents, manipulate elections and
support militant groups.

''Pakistan would certainly be better off if the ISI were never used for domestic
political purposes,'' said Mr. Grenier, the former C.I.A. Islamabad station
chief. ''That goes without saying.''

Pakistani analysts and Western diplomats argue that the country will remain
unstable as long as the ISI remains so powerful and so unaccountable. The ISI
has grown more powerful in each period of military rule, they said.

Civilian leaders, including Mrs. Bhutto, could not resist using it to secure
their political aims, but neither could they control it. And the army continues
to rely on the ISI for its own foreign policy aims, particularly battling India
in Kashmir and seeking influence in Afghanistan.

''The question is, how do you change that?'' asked one Western diplomat. ''Their
tentacles are everywhere.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Islamic militants surrendered in July after Pakistani
authorities stormed the Red Mosque in Islamabad. Government officials reported
more than 100 deaths
militants insisted that thousands had been killed.(PHOTOGRAPH BY AAMIR
QURESHI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 President Pervez Musharraf, left, with Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, who succeeded
Mr. Musharraf as chief of the army last year. General Kayani previously led the
ISI, Pakistan's premier military intelligence agency.(PHOTOGRAPH BY ANJUM
NAVEED/ASSOCIATED PRESS)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (79%); TALIBAN (79%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); ARMIES (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); ELECTION FRAUD (75%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); CORRUPTION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (56%)

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (89%); BENAZIR BHUTTO (59%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (90%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1271 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 18, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canadian Manual Has U.S. on Torture List

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


A training manual for Canadian diplomats lists the United States among countries
that potentially torture or abuse prisoners.

The manual is an internal document of the Department of Foreign Affairs. A
spokesman for the foreign minister confirmed the contents of the manual after
news reports about it circulated on Thursday.

The manual appears to contradict the public stance of Canada's Conservative
government, which accepts assurances from the United States that it does not
mistreat prisoners, including those at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

One Canadian, Omar Khadr, is being held there; he was captured in Afghanistan in
2002.

In an e-mail message, Neil Hrab, a spokesman for the minister of foreign
affairs, Maxime Bernier, said the manual was ''not a policy document or any kind
of a statement of policy'' and did not ''convey the government's views or
positions.''

A spokeswoman for the United States Embassy here was quoted by Reuters as
saying, ''The United States does not permit, tolerate or condone torture under
any circumstances.''

The manual, in the form of a PowerPoint presentation, is used for training
diplomats in how to protect Canadians detained by foreign governments from
torture and how to handle suspicions that inmates are abused.

The torture training program for diplomats was set up largely because of the
case of Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian.

He  was detained in 2002 by United States officials, who sent him to Syria after
reviewing erroneous information from Canada suggesting that he was linked to
terrorist activities.

A Canadian inquiry concluded that Mr. Arar was tortured while in Syrian custody.
Last year the Canadian government paid Mr. Arar and his family 11.5 million
Canadian dollars in compensation.

The government turned the manual over to the Canadian branch of Amnesty
International because  of a legal action by the group. Amnesty International is
challenging Canada's  policy of handing over  prisoners taken by Canadian troops
in Afghanistan to the Afghan government.

The document also lists Israel, Syria, Iran, Afghanistan and China as countries
suspected of torturing prisoners.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (87%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(78%); PRISONS (78%); TERRORISM (50%)

PERSON: MAXIME BERNIER (57%)

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (58%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (58%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SYRIA (94%);
ISRAEL (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); CUBA (71%)

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1274 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Intervention, Hailed as a Concept, Is Shunned in Practice

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; DIPLOMATIC MEMO; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1208 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


Three years after the United Nations adopted a groundbreaking resolution to help
it intervene to stop genocide, even longtime supporters of the rule acknowledge
that it has not helped the organization  end  the violence in Darfur.

The General Assembly resolution, approved in 2005, held nations responsible for
shielding their citizens from mass atrocities and established the right of
international forces to step in if nations did not fulfill this new
''responsibility to protect.''

''It was the high-water mark when the General Assembly endorsed the concept; it
was an incredible leap forward from the whole crippling debate over whether
humanitarian intervention wasn't just a Trojan horse for neo-imperialism,'' said
John Prendergast, co-chairman of the Enough Project, a Washington-based group
dedicated to preventing genocide.

''When it happened in 2005,'' he said, ''you believed that potentially things
could be different. But in the daily slugfest of international policy making, it
hasn't survived the first test: Darfur.''

The United Nations has tried to take the lead in Darfur, the crisis-ridden
region in western Sudan. But it has been stymied by the failure of major member
states to fulfill promises to support action and by the intransigence of the
Sudanese government.

Sudan begrudgingly agreed last year to permit United Nations peacekeepers into
Darfur but only as part of a joint mission with the African Union, whose own
7,000-member force had proved inadequate.

Since then, the government has thrown up so many bureaucratic and operational
roadblocks that the force that took over on Jan. 1 is only a third of its
planned strength of 26,000, and Sudanese authorities are still blocking United
Nations' efforts to include specialized non-African troops considered essential
to making the mission effective.

In addition, countries with advanced militaries have not come forward to answer
United Nations appeals for the sophisticated aviation and logistics assistance
that the force needs.

Darfur, in short, has shown that there is a great difference between gaining
acceptance for a working theory and making the theory work.

The 2005 resolution was meant to break the impasse between those who believe the
outside world has the power to intercede in countries where mass atrocities are
occurring and those who believe that the sovereignty of the state, a concept
created in the 17th century and recognized in the United Nations Charter,
precludes any outside intervention.

The phrasing of the resolution sought to square the two long-antagonistic
positions by saying that the world could step in, but only after the state had
shown unwillingness to act itself.

The longstanding debate over when countries should intervene took on urgency
after the United Nations and its principal member states on the Security Council
did nothing to stop the 1994 genocide in Rwanda, where Hutu extremists
slaughtered 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu. Despite desperate calls for
reinforcements from the United Nations commander, Gen. Romeo Dallaire of Canada,
the Security Council cut the number of peacekeepers to 450 from 2,500.

Donald Steinberg, the New York director of the International Crisis Group,
remembers his despair that year when, as President Clinton's special assistant
for Africa, he was unable to marshal international support for taking action to
stop the killing.

Among the available options, he recalled, were jamming the radio station
broadcasting tribal hate messages, reinforcing United Nations peacekeeping
forces or immediately declaring the situation to be genocide.

''But each time some of us pushed for these steps,'' he said, ''others would
ask, 'Where's the legal basis for these actions, where's the public outcry, the
'Hallelujah' chorus of support? Where's the evidence to show that these actions
will end the killings?'<0>''

With the world facing in Darfur a situation that many have identified as
genocide, the advocates of international intervention should, in theory, have
answered those questions.

First, there is Security Council approval for the largest peacekeeping force in
history, which, at full strength, should have the capacity  to halt the killing.

Second, there is a vocal, organized and worldwide campaign backing intervention.

As for the legal basis, there is the 2005 General Assembly resolution embodying
the concept of a state's ''responsibility to protect,'' which has become so much
a part of the United Nations vocabulary of resolving conflict that it even has
its own abbreviation, R2P.

Secretary General Ban Ki-moon has put so much faith in it that he
uncharacteristically upbraided an under secretary general at a high-level policy
committee meeting in October who disputed the high priority being placed on the
concept of intervention.

''The S.G. said he utterly disagreed and felt that this was fundamental to the
future of the U.N. and that after elevating the principle so high, we had the
obligation to put it into effect,'' said a participant in the meeting who
witnessed the exchange and agreed to talk about it in exchange for anonymity.

Mr. Ban has upgraded and broadened the post of special adviser for the
prevention of genocide and mass atrocities and created a new assistant secretary
general position specifically on the responsibility to protect.

But many of the developing-world countries that supported the resolution three
years ago have backed off out of suspicion that they could become targets of
intervention.

''There has been a tremendous amount of buyer's remorse,'' Mr. Steinberg said.

Samantha Power, a professor at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard,
said, ''We have more than 150 countries on the books saying they believe this
responsibility exists, but what advocates have begun to understand is that
governments will never exercise this responsibility naturally or eagerly, they
will only exercise it if they feel they are going to pay a price for not
exercising it.''

At the same time, advocates of intervention say the resolution has already shown
at least some value.

''I think it's the best tool we've come up with for educating; it just remains
to be seen if it will be as good at converting theory to action,'' said Mr.
Prendergast, of the Enough Project.

Mr. Steinberg said, ''It's a way of telling people that sovereignty is not an
excuse to facilitate mass killings in your own country, and people get that.''

Ruth W. Messinger, president of the American Jewish World Service and a
co-founder of the Save Darfur Coalition, said, ''I think it's a critically
important phrase, and I don't say that lightly.''

Next month, a research and advocacy center dedicated to moving the principle of
responsibility to protect into practice is being inaugurated at the Ralph Bunche
Institute for International Studies at the Graduate Center of the City
University of New York. Similar offices are being set up  in Australia, Sri
Lanka and Thailand.

Recalling passage of the declaration in 2005, Mr. Steinberg said, ''We decided
then that this was the most the market would bear, but we haven't gotten what we
need out of it, and unless we can apply it to a situation like Darfur, then the
promise will be lost.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); APPROVALS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); AFRICAN UNION (54%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1275 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israeli Airstrike in Gaza Kills 2 Hamas Members

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 865 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


An Israeli airstrike killed two members of the Hamas military wing in the
northern Gaza Strip early on Saturday, and three Qassam rockets fired by
militants from Gaza landed in and around the Israeli border town of Sderot,
causing no casualties.

The Israeli Army said another airstrike was aimed at a vehicle carrying weapons
in northern Gaza early on Saturday, but no casualties were reported, and that a
small ground force entered Gaza and arrested four armed Hamas militants, taking
them to Israel for questioning.

The relative calm followed four days of heightened violence during which 39
Palestinians, including at least six civilians, were killed by Israeli fire,
hospital officials in Gaza said.

The Israeli military said its actions were aimed at distancing ''terrorist
organizations, particularly Hamas,'' from the border fence, and at reducing
rocket fire into Israel. More than 130 rockets were fired at Israel since
Tuesday, the army said, with about half  landing in Israel.

A United Nations official in Geneva on Saturday condemned Israel's actions,
particularly the bombing on Friday of an empty Hamas Interior Ministry building
in a Gaza City neighborhood. Shrapnel from the missile strike killed a woman and
wounded up to 46 people, some of them children, who were celebrating at a
wedding party next door.

The official, John Dugard, who works on human rights in the Palestinian
territories, said the Israelis who were responsible ''for such cowardly action''
resulting in civilian casualties ''are guilty of serious war crimes and should
be prosecuted and punished for their crimes.'' He said that the attack on the
building ''near a wedding party venue'' was carried out ''with what must have
been foreseen loss of life and injury to many civilians.''

An Israeli Army spokeswoman said that Israel ''had attacked a Hamas
headquarters,'' and nothing else, in the raid. In response to some of the
earlier civilian deaths, military officials said that Israel attacked only
militants, but that they often operated from civilian areas in Gaza, while the
rocket fire from Gaza was directed at Israeli civilian centers.

Mr. Dugard also criticized Israel's closing of its border crossings with Gaza as
a violation of ''the strict prohibition on collective punishment contained in
the Fourth Geneva Convention.''

Israel's defense minister, Ehud Barak, said late on Thursday that the crossings
between Gaza and Israel would be sealed for a few days to all traffic, except
for essential supplies and emergency cases, as an additional measure to press
Hamas into stopping the rocket fire.

Gaza's population of 1.5 million depends on imports for most basic supplies, and
on Saturday, Hamas called on Egypt to open the Rafah crossing on its border with
Gaza to allow in goods. The Rafah crossing has been officially closed since
Hamas seized control of the strip in June, after the European mission monitoring
the area left.

The Rafah crossing had previously been used for passenger traffic only. Hamas
and Egypt have opened the crossing briefly on a few occasions, most recently to
permit about 2,000 Palestinians to make the annual Muslim pilgrimage to Mecca,
in Saudi Arabia. Israeli officials said Hamas exploited such occasions to bring
weapons and money into Gaza. International aid officials have warned that the
situation in the already impoverished Gaza Strip could become perilous as a
result of the closing.

A spokesman for the Israeli Defense Ministry, Shlomo Dror, said Saturday that
''there is no humanitarian crisis in Gaza and there won't be one.''

He said, ''It won't get to that stage.''  But he added, ''It doesn't mean that
we will make an easy life'' for Hamas.

Mr. Dror noted that merchandise passed from Egypt into Gaza ''all the time''
through tunnels under the border.

At a news conference in Gaza on Saturday, Said Siam, a senior Hamas official who
oversees security forces in Gaza, did not address the hostilities with Israel,
but announced instead that a young man from Fatah, the main rival of Hamas, had
been arrested for plotting to assassinate Ismail Haniya, the Hamas leader in
Gaza.

Mr. Siam said the man had been planning to blow himself up in a mosque while Mr.
Haniya prayed, and accused senior Fatah officials in the West Bank of
involvement in the plot. Fatah officials denied the accusations.

Last week Hamas said it caught a young man with a bag of explosives heading for
a sports stadium in Gaza where Mr. Haniya was appearing before a crowd.

In recent days there had been indications of a slight thaw in the enmity between
Hamas and Fatah. President Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah  phoned a Hamas leader,
Mahmoud Zahar, in Gaza to offer his condolences after Mr. Zahar's son, a
militant, was killed in one of the Israeli strikes. And on Friday, several Fatah
figures were interviewed on the Hamas-run television station for the first time
since June.

But some analysts see Mr. Siam's announcement as a sign that a rapprochement
between the groups is still far off. Late on Friday, Mr. Abbas condemned
Israel's actions in Gaza as ''brutal,'' but also said the Hamas takeover of Gaza
had ''destroyed'' Palestinian dreams.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); HAMAS (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
ARMIES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); LAW OF WAR (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); TERRITORIAL &
NATIONAL BORDERS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CITY LIFE (77%); POPULATION
SIZE (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); WAR CRIMES (75%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (74%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS
(71%); HOSPITALS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: EHUD BARAK (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (78%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1277 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 21, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fuel Shortage Shuts Gaza Power Plant, Leaving City Dark

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza
City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 506 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


Israel's closing of its border crossings with Gaza remained in effect Sunday,
and Gaza's only electricity plant shut down because of a shortage of imported
fuel needed to run it.

Israel's defense minister, Ehud Barak, ordered a temporary halt on all imports
into the Hamas-run Gaza Strip late last week. The measure, along with stepped-up
military operations in Gaza, was meant to persuade Palestinian militants there
to stop  firing rockets at Israel.

A spokeswoman for Mr. Barak said Sunday that the decision would most likely be
re-evaluated in a few days.

Five rockets had been launched from Gaza by nightfall on Sunday, two of which
landed in and around the Israeli border town of Sderot, an army spokeswoman
said. There was a marked decrease in rocket fire over the weekend, compared with
the roughly 130 rockets that the army said had been launched from Gaza during
four days last week.

An Israeli airstrike in northern Gaza on Sunday night was aimed at a rocket
launching squad and killed at least one Palestinian, Hamas and Palestinian
medical officials said.

Palestinian officials shut down Gaza's power station on Sunday night, leaving
Gaza City in darkness. The manager of the power station, Rafiq Meliha, said
local hospitals, water and sewage treatment facilities would also be affected.

Israeli officials disputed Mr. Meliha's assertions, saying that Israel still
supplies Gaza with about 70 percent of its electricity requirements, while
another 5 percent comes from Egypt. ''That is all going on as usual,'' said
Shlomo Dror, a spokesman for the Defense Ministry. ''Sure, the Palestinians can
say they have no electricity and take down their turbines, but there is no
crisis,'' he insisted, adding that it is up to the Palestinians how they
allocate whatever electricity they have within the Gaza Strip.

Moshe Kariv, a spokesman for the Israeli government body that deals  with the
Palestinians, said the situation in Gaza is ''difficult'' but that there was
enough food ''for a few days.''

About 70 Gazans were allowed to enter Israel for medical treatment on Sunday,
according to an Israeli official at the crossings, but nothing else went in or
out. Mr. Kariv acknowledged a shortage of medicine in Gaza, but said that was
because of a problem with payment from the Palestinian side.

Separately, Israeli politicians expressed outrage on Sunday at a speech made by
Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, the leader of the Hezbollah militia, who said in Beirut
on Saturday that his organization possessed many body parts of Israeli soldiers
left behind on the battlefields of southern Lebanon. Several ministers called
for Sheik Nasrallah's death and one called him a ''sewer rat.''

In a statement released late Saturday night, the Israeli Army spokesman's unit
said that Sheik Nasrallah's pronouncements ''constitute a cruel and cynical move
by an organization that flagrantly tramples the most fundamental ethical codes,
shows no respect for human rights or the international conventions that govern
these matters.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: After the Palestinian authorities closed Gaza's electricity
plant on Sunday night, Gazans protested with candles. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABID
KATIB/GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POWER PLANTS (92%); ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (91%); IMPORT TRADE (90%);
ARMIES (90%); UTILITIES INDUSTRY (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%);
COMMODITIES SHORTAGES (90%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
HAMAS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (79%); POWER FAILURES (78%); BOMBINGS (77%); WAR &
CONFLICT (76%); DRUG SHORTAGES (73%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (71%);
HOSPITALS (66%); SEWERAGE SYSTEMS (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%)

PERSON: HASSAN NASRALLAH (79%); EHUD BARAK (74%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); LEBANON (92%);
EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1289 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 28, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Corrections: For the Record

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 65 words


An article on Thursday  about the Canadian military's secret action to stop
transferring prisoners to Afghanistan's government after Canadian monitors found
evidence that they were being abused and tortured misspelled the surname of the
leader of the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association, one of the groups
seeking an injunction to block more transfers. He is Jason Gratl, not Gretl.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%); SUITS & CLAIMS (80%);
INJUNCTIONS (51%); LITIGATION (51%)

STATE: BRITISH COLUMBIA, CANADA (73%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (91%)

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1297 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 31, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy Calls Some Kenya Violence Ethnic Cleansing

BYLINE: By JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Kennedy Abwao contributed reporting from Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya


The top American diplomat for Africa said Wednesday that some of the violence
that has swept across Kenya in the past month has been ethnic cleansing intended
to drive people from their homes, but that it should not be considered genocide.

Jendayi Frazer, the assistant secretary of state for African affairs, who
visited some of the conflict-torn areas this month, said she had met with
victims of the violence who described being ordered off their land.

''If they left, they were not attacked; if they stayed beyond the deadline, they
were attacked,'' said Ms. Frazer, while attending an African Union meeting in
Ethiopia on Wednesday. ''It is a plan to push people out of the area in the Rift
Valley.''

The Rift Valley, one of the most beautiful slices of Africa, has been the
epicenter of Kenya's postelection problems and is home to ethnic groups that
have long felt others do not belong.

The violence, fueled by decades-old tensions over access to wealth and power,
exploded on Dec. 30,  after the  electoral commission said  the incumbent
president, Mwai Kibaki, won  an election that observers said was deeply flawed.
Ethnic groups like the Kalenjin, who were supporting Kenya's top opposition
leader, Raila Odinga, burned down homes and hacked to death Kikuyus, Mr.
Kibaki's ethnic group.

In the past week, Kikuyus have been taking revenge and violently expelling other
ethnic groups from Kikuyu-dominated areas. Kenya seems to be tearing itself
apart along ethnic lines, with more than 800 people killed and at least 300,000
displaced.

The State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, said Ms. Frazer had made the
assessment based on ''her firsthand view of the situation,'' but did not say
whether the department would adopt her use of the term ethnic cleansing. Rather,
he said the department was collecting information on ''any atrocities that may
have occurred.''

The term  gained currency during Yugoslavia's civil war in the early 1990s.
There are many definitions, but it is widely used to mean creating an area that
is ethnically homogenous by using force or intimidation to remove people from
another ethnic or religious group.

That seems to be the case in many towns and neighborhoods in Kenya, and it shows
no signs of letting up. On Wednesday, Kikuyu residents of a town called Kikuyu
massed in the streets and demanded that Luos, Mr. Odinga's ethnic group, leave.
Dozens of Luos were hiding in a government building. Police officers put them in
a bus and escorted them away. Many residents cheered.

Kofi Annan, the former United Nations secretary general, is brokering talks
between Kenya's opposing politicians and has emphasized that time is running
out. Residents across Kenya have talked about meetings where community elders
have mapped out plans to kill and drive out members of rival ethnic groups.

Ms. Frazer is one of the first high-ranking Western officials to apply the term
ethnic cleansing to Kenya. Many  diplomats have shied away from it, saying its
use could  increase tensions and give  the impression that the diplomats were
taking sides. The government accuses opposition leaders of orchestrating mayhem
and engineering ethnic cleansing of groups that back the president; the
opposition counters that the violence was spontaneous outrage over a rigged
election.

Government officials seemed pleased by Ms. Frazer's statement. ''This is what we
have been saying all along,'' said a spokesman, Alfred Mutua.

He said that government lawyers were collecting evidence against ringleaders for
use before  the International Criminal Court. ''We don't want this to seem
political,'' Mr. Mutua said.

Salim Lone, a spokesman for Mr. Odinga, disagreed with using the term. ''Most
knowledgeable observers have characterized these killings as political rather
than ethnic,'' he said. ''But there is no doubt that their terrifying scale and
brutality have engendered deep communal hatreds on both sides. That is why it is
so vital that both sides to the electoral dispute do everything possible to make
Mr. Kofi Annan's mediation efforts succeed by making an uncompromising and
unconditional commitment to peace.''

Mr. Lone said that the negotiations, which began formally on Tuesday, had gotten
off to a good start and that Mr. Kibaki helped eased tensions by allowing Mr.
Annan to sit in the middle of a dais, which sent the signal that Mr. Annan, not
Mr. Kibaki, was leading the meeting.

The country, meanwhile, seemed to be in a tense simmer on Wednesday, with few
major episodes of violence reported but standoffs continuing between gangs of
opposing ethnic groups.

Government officials said that they were continuing to investigate the killing
of Melitus Mugabe Were, a freshman member of Parliament, who was shot to death
in his driveway on Tuesday morning. But it seems that the case is only getting
murkier.

A local newspaper reported that his wallet was stolen, implying a possible
robbery, but his brother-in-law, Vincent Nyabeii, said that was not true.
''Nothing was taken, nothing,'' he said. ''This was an assassination.''

Many supporters have said Mr. Were, a self-made businessman who was revered in
the slum where he grew up, was killed by thugs employed by the government
because he was a member of the opposition. If he was eliminated and a new
election was held, his supporters said, his seat would probably go to a member
of the government's party.

But it is not clear how solid an opposition member he was. He was a moderate by
all accounts and was seen as a potential peacemaker. Members of Mr. Kibaki's
party said Mr. Were was even considering defecting, which could have tipped the
balance of power in Parliament, where the opposition has a slight edge. On
Wednesday, one government official said that right before the killing, Mr. Were
made an appointment to meet with the president and that he might have been slain
by people in his own party who saw him as a traitor.

Several of Mr. Were's friends have said that he was disillusioned with his
party's response to the disputed election, especially the calls for protests,
which have resulted in many people being killed, including some shot by police
officers. ''He was not in thick of his party's politics,'' said George Kimani, a
friend.

As for the possibility of defection, Mr. Kimani said, ''Yes, he was considering
it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Members of the Luo ethnic group were forced out of a
predominately Kikuyu town on Wednesday under a police escort.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
EVELYN HOCKSTEIN FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC GROUPS (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); ETHNICITY (90%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); GENOCIDE (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); CIVIL
WAR (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); POLITICS (71%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (69%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (66%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (57%)

PERSON: MWAI KIBAKI (58%)

CITY: NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

COUNTRY: KENYA (95%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1310 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

France: Le Pen Guilty In Defending Nazis

BYLINE: By MAIA DE LA BAUME

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 78 words


The far-right National Front leader Jean-Marie Le Pen, a perennial presidential
candidate, was given a three-month suspended prison sentence for saying that the
Nazi occupation of France was ''not particularly inhuman'' and that ''excesses''
were inevitable. The Paris court ruled that he had denied a crime against
humanity and that he was complicit in justifying war crimes, and fined him
$14,500. The charges stemmed from comments he made in 2005 in a right-wing
weekly.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (87%); SENTENCING (87%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); CONSERVATIVE MEDIA (86%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (85%);
WAR CRIMES (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%)

PERSON: JEAN-MARIE LE PEN (90%)

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (70%)

COUNTRY: FRANCE (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1311 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Call It Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 99 words


To the Editor:

Re ''A New Chapter in Ethnic Cleansing'' (editorial, Feb. 2):

The continued use of the term ''ethnic cleansing'' to describer murder and
widespread violence against targeted ethnic groups around the world is
offensive. Both ''ethnic'' and ''cleansing'' are positive words. Why do we
persist in using ''cleansing'' when we mean genocide?

Let's call it what it is. Or use a negative word like ''ethnocide,'' but please
stop calling a profound and horrifying sin by a spiritually and scientifically
positive word like ''cleansing.''

Dorothy Stoneman  Belmont, Mass., Feb. 2, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); ETHNIC
GROUPS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (73%); ETHNICITY (73%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (50%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1314 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Memorials LANTOS, CONGRESSMAN TOM

SECTION: Section D; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 115 words


LANTOS--Congressman Tom The world-wide family of Shaare Zedek Medical Center in
Jerusalem mourns the loss of a cherished friend and true hero of the Jewish
people. From the ashes of the Holocaust, he channeled his life experiences to
become a moral authority on issues relating to human rights and civil liberties.
His humanitarian concern for the people of Israel played an indispensable role
in facilitating a grant from USAID in support of the Acute Care Unit in the
Medical Center's Department of Emergency Medicine on the Fanya Gottesfeld Heller
Floor. Our heartfelt condolences to his wife, children and the entire family.
American Committee for Shaare Zedek Medical Center in Jerusalem

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Memorial Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (88%); HOLOCAUST (87%); DEATHS &
OBITUARIES (85%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (83%); ACUTE CARE (83%)

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (92%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (90%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (90%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1315 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 12, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial's Focus To Suit Bush

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS; Carl Hulse contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NEWS ANALYSIS; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 988 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Harsh interrogations and Guantanamo Bay, secret prisons and warrantless
eavesdropping, the war against Al Qaeda and the one in Iraq. On issue after
issue, President Bush has showed little indication that he will shrink from the
most controversial decisions of his tenure.

With the decision to charge six Guantanamo detainees with the attacks of Sept.
11, 2001, and to seek the death penalty for the crimes, many of those issues
will now be back in the spotlight. In an election year, that appears to be
exactly where Mr. Bush wants the focus to be.

The White House said on Monday that Mr. Bush had no role in the decision to file
charges now against the six detainees, leaving the strategy for prosecuting them
to the military.

Still, the cases soon to be put before military tribunals -- including that
against Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who has described himself as the mastermind of
the attacks -- represent a major part of ''the unfinished business'' that Mr.
Bush and his aides talk about when they vow ''to sprint to the finish,'' as one
aide did again on Monday.

Mr. Bush never sounds surer of himself than when the subject is Sept. 11, even
when his critics argue that he has squandered the country's moral authority,
violated American and international law, and led the United States into the
foolhardy distraction of Iraq.

''Six and a half years ago, our country faced the worst attack in our history,''
Mr. Bush said late last week, speaking to the Conservative Political Action
Conference. ''I understood immediately that we would have to act boldly to
protect the American people. So we've gone on the offense against these
extremists. We're staying on the offense, and we will not relent until we bring
them to justice.''

The 9/11 candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, may have dropped his bid
for the White House. But the 9/11 presidency is far from over.

On the question of warrantless wiretapping, widely expanded after the Sept. 11
attacks, Mr. Bush is pushing to make permanent legislation that last year made a
once-secret program legal, despite a storm of protest that has reverberated
since 2005, when the program was disclosed.

Only a year ago, Iraq appeared to have deflated the president's popularity and
eroded his standing even among Republicans and the Pentagon's generals. But Mr.
Bush now appears to have laid a foundation to keep more than 130,000 American
troops on the ground in a mission he has justified as part of a broader fight
against terrorism, despite an overwhelming groundswell against an unpopular
conflict. Secretary of Defense Robert M. Gates on Monday essentially endorsed a
''pause'' in further troop withdrawals once those troops sent in last year as
part of a temporary buildup go home.

In each of these cases -- the military tribunals, the wiretapping legislation,
Iraq -- the White House seems eager to lock in as many of the president's
policies as possible before he leaves office in 11 months. And as it looks ahead
to the November elections, the White House seems to have concluded that each is
politically sustainable and even favorable for a Republican candidate and Mr.
Bush's own legacy.

Whether the White House will succeed --  and November will certainly be the
measure --  remains to be seen.

Democrats have battled before, with mixed success, against Republican efforts to
portray them as weak on defense. This time, the Democrats sound determined to
fight back more forcefully.

''I wish they had as coherent a strategy for fighting the war on terror as they
do for politicizing the war on terror,'' Representative Rahm Emanuel of
Illinois, chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, said on Monday.

The legality of military tribunals has been in dispute since the days
immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks. It is possible that the trials could
backfire by underscoring the administration's failures as well as any successes
in bringing some of America's most-wanted to justice.

''The American public doesn't need to put them on trial at this point to prove
we got the bad guys,'' said Jennifer Daskal, a lawyer at Human Rights Watch in
Washington. ''I think the focus is going to be on the unfairness of the trials
and the use of highly abusive interrogations.''

Just last week, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, the director of the Central Intelligence
Agency, became the first government official to acknowledge publicly that those
interrogations, in three cases, included the technique known as waterboarding,
which simulates drowning and is regarded by many as torture.

Mr. Bush's administration, however, appears to have calculated that many
Americans, if not most, do not necessarily object to harsh interrogations or
eavesdropping if they were used to prevent further attacks.

At a fund-raiser on Friday in Pennsylvania, hardly the most conservative state,
Vice President Dick Cheney vigorously defended the use of waterboarding and
other harsh interrogation techniques, referring to them as ''a tougher program
for a very few tougher customers.''

''He and others were questioned at a time when another attack on this country
was believed to be imminent,'' Mr. Cheney said of Mr. Mohammed and other Qaeda
members. ''It's a good thing we had them in custody, and it is a good thing that
we found out what they knew.''

Of the six men charged on Monday, Mr. Mohammed and four others were held for as
long as three years in the secret C.I.A. prisons that were part of what the
agency calls its ''high-value terrorist interrogation program.'' The prisons
were established in 2002, but the administration did not publicly reveal their
existence until 2006, when Mr. Mohammed and other detainees were moved from the
C.I.A. facilities to the military prison in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

In a statement to C.I.A. employees on Monday, General Hayden called the filing
of charges ''a crucial milestone on the road to justice for the victims of
9/11.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%);
ARMED FORCES (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); WIRETAPPING (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
CAPITAL CRIMES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (76%);
CONSERVATISM (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); LEGISLATION (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); ROBERT M GATES (58%); RUDY GIULIANI (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1320 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 14, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths LANTOS, TOM

SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 108 words


LANTOS--Tom. American Friends of The Hebrew University (AFHU) and The Hebrew
University of Jerusalem (HU) are saddened by the passing of Congressman Tom
Lantos. As the only Holocaust survivor to serve in U.S. Congress, he will be
remembered as a proponent of human rights committed to Israel and the Jewish
community. He received an honorary doctorate posthumously from HU for his
achievements. We extend our deepest sympathies to his wife Annette and
daughters, Annette and Katrina. The Hebrew University President Menachem Magidor
AFHU Ira Lee Sorkin, Chairman of the Board George A. Schieren, President Peter
T. Willner, National Executive Director

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES
(88%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (88%); HOLOCAUST (87%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(87%); JEWS & JUDAISM (86%); EXECUTIVES (82%)

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (93%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1323 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 15, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths LANTOS, TOM

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Classified; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 104 words


LANTOS--Tom. The American Gathering of Jewish Holocaust Survivors and Their
Descendants mourns with profound sadness the passing of our friend the
distinguished Congressman from California. A lifelong champion against fascism
and antisemitism, a staunch advocate for Holocaust education and human rights,
and a prominent supporter of the State of Israel, his courage and moral clarity
made him a proud role model for all Americans. Our deepest sympathy to his wife
Annette, their children and grandchildren. May his memory be a blessing for us
all. Sam Bloch, President Roman Kent, Chairman Max Liebmann, Sr. Vice President

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Paid Death Notice

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOLOCAUST (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (87%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (87%); GRANDCHILDREN (83%); EXECUTIVES (82%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN GATHERING OF JEWISH HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS (84%)

PERSON: TOM LANTOS (91%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); ISRAEL (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1328 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 18, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pakistanis Go to Polls Amid Fear of Violence, Vote Rigging and New Turmoil

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL and JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1522 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan


Pakistanis began voting Monday morning in parliamentary elections that are
expected to diminish President Pervez Musharraf further and present Washington
with a challenging new political lineup here as it pursues its fight against the
Taliban and Al Qaeda in the region.

The vote, which was delayed after the assassination of the opposition leader
Benazir Bhutto nearly two months ago, comes amid anxiety of further political
turmoil if the government manipulates the results or enters a battle with the
opposition parties over forming a government.  Reuters reported that 80,000
troops were backing up police, keeping watch over polling places.

At least four candidates, including Ms. Bhutto, and nearly 100 other Pakistanis
have been killed during the campaign. Parties have reported kidnappings and
arrests of candidates and attempts to intimidate their families, according to
Sheila Fruman, director of the National Democratic Institute's office in
Pakistan. The opposition has threatened street protests if the vote is perceived
to be unfair, but has also called for a government of national consensus.

American officials and others here hope that the election provides a fresh
opportunity for a new civilian government to rally Pakistanis behind the fight
against the militants who now threaten the security and stability of the
country.

After growing frustration with eight years of military rule, opposition
politicians and analysts argue that Mr. Musharraf has lost the support of the
people and cannot fight extremism effectively without it.

With the country facing a growing insurgency by the Taliban and Al Qaeda, rising
prices and escalating violence, the nationwide vote will now serve as a kind of
referendum on Mr. Musharraf, who has grown deeply unpopular.

No matter which party prevails, Mr. Musharraf, who has been Washington's partner
in the campaign against terrorism for the past six years, is almost certain to
emerge further reduced in the post-election skirmishing.

He is already much weakened after resigning as army chief in November, and a
popularly elected prime minister with the backing of Parliament will emerge as a
competitive new force.

The party that has supported Mr. Musharraf for the past five years, the Pakistan
Muslim League-Q, is expected to fare considerably worse than it did in the last
election.

The party of Ms. Bhutto, the Pakistan Peoples Party, is riding a wave of
sympathy after her death and may emerge as the largest party in Parliament,
analysts say.

Ms. Bhutto's party, which is now led by her widower, Asif Ali Zardari, and the
party of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, Pakistan Muslim League-N, are
moderate parties opposed to terrorism.

They argue that only a popularly elected government can bring the country
together to oppose militancy. For his part, Mr. Zardari has also called for a
government of national consensus after the election and has not ruled out
working with Mr. Musharraf.

The insurgency remains at the top of the Bush administration's agenda here, and
American officials have started to prepare for Mr. Musharraf's eventual exit. In
a series of high-level visits in the past month on how to stem the militants'
efforts to destabilize Pakistan, Washington officials have focused on the new
army chief, Gen. Ashfaq Parvez Kayani, an implicit recognition of the shifting
balance of power.

Despite the complaints about violence in the campaign and the potential for
fraud, the Bush administration has appeared determined to validate the election
as a satisfactory exercise in democracy. Richard A. Boucher, the assistant
secretary of state for South and Central Asian affairs, recently told a
Congressional committee that he was looking for ''as fair an election as
possible.''

International observers, including several United States senators who arrived
Sunday, have already warned of serious flaws in the pre-election process. They
have said that at best the election would be deemed ''credible,'' rather than
free and fair.

The biggest question will be to what extent the government apparatus will try to
manipulate the results in favor of the pro-Musharraf party. If the elections are
skewed too far in its favor, the government risks large protests and violence.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, the Democratic chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, said after arriving in Lahore on Sunday night as an
election observer that he was ''mildly optimistic'' that the election would be
''fairly credible.''

But Mr. Biden said that if the election turned out to be seriously flawed, he
would seek to curtail United States military aid to Pakistan. Two other members
of the foreign relations committee, Senators Chuck Hagel, Republican of
Nebraska, and John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, also arrived to observe the
election.

Ms. Fruman, of the National Democratic Institute, described a litany of
complaints, mostly from opposition parties, of bribery and the use of state
resources for campaigns. The production of counterfeit identity cards was
uncovered in the town of Quetta when a package of 3,000 fake cards split open,
Ms. Fruman said. Millions of names were found to have been missing from voter
rolls, including, in one case, an entire village where support was strong for
the Pakistan Peoples Party, she said.

''We cannot verify them, but in many cases the same complaints have come from
different parties,'' Ms. Fruman said. The irregularities were consistent with
the trends described in the institute's pre-election mission report, she said.
Any one such incident, she added, ''would be enough to stop elections in the
West.''

Mr. Musharraf has promised free and fair elections and has warned parties not to
protest if they lose. ''I assure you that the elections will be fair, free and
transparent and peaceful,'' he said at a seminar in Islamabad, the capital, last
week, the state-run Associated Press of Pakistan reported.

''Let there be no doubt that anyone will be allowed to resort to lawlessness in
the garb of allegations about rigging in the elections,'' he was quoted as
saying.

Yet even the attorney general, Malik Muhammad Qayyum, seemed to acknowledge
government interference in a telephone conversation with an acquaintance, which
was recorded by a journalist in November. ''They will massively rig to get their
own people to win,'' Mr. Qayyum said, apparently referring to the government.

Mr. Qayyum has since denied that the conversation occurred, but a transcript was
released by Human Rights Watch, a New York-based organization. Mr. Qayyum had
taken the call from his acquaintance while still on the line with the
journalist, who had been interviewing him.

In a first for Pakistan, an estimated 20,000 volunteers have fanned out across
the country to monitor polling stations, as well as the critical counting
process that will be conducted by election officials at district courthouses
after the polls close. But as many as 4,000 of them were denied accreditation to
monitor the vote by government officials in Punjab, the most important province
in the election.

The small army of volunteers is organized by the Free and Fair Election Network,
which is financed in part by the United States Agency for International
Development. Many of the monitors are in their 20s and 30s, eager to help make
the election process fairer. They will conduct a parallel vote count Monday
night in 264 of the 272 parliamentary constituencies.

A report by the Free and Fair Election Network released Feb. 5 said mayors had
been supporting certain candidates by urging voters to vote for them, attending
their rallies and allowing them to use resources like official cars and
premises. ''Most support is reported to have been in favor of the Pakistan
Muslim League-Q,'' Mr. Musharraf's party, the report said.

The most sensitive hours of the election, according to experts, will be the
counting of the ballots. The 272 officials who will count them are lower-court
judges chosen by the national election commission, and many are in thrall to
high-court judges appointed by the Musharraf government.

The IFES (formerly the International Foundation for Election Systems), a
nonpartisan group, had advised the Pakistanis to change the counting system to
make it less vulnerable to fraud, Western diplomats said. The changes, which
would have involved requiring the returning officers to announce the
constituency results polling station by polling station, had been rebuffed, they
said.

Chaudhry Pervez Elahi, the former chief minister of Punjab and Mr. Musharraf's
candidate for prime minister, sounding more optimistic than even most officials
of the Pakistan Muslim League-Q, said he expected the party to win ''100-plus
seats'' of the 148 parliamentary seats in Punjab.

The party dominated local government in Punjab, and local mayors would bring
voters to the polls to vote for the Muslim League-Q ticket, he said. Most
analysts say that even though Pakistani parliamentary elections turn on local
politics, Mr. Elahi's projection is exceptionally generous.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Regional election workers in Lahore, Pakistan, presented voting
lists and waited to receive sealed bags containing blank ballots.
 Election workers in Lahore waited for ballots. Monday's vote was delayed after
the death of Benazir Bhutto in December.(PHOTOGRAPHS BY TYLER HICKS/THE NEW YORK
TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (90%); POLITICS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
WAR ON TERROR (79%); MILITARY RULE (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (74%); REFERENDUMS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); INDUSTRY ANALYSTS
(70%); PRICE INCREASES (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); NATIONAL DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTE FOR INTERNATIONAL
AFFAIRS (56%)

PERSON: BENAZIR BHUTTO (89%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (89%); ASIF ALI ZARDARI (58%);
NAWAZ SHARIF (58%)

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1329 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 19, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Impressions of Terrorism, Drawn From Court Files

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK.

Online: Documents and an archive of Adam Liptak's articles:
nytimes.com/adamliptak.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; SIDEBAR; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 959 words


Jeffrey Breinholt, who is on leave from a counterterrorism post at the Justice
Department, has been studying what he calls ''an undervalued source of strategic
intelligence about the threats we face from radical Islam within the U.S.'' He
has been looking at court decisions.

Last year, 888 judicial opinions mentioned Muslims, Islam or variations on those
terms, more than in any other year in the history of the United States. In
contrast to the views of many academic researchers and civil liberties groups,
Mr. Breinholt says the decisions show that terrorism prosecutions work and that
American Muslims are prickly, litigious and poorly integrated into American
society.

''Next time someone claims that American prosecutors never win terrorism cases,
or that Muslims are not more likely to be terrorists than other ethnic
enclaves,'' he wrote in a report last month, ''recommend that they visit a law
library, where they will find several published 2007 opinions in the case books
where Muslims were successfully prosecuted for conduct related to religiously
inspired violence.''

Mr. Breinholt, who is now director of national security law at the International
Assessment and Strategy Center, a Washington research group, conducted his study
by plugging words into a database of judicial decisions. After eliminating cases
in which Islam figured tangentially and 280 cases brought by Muslim prisoners
claiming violations of their religious rights, about 500 pretty interesting
cases remained. Most of them involved garden-variety crimes, requests for asylum
and claims of employment discrimination. Relatively few concerned terrorism.

Mr. Breinholt's methodology was more impressionistic than scientific, as
relatively few cases result in published decisions from judges. Guilty pleas,
jury verdicts and settlements, for instance, do not generally appear in such
databases.

In an interview, Mr. Breinholt said that his conclusions about terrorism were
even stronger once guilty pleas were included. Over all, he said, the Justice
Department wins terrorism cases 10 times as often as it loses them.

But David Cole, a law professor at Georgetown and the author, with Jules Lobel,
of ''Less Safe, Less Free: Why America is Losing the War on Terror,'' said Mr.
Breinholt's numbers were misleading, as most of the prosecutions he counted as
victories did not involve actual terrorists.

''Virtually all of their 'terrorism' cases are material support cases,''
Professor Cole said. It is fairly easy to prove that someone provided material
support to terrorists, he added, as it requires no evidence of involvement in or
intent to support terrorism. Writing a check to the wrong organization to
support its charitable work is enough.

''When you have a broad guilt-by-association statute,'' Professor Cole said,
''it's very easy to get convictions.''

By Professor Cole's count, there has been only one conviction of someone who
tried to commit a terrorist act linked to Islam after Sept. 11, that of Richard
C. Reid, the so-called shoe bomber, who tried to blow up an airplane over the
Atlantic.

Mr. Breinholt cited 11 decisions in his report as proof of the government's good
track record last year. They included opinions concerning Jose Padilla, who was
sentenced to 17 years in prison last month for conspiring to aid terrorism;
Yassin M. Aref, an Albany imam who was convicted of supporting terrorism; and
John A. Muhammad, the older of the two snipers who killed 10 people in the
Washington area in 2002.

But the case against Mr. Padilla evolved over the years as he moved from the
criminal justice system to military detention and back, and he was ultimately
convicted under a relatively elastic conspiracy law. The judge in the case said
there was no evidence linking Mr. Padilla to a specific act of terrorism.

Mr. Aref, the imam, was convicted of supporting a hoax created by the Federal
Bureau of Investigation.

And while Mr. Muhammad, the sniper, surely terrorized the Washington area and
said he was a Muslim, he was not a classic jihadist.

The decisions Mr. Breinholt collected do provide a snapshot of public and
judicial attitudes. Beyond the terrorism cases, two trends are clear: the number
of civil cases brought by Muslim plaintiffs is growing fast, and the plaintiffs
almost always lose.

There were, for instance, 69 employment discrimination decisions involving
Muslim plaintiffs in 2007. Only one involved a victory, if you can call it that.

Abdul W. Azimi, a meat slicer in Portland, Me., sued his employer, Jordan Meats,
for what an appeals court called ''myriad and outrageous'' mistreatment. Mr.
Azimi found pieces of pork in his jacket, a picture of Osama bin Laden in his
locker and his shoes in the toilet. A Maine jury ruled in his favor but awarded
him no damages, leaving him with only a judicial declaration that his employer
had violated the law.

That seems to be par for the course. Mr. Breinholt says only about a dozen
Muslim plaintiffs claiming religious discrimination have prevailed in court in
the history of the United States.

Various conclusions are possible. One is that it is not easy to win employment
discrimination suits based on religious bias regardless of denomination. Another
is that the American legal system may be particularly hostile to claims brought
by Muslim plaintiffs.

But Mr. Breinholt goes in a different direction. Muslim plaintiffs are using
''frequently frivolous litigation,'' he said, ''to control how people express
themselves and to frustrate government security efforts.''

Professor Cole drew a different conclusion. ''One definition of being integrated
into American society,'' he said, ''is being involved in a lot of litigation. We
are a very litigious society.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Jeffrey Breinholt (PHOTOGRAPH BY ANDREW COUNCILL FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); TERRORISM (93%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); GUILTY PLEAS
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); MUSLIM AMERICANS
(78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); LAW LIBRARIES (77%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); JURY TRIALS (77%); LITIGATION
(77%); VERDICTS (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (76%); TEXTBOOKS (75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(74%); SPECIAL LIBRARIES (73%); WAR ON TERROR (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
WRITERS (73%); LIBRARIES (68%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (68%); EMPLOYMENT (51%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1333 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 20, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rebels and Ugandan Government Agree to Terms of Prosecutions of War Crimes

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 430 words

DATELINE: KAMPALA, Uganda


The Ugandan government and rebels with the Lord's Resistance Army have signed an
agreement on how to handle war crimes committed during the 21-year war in the
country's north.

The agreement was signed late Monday in the southern Sudanese town of Juba,
where the two sides have been holding talks for 19 months. It specifies that
severe crimes committed by the rebels during the war will be tried under ''a
special division of the High Court in Uganda,'' said Capt. Chris Magezi, the
spokesman for the government's delegation.

The agreement also says that the special court division will help protect the
witnesses, victims, women and children who participate in those trials.

The Lord's Resistance Army is notorious for brutally attacking civilians, often
burning them to death and hacking off their limbs. More than half of the rebel
fighters are believed to be children abducted from northern Uganda.

Less severe crimes that are not handled by the court can go through traditional
reconciliation rituals used by the Acholi people of northern Uganda or through
junior courts, Captain Magezi said.

The rebels are hiding out to the west, in northeastern Congo. The rebels'
leader, Joseph Kony, and two of his commanders are wanted by the International
Criminal Court in The Hague, accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity.

He stands accused of brainwashing countless children, turning the girls into sex
slaves and the boys into prepubescent killers. His rebel army, a so-called
Christian movement, has terrorized this corner of Africa for a generation.

The Lord's Resistance Army has vowed not to sign a final peace deal unless the
government can persuade the World Court to drop the case against Mr. Kony,
something analysts say is unlikely.

The agreement does not mention in which court Mr. Kony could face trial, but the
rebels said they were satisfied with the deal.

''In negotiations you never get it all, but the L.R.A. is happy with the
agreement and is committed to the contents,'' said James Obita, deputy
negotiator for the rebels.

Tens of thousands of people have been killed and nearly two million displaced
since the rebellion started in the mid-1980s. It began as a war between the
Acholi people, a long dispossessed ethnic group in northern Uganda, and the
government.

Captain Magezi said the talks, mediated by southern Sudan's vice president, Riek
Machar, would now move to the fourth stage, discussions on a permanent
cease-fire.

''This is a big success,'' he said. ''We will in the same spirit start
discussions on a permanent cease-fire.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(90%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);
SLAVERY (73%); DISPLACED PERSONS (73%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (69%); BURN INJURIES
(69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%); ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (55%)

CITY: KAMPALA, UGANDA (78%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%)

COUNTRY: UGANDA (94%); SUDAN (93%); AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (70%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1336 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Canadian TV Network Seeks Release of Afghan

BYLINE: By IAN AUSTEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 468 words

DATELINE: OTTAWA


Canada's largest commercial television network is asking for the immediate
release of an Afghan employee who it has been told is being detained by the
United States military.

Robert Hurst, the president of CTV News, said Javed Yazamy, who performed a
variety of reporting and support duties for the network in Afghanistan beginning
about two years ago, disappeared in the city of Kandahar last October. Mr. Hurst
said the International Committee of the Red Cross subsequently confirmed that
Mr. Yazamy, 22, was in the Bagram Detention Center at an American air base near
Kabul.

''Our issue here is that we've been told nothing by governments or NATO,'' Mr.
Hurst said. NATO forces are responsible for security in much of Afghanistan.
''It's been four months now that we've been working quietly through back
channels with absolutely no results. Now we're making an appeal: Release him or
else explain why he's being detained and proceed with due process.''

From family members, Mr. Hurst said, the network learned that Mr. Yazamy had
traveled to a military base in Kandahar, where Canadian troops are the main
combat force, just before  his disappearance. Mr. Hurst added that the trip was
not made at the broadcaster's request.

Several weeks ago CTV formally asked the Canadian Embassy in Kabul to
investigate Mr. Yazamy's case, but Mr. Hurst said the broadcaster had not
received a reply. Neil Hrab, spokesman for the foreign affairs minister, Maxime
Bernier, said in an e-mail message that the government was ''aware of the
situation and the Canadian Embassy in Kabul is working closely with CTV to get
further information.''

On Wednesday, Agence France-Presse reported that Lt. Col. David Accetta, a
spokesman for the American military at Bagram, confirmed that Mr. Yazamy was
being detained there but said that he was ''not being detained because he is a
journalist.''

Representatives of two journalists' rights groups said that without additional
information, they found it difficult to accept that if Mr. Yazamy was in
detention there, it was not related to his work for CTV.

Robert Dietz, a program coordinator for the Committee to Protect Journalists,
said Mr. Yazamy's family believed that he was being held because he had contacts
with the Taliban and was carrying a Taliban-related video recording.

''This is what reporters do,'' said Dennis Trudeau, a spokesman for the Canadian
branch of Reporters Without Borders. ''It's not necessarily against the law to
be in contact with multiple sides in a conflict.''

At least two other journalists are known to be in American detention: Bilal
Hussein, an Iraqi staff photographer for The Associated Press, has been held in
Iraq since April 2006. Sami al-Hajj, a cameraman for Al Jazeera, has been
detained since 2001, mostly at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); JOURNALISM (89%);
TALIBAN (89%); WRITERS (85%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%);
MISSING PERSONS (77%); NEWS REPORTING (77%); MILITARY BASES (77%);
PHOTOJOURNALISM (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); DUE
PROCESS (72%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (66%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (56%)

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (53%); ASSOCIATED PRESS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (83%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE
OF THE RED CROSS (57%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (53%); SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES
(50%)

PERSON: MAXIME BERNIER (50%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (93%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (93%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA
(59%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (59%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (97%); CANADA (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1342 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Primary Sources

BYLINE: By DAVID WALDSTREICHER.

David Waldstreicher teaches history at Temple University and is the author of
''Runaway America: Benjamin Franklin, Slavery, and the American Revolution.''

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 650 words


MR. AND MRS. PRINCE

How an Extraordinary Eighteenth-Century Family Moved Out of Slavery and Into
Legend.

By Gretchen Holbrook Gerzina.

Researched with Anthony Gerzina.

Illustrated. 256 pp. Amistad/HarperCollins Publishers. $24.95.

David McCullough, the best-selling historian, insists that the secret to his
craft is simple: tell stories. If we say, ''The king died and then the queen
died,'' we have two events. If we add that the queen died of grief, we have a
story, and a good one because the reader has a reason to care. This maxim
(McCullough borrowed it from E. M. Forster) is less helpful when there's no
royal paper trail. Can history assume the queen's grief because it makes a good
story? A good story may stand in for a true one.

Gretchen Holbrook Gerzina went looking for an African-American Yankee with a
royal name, locally famous for performing ballads and arguing for her rights in
court. In the case of Lucy Terry Prince, the recoverable truth is limited, but
it still has more drama than the sketchy legend. The story starts with Prince's
husband, Abijah, born in 1706 and slave to several masters in New England,
including an ancestor of the author. Abijah took advantage of several moves and
military service: by the age of 45 he had negotiated, and probably bought, his
freedom. Passing regularly through the frontier crossroads of Deerfield, Mass.,
he noticed Lucy, a veteran of the Middle Passage, who recited to customers at
her owner's tavern the only poem of hers that has survived. Possibly laudatory,
maybe satirical, it's about an Indian attack: ''Samuel Amsden they found dead /
Not many rods off from his head.''

The Princes built a family and a life together. Thanks to rampant land
speculation in northern New England, they became freeholders in Guilford, Vt.
They kept their homestead intact throughout the Revolutionary War and during
controversies over land titles between Vermonters and claimants from other
states. When an envious and probably racist Guilford neighbor cut down their
fences and let loose his livestock in an effort to run them off their land, the
Princes appealed all the way to the governor and his council, with success.
Later, after Abijah's death, Lucy and her sons fought for title in another town
where they had a claim as original proprietors. Her struggle helped preserve a
small tract for her surviving children. Dying of grief was a luxury Lucy Prince
repeatedly refused.

Years of strenuous digging in the account books and personal papers of whites
who knew the Princes have enabled Gerzina to present a moving, if less than
rounded, portrait of a striving family. Eighteenth-century Yankees kept track of
everything: the work and pay of the slaves they owned and rented, even what they
bought at the store. But ''Mr. and Mrs. Prince'' isn't -- it can't be -- the
inner life of a vernacular poet and her enterprising husband. Instead of
lamenting the limits of the evidence, the author spins a parallel story out of
the dig for evidence.

For the most part, the search is artfully woven into the story of the Princes'
hard work. A healthy dose of humility helps. Gerzina, chairwoman of the English
department at Dartmouth, and her husband, Anthony, had to learn archival
research -- a process that does not lack comedic qualities, or characters. When
Gerzina seems about to turn herself into the heroine of the tale, she wisely
steps back, admitting her jealousy of her spouse's discoveries. She confesses to
hearing Abijah's ghost say, ''Go tell our story,'' only to add that this is not
a singular encounter in Guilford. Posed as a North Country initiation, this
mysticism is surprisingly winning: it courts, then steps away from,
sentimentality. Its very banality and ambiguity mimic the author's studied
refusal to overstate, or own, the Princes' heroism. The drama of their lives,
and of her discovery, is enough.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Mr. and Mrs. Prince (Book)>; Mr. and Mrs. Prince (Book)>

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); HISTORY (78%); WRITERS (77%);
DEEDS & RECORDINGS (67%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (67%)

COMPANY: HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS INC (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); NAICS451211 BOOK STORES (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

STATE: NORTHEAST USA (90%); VERMONT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1355 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 1, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mayor Vetoes Bill Protecting Section 8 Tenants From Landlord Bias

BYLINE: By MANNY FERNANDEZ

SECTION: Section B; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 722 words


Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg vetoed a bill on Friday that would prohibit landlords
from discriminating against prospective tenants who use rent subsidies, setting
the stage for an expected override by the City Council.

The bill would have made it illegal for most landlords to refuse tenants who
intended to pay their rent using federal rent subsidy vouchers, known as Section
8 vouchers, or any other form of local, state or federal government assistance.
The measure was supported by numerous advocates for low-income housing and
opposed by many landlords and property managers.

In a statement on Friday, Mr. Bloomberg said the bill, while well-intentioned,
prohibited landlords from making sound business decisions and required them to
enter into contracts with government agencies that they might otherwise avoid.
The bill, the mayor wrote, ''fails to recognize that the onus should be on
government to make the program more attractive for private sector participation,
not the other way around.''

Section 8 tenants, many of whom are poor, disabled or elderly black and Hispanic
residents, pay about 30 percent of their income toward rent, and the vouchers
cover the balance. In recent years, as gentrification has spread into low-income
neighborhoods and as the strength of the real estate market has increased the
potential for higher profits, housing advocates and voucher holders say property
owners have been turning away more Section 8 tenants. In newspapers and on Web
sites like Craigslist, landlords and real estate agents often add the phrase
''No Section 8'' to their rental listings.

Supporters of the bill, including Councilman Bill de Blasio, a Brooklyn Democrat
who introduced the measure, described it as a crucial way to ensure housing for
needy families and to prevent landlords from using their dislike of the vouchers
to mask broader discrimination against single mothers and black and Hispanic
tenants.

But opponents of the bill, including the Rent Stabilization Association, a trade
group that represents New York City landlords, said that property owners refused
the vouchers because of the payment delays and other administrative problems
associated with the Section 8 program, and that forcing landlords to participate
in what had been a voluntary program was unfair.

The City Council voted in favor of the measure in January, 39 to 8, with one
abstention, well over the two-thirds majority needed to override a mayoral veto.
Mr. de Blasio vowed to work with the Council speaker, Christine C. Quinn, for
the override.

''You can believe in stopping discrimination and in improving the Section 8
program at the same time,'' Mr. de Blasio said. ''It's not like one needs to
wait for the other. The notion that we should not ban discrimination until the
Section 8 program is perfected doesn't make any sense to me.''

Several states, cities and counties have adopted similar laws, including the
state of New Jersey, the District of Columbia, and the cities of Seattle and
Chicago. But New York City -- home of the largest Section 8 program in the
country -- has never had such a law.

The extent of the problem New York landlords create in turning away Section 8
tenants has been a point of dispute.

Cliff Mulqueen, deputy commissioner and general counsel of the city's Commission
on Human Rights, which opposed the bill, has said that he had not seen  any
complaints from people with vouchers about racial discrimination.

New York Acorn Housing, a community organizing group that supported the bill,
rallied outside the commission's offices in November in protest, saying that
discrimination was real and widespread.

The New York City Housing Authority, which is in charge of the bulk of the
Section 8 program in the city, currently administers about 85,000 vouchers. As
of Jan. 30, there were 30,362 participating landlords in the program, an
increase from previous years, a spokesman said. In 2007, about 1,700 vouchers
were issued but not used. Some applicants find an apartment but the landlord
refuses to take vouchers, while some find a unit that fails inspections and
others have trouble going about their search. Vouchers are normally issued for
180 days, the spokesman said, but the Housing Authority often grants extensions
to voucher holders who have been unable to find an apartment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RENTAL PROPERTY (92%); MAYORS (91%); VETO (91%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE
(90%); LOW INCOME PERSONS (90%); RESIDENTIAL RENTAL PROPERTY (90%); REGIONAL &
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); REAL ESTATE (90%); PUBLIC
HOUSING (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HOUSING AUTHORITIES (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); CITIES (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (89%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); RENT CONTROL (78%); PROPERTY MANAGEMENT (78%); LOW
COST HOUSING SCHEMES (78%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (75%); HOUSING MARKET (75%);
PUBLIC CONTRACTING (72%); FAMILY (71%); REAL ESTATE MARKET (70%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (66%); SINGLE PARENTS (50%)

COMPANY: CRAIGSLIST INC (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: MICHAEL BLOOMBERG (89%); BILL DE BLASIO (79%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1360 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

As Israeli Forces Withdraw From Northern Gaza, Hamas Celebrates Its Rocketry

BYLINE: By TAGHREED EL-KHODARY and ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary reported
from Gaza City and Isabel Kershner from Jerusalem. Steven Erlanger contributed
reporting from Jerusalem.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1267 words

DATELINE: GAZA


As Israel withdrew its forces from the northern Gaza Strip on Monday after a
two-day assault on Hamas militants, and as Palestinians emerged from their
houses to inspect the damage, Hamas leaders seemed to be following the playbook
of their Lebanese ally, Hezbollah, in its 2006 war with Israel.

Fawzi Barhoum, a spokesman for Hamas in Gaza, said that like Hezbollah, Hamas
had ''gone from the stone to the rocket.''

''What we learned from Hezbollah,'' he said, ''is that resistance is a choice
that can work.''

The clearest example of echoing Hezbollah came Monday when thousands attended a
so-called victory rally, and Mahmoud Zahar, an influential Hamas leader, briefly
came out of hiding to tell the rallygoers that his organization would rebuild
any house that had been damaged by the Israeli strikes.

Holding up his group as the source of reconstruction as well as resistance is
precisely the message that brought local and regional acclaim to Hassan
Nasrallah, the Hezbollah leader, when his organization faced down Israeli
attacks in the summer of 2006 through rocket barrages on Israel.

The latest surge in hostilities between Israel and militants in the Gaza Strip
left 116 Palestinians dead, according to Dr. Moawiya Hassanain of the
Palestinian Health Ministry in Gaza, making it the deadliest fighting in Gaza in
a year. Two Israeli soldiers were killed in the fighting in northern Gaza on
Saturday, and one Israeli civilian was killed last Wednesday by rocket fire in
the border town of Sderot.

But more than 200 rockets have been fired at Israel since Wednesday, according
to Israeli military officials, including at least 21 longer-range Katyusha-style
rockets, which are manufactured outside Gaza and brought into the strip.
Palestinians and Israelis see the use of those rockets as another illustration
of the growing similarity between Hezbollah and Hamas, the militant Islamic
organization that controls Gaza.

''We are very concerned that the role model for Hamas in Gaza is the Lebanese
Hezbollah,'' said Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israel's prime minister, Ehud
Olmert, when asked about parallels between this conflict and the one with
Hezbollah.

''I have no doubt that the people who built Hezbollah's military machine are now
building the military machine of Hamas,'' Mr. Regev added. He cited  Iran, where
Israeli security officials say the longer-range rockets used by both Hezbollah
and Hamas were made.

Israeli officials say  Hezbollah also provides Hamas with training and
logistical support. They add that Hamas has also adopted other Hezbollah
tactics, operating in  civilian areas and in some cases storing weapons in
homes, creating similar quandaries  for the army that it faced in its war in
Lebanon in 2006.

Soon after the forces left northern Gaza on Monday, two more of the imported
rockets  struck Ashkelon, an Israeli coastal city of 120,000 people about 10
miles north of the strip. One rocket hit an apartment block, causing damage but
no serious injuries.

Hamas has claimed responsibility for most of the rocket fire. Hamas took over
Gaza last June after routing forces loyal to President Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah.

Mr. Abbas, who is based in the West Bank, suspended peace talks with Israel as
the death toll rose in Gaza, and on Monday he called on all sides to agree to a
cease-fire and to allow him to act as a mediator, a day before Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice was expected to arrive in the region for talks.

There was a second day of unrest in the West Bank on Monday, with Palestinians
protesting the Israeli actions in Gaza and throwing stones at soldiers and
Israeli cars in various locations. An Israeli settler shot and killed a
17-year-old Palestinian on a road west of Ramallah. According to Israel Radio,
the settler said he had gone out for a walk and was confronted by a group of
Palestinians, some masked, who threw stones.

In what was apparently a bid to remain relevant in Gaza, and in an echo of the
actions of the Lebanese government in southern Beirut after the war in 2006, Mr.
Abbas also instructed his government  to allocate $5 million to compensate Gaza
residents whose properties were damaged in the Israeli campaign.

Israel says its ground and air forces have been aiming only at rocket squads and
weapons storage and production facilities in Gaza. Israel's army chief of staff,
Lt. Gen. Gabi Ashkenazi, and its chief of military intelligence, Maj. Gen. Amos
Yadlin,  described 90 percent of those killed in Gaza in the last few days as
terrorists.

But that figure is challenged by medical officials in Gaza, who say about half
of those killed were civilians, including several young children. The Israeli
human rights organization B'Tselem also issued a statement on Monday saying that
by its count, at least 54 of the dead had not taken part in the hostilities.

Mr. Olmert was quoted as telling  Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee of
Parliament  that the recent military campaign, which started with concerted
airstrikes on Wednesday and continued with the ground incursion early Saturday,
was ''not a one-time event.''

''We are in the midst of a combat action,'' he said, adding that ''the objective
is reducing the rocket fire and weakening Hamas.''

On Monday evening, the Israeli Air Force struck another rocket-launching squad
and the wagon in which they were transporting rockets in northern Gaza, an army
spokeswoman said. Palestinian officials said one militant was killed.

Israel is mulling a much broader and longer ground operation in Gaza, the
defense minister, Ehud Barak, has said in recent days. But  Israeli government
and military officials say they are wary of such a campaign because of the
inevitably high cost in lives on the two  sides and uncertainty about what might
be achieved.

In terms of strength, Hamas is still far from Hezbollah. But if Israel does not
act, said Mr. Regev, the spokesman for Mr. Olmert, it will wake up one day to a
much more dangerous situation in the south with a large part of the Israeli
population within range of Hamas rocket fire.

In the Gaza town of Jabaliya, the focus of the Israeli ground operation,
residents emerged from their houses to inspect the destruction left by the
Israeli tanks and to bury more of the dead.

Ahmad Darabeh, 37, a teacher and father of six, described how soldiers blew open
the door of his house without warning before dawn on Saturday and took up sniper
positions inside. The  family was confined to one room, allowed out only to  the
bathroom once every 10 hours, Mr. Darabeh said.

He  said one of his female relatives, Nihad Daher, 22, who lived nearby, was
killed Saturday by shrapnel when an Israeli Apache helicopter fired a missile at
an armed group outside the house.

Mr. Darabeh said he was impressed by the organization of the members of the
Qassam Brigades, the military wing of Hamas. ''It was striking to see their
performance this time,'' he said, adding that if the Israeli ground forces had
not been backed up from the air, ''Hamas could have beaten them.''

The Qassam Brigades say that 37 of its members have been killed since Wednesday,
and other militant groups say they lost  15.

Many Palestinians in Gaza also expressed reservations about the Hamas
celebrations, given the number of people who had died.

Sitting outside her partly destroyed house in Jabaliya, Aisha Abd Rabbo, 85,
said she did not care about the offer of compensation from Mr. Zahar, the Hamas
leader who addressed the rally on Monday.

''All I want is the return of those who were killed,'' she said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE ISRAELIS: Israeli soldiers approached Palestinian youths on
Monday in Bethlehem, in the West Bank, after Palestinians protested Israeli
military operations in the Gaza Strip. (PHOTOGRAPH BY KEVIN FRAYER/ASSOCIATED
PRESS)
 THE PALESTINIANS: Palestinian youths ran after fighting broke out against the
Israeli soldiers in Bethlehem. More than 100 Palestinians have died in
hostilities since Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MUSA AL-SHAER/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
-- GETTY IMAGES) MAP: Rockets reached Ashkelon, about 10 miles from the strip.
Map of Ashkelon near the Gaza Strip.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (96%); HEZBOLLAH (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); ARMIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (72%);
PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (71%); ARMED FORCES (70%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS
(65%); RELIGION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); HEZBOLLAH (94%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%); HASSAN NASRALLAH (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (99%); LEBANON (94%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1361 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Charges Are Dropped Against 2 Shiite Ex-Officials Accused in Sectarian Killings

BYLINE: By ALISSA J. RUBIN; Ahmad Fadam contributed reporting.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 860 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD


A three-judge panel dropped charges on Monday against two former high-ranking
Shiite government officials accused of using the Health Ministry to run death
squads and enrich themselves.

The charges and the two-day trial were the most prominent judicial attempts to
confront the factional violence that has whittled away at the government's
credibility.

But the judges found there was insufficient witness evidence to find the
defendants guilty of the murder, kidnapping and corruption charges against them
-- a decision that shook up Sunnis and troubled some Shiites as well.

Much of the evidence consisted of overheard and secondhand conversations, which
the judges said carried less weight than witness accounts.

The trial had been the first effort by the Iraqi government to bring to justice
people accused of playing commanding roles in the flood of sectarian kidnapping
and killing that traumatized Baghdad in 2005 and 2006.

Feeding doubt about the trial's fairness, many of the prosecution's witnesses
had been intimidated and ultimately refused to appear in court.

Defense lawyers, who were visibly pleased with the decision, said the lack of
witness accounts was crucial to the panel's ruling. ''There was no eyewitness
evidence, so in the end the judiciary could not reach a verdict on a crime that
carries the death sentence without that,'' said Ameer Taha, one of the lawyers
representing the defendants.

On trial was Hakim al-Zamili, a former deputy health minister and member of the
political group allied with the Shiite cleric Moktada al-Sadr, which controlled
the ministry from 2005 through early 2007. Also on trial was Hamid al-Shammari,
the head of the ministry's 13,000-member security service.

Mr. Zamili was charged with orchestrating the kidnapping and murder of more than
a dozen people and with skimming from government contracts. He was also accused
of allowing Mr. Sadr's militia to operate out of the ministry and use official
cars and ambulances to ferry weapons and abduct Sunni patients from hospitals.

Families of victims were angered by the verdict, saying it appeared that the
court was unable to render justice.

''It's a travesty, an absolute travesty of justice,'' said Ali al-Safaar, whose
father, also a deputy health minister, was kidnapped from his home after
preparing a report on corruption that identified Mr. Zamili. ''How can 13 murder
cases and kidnappings and corruption be dealt with in two days?''

For Sunnis, the outcome was deeply discouraging. They contend that a majority of
victims of the Health Ministry's militia were Sunnis and that allowing the
defendants to go free will give militias the freedom to repeat their acts. A
group of Sunni members of Parliament met late into the night on Monday to
discuss the trial results.

''I don't think that there was any fairness in this matter,'' said Saleem
Abdullah, a member of Parliament and a spokesman for Tawafiq, the main Sunni
bloc. ''We are still wondering what happened to Ali al-Mahdawi, who entered the
Ministry of Health and didn't come out. So where is he?''

Mr. Mahdawi, a Sunni, was the director general of health for Diyala Province. He
attended a meeting at the Ministry of Health on June 12, 2006, and vanished. Mr.
Abdullah blamed the Americans for failing to push Iraqis to hold a more rigorous
trial.

The Americans ''also have the suspicions, but they have political considerations
too,'' he said. ''Maybe because Sadr recently froze the Mahdi Army, they are
trying not to criticize or provoke him,'' he added, referring to Mr. Sadr's
recent decision to extend a cease-fire for six more months.

The Americans have invested millions in the Rule of Law complex, creating a safe
place to hold politically delicate trials. They have deputized legal advisers
from several Western countries to help Iraqis develop evidence-gathering
techniques and forensics. But for all the work and money, this trial, which
officials had held up as a banner example of the progress Iraq had made, ended
without holding anyone accountable for horrific crimes.

A spokesman for the American Embassy  said it was ''reserving judgment'' on the
outcome and had serious questions about the result. ''There remain serious
allegations of witness intimidation and other irregularities in this case,''
said Noel Clayton, an embassy press officer.

But perhaps most worrisome, some officials said, was that if the court could not
convict based on the evidence it amassed in this case, which it took months to
gather, it could be difficult for the court ever to convict those responsible
for sectarian crimes.

Some victims insisted that this was as much about greed and political power as
it was sectarian friction. ''This is not about Sunni or Shia,'' said Zainab
al-Saffar, a Shiite who testified for the prosecution because her brother was
kidnapped. ''This is because these are criminals; it's about money.''

Ms. Saffar has been threatened for months, receiving menacing messages on her
cellphone that warned her not to press her case or testify against Mr. Zamili.
One recent message said, ''Start praying because Judgment Day is close.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); JUDGES (90%);
EYEWITNESSES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
CORRUPTION (89%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); HEALTH
CARE POLICY (89%); VERDICTS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (73%);
EMERGENCY VEHICLES (66%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (64%); MURDER (58%)

PERSON: MOQTADA AL-SADR (58%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1365 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 6, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Under Pressure, Abbas Says He'll Talk Peace, but Actual Dialogue May Be Remote

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER and ISABEL KERSHNER; Helene Cooper added later
reporting from Brussels.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 883 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


After coming under heavy pressure from the United States, Mahmoud Abbas, the
Palestinian president, said Wednesday that he intended to resume negotiations
with Israel on a peace plan.

But he did not say when he would return to talks, and he is under political
pressure at home not to do so if the Palestinian death toll continues to rise
from Israeli attacks on Gaza.

Mr. Abbas suspended negotiations over the weekend during  Israeli operations to
stop rocket fire from Gaza that left 126 Palestinians, including civilians, dead
since Feb. 27. Three Israelis also died, two soldiers in the fighting and one
civilian in a rocket attack.

Mr. Abbas's decision to return to the negotiating table followed talks with
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice.

Even winning Mr. Abbas's somewhat vague agreement proved difficult.

Ms. Rice apparently had interpreted talks with Mr. Abbas as having ended with
his commitment to return unconditionally to peace talks, Israeli and American
officials said. But then Mr. Abbas told reporters he would return only when
Israel reached a truce with Hamas, the militant Palestinian group that controls
Gaza.

That prompted Ms. Rice to interrupt her lunch with Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni
and telephone Mr. Abbas, Israeli and American officials said.

Shortly afterward, the Palestinian president  released a statement that the
peace process was a ''strategic choice and we have the intention of resuming.''
He did not list any preconditions.

Mr. Abbas's hesitancy provides further evidence of just how hard it will be for
President Bush to achieve his stated goal of a peace deal by January, the end of
his term. And the resolute tone at Israel's security cabinet on Wednesday did
not seem to suggest an imminent truce.

The security cabinet refrained from approving a large-scale military operation
of the kind that Defense Minister Ehud Barak has been threatening. But it
decided that Israel would act ''continuously and systematically'' in order to
bring an end to the rocket fire from Gaza.

More than 200 rockets have been fired over the past week, according to Israeli
military officials, including longer-range Katyusha-style rockets.

On Wednesday morning, two rockets were launched against Israel, an army
spokeswoman said. There were no reports of damage or casualties.

In Gaza, the militant groups Islamic Jihad and the Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for the rocket fire, saying it
was in retaliation for a limited Israeli army operation on Tuesday night aimed
at a local Islamic Jihad leader. The militant leader was killed in clashes, and
a month-old baby was killed in the cross-fire, Palestinian officials said.

Israel had withdrawn its forces from the northern Gaza Strip just the day
before, after a two-day assault.

Ms. Livni said Wednesday that the violence was to be expected and that neither
Israelis nor Palestinians should let it get in the way of the peace talks. She
obliquely criticized Mr. Abbas for suspending the talks on Sunday and noted that
Israel had not pulled out of the talks when rockets from Gaza hit Israel.

''I'm not going to enter a kind of blame game, but clearly I expect my
co-partners to do the same, and I said that to them as well,'' she said during a
news conference with Ms. Rice.

But several Middle East experts said Mr. Abbas needs something  tangible to
enable him to convince Palestinians that he -- and not Hamas's leaders -- can
negotiate a peace that includes the establishment of a Palestinian state. The
experts said the dismantling of roadblocks and some Israeli settlements would
help Mr. Abbas.

On Wednesday morning, the Israelis did take one small step, but that effort fell
short. The Israelis sent a small force to an illegal hilltop settlement outpost
in the northern West Bank. The site, Esh Kodesh, falls into the category of
outposts that Israel has pledged to dismantle.

The forces disconnected a pipe bringing water from the settlement's tower, then
left. An hour later, the settlers had reconnected the pipe, witnesses said.

Ms. Rice was in the Middle East to move peace talks forward, but the increased
violence meant that she had to spend much of her time trying to get Mr. Abbas
back to the table.

Ms. Rice said that an American general overseeing implementation of some parts
of the peace deal would hold his first joint meeting with Israelis and
Palestinians, where the United States would serve as arbiter over whether both
sides are doing what they promised to do.

''I do understand the difficult circumstances for President Abbas, but I think
he's made the right decision,'' Ms. Rice told reporters later on her flight from
Jerusalem to Brussels, where she is to attend a NATO meeting.

A report on Wednesday by eight British-based relief and human rights
organizations, including Amnesty International U.K., says the humanitarian
situation in Gaza is now the worst it has been since the Israeli occupation
began in 1967.

The report said 80 percent of Gaza's 1.5 million people were dependent on food
aid, compared with 63 percent in 2006. Unemployment is close to 40 percent, and
95 percent of Gaza's industrial operations have been suspended because of a ban
on the import of raw materials and on all exports, the report added.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: In a symbolic gesture, Israel sent a small force on Wednesday to
an illegal hilltop outpost in the West Bank, near Esh Kodesh. The forces
disconnected a pipe bringing water from the settlement's water tower, then left.
An hour later, the settlers reconnected the pipe, witnesses said. (RINA
CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACE PROCESS (95%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); ARMIES (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); HAMAS (78%); BOMBINGS
(76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(75%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); ARMED FORCES
(70%); RELIGION (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (92%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (79%); TZIPORA LIVNI (58%); GEORGE
W BUSH (58%); EHUD BARAK (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (97%); UNITED STATES
(94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1375 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 9, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gains Cited in Hunt for Liberia Ex-Warlord's Fortune

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1015 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


For two years, Charles Taylor, the West African warlord and former president of
Liberia, has been locked in a Dutch high-security jail, leaving the compound
only in an armored car that speeds across The Hague as it delivers him to his
war crimes trial.

But while he is in the dock, the hunt is still on for his legendary missing
fortune. Prosecutors say the most exhaustive effort to date is under way to
pinpoint the money the former dictator is believed to have amassed by pilfering
the coffers of his country and running smuggling operations, particularly of
diamonds, deep inside neighboring states.

No money has been seized, but investigators say they have made some
breakthroughs recently.

''We have new information that more than $1 billion passed through Taylor's
personal bank accounts between 1997 and 2003 when he was president,'' said
Stephen Rapp, the chief prosecutor of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, which
is trying Mr. Taylor at an outpost in The Hague. Last year, experts advising the
United Nations Security Council estimated Mr. Taylor's fortune at half that
amount.

Newly traced bank records and other documents show Liberian money flowing into
Mr. Taylor's accounts, as well as large cash withdrawals and transfers to
foreign banks, Mr. Rapp said. ''The records showed he controlled enormous funds
which he hid,'' the prosecutor said. ''The big question is how much of that
wealth is still left.''

The court now has the aid of a London law firm with experience in recovering
wealth stolen by dictators and other leaders. Court officials said the firm was
being paid by Western governments but they would not release other details,
saying that could jeopardize the investigation.

Mr. Taylor, 60, has been charged with pillaging, but his hidden accounts and
assets are also central to his prosecution on charges of war crimes and crimes
against humanity. The prosecutors want to demonstrate how he financed operations
that dragged neighboring Sierra Leone into a civil war that lasted more than a
decade.

Prosecutors argue that in his drive to expand his power in the region, Mr.
Taylor used stolen millions, including profits from smuggled diamonds, to buy
the loyalty, weapons and supplies for rebels in Sierra Leone and other
neighboring countries. His indictment holds him accountable for the rebels'
barbaric methods, as they pillaged, killed, raped, used children as soldiers and
hacked off hands or feet of innocent civilians.

No one knows how much money was stolen in the region or raised from the diamond
fields of Sierra Leone and parts of Guinea. Evidence presented at the trial
showed that enslaved laborers were often forced to dig for diamonds at gunpoint
and could be executed for keeping a stone. Court investigators have said
diamonds were often sold cheaply and used to pay for clandestine weapons
shipments.

Millions of dollars of income from government timber concessions and Liberia's
shipping flags of convenience often went directly to Mr. Taylor, Western
diplomats have said.

If the international judges' panel finds him guilty of pillaging, the court can
seize assets proved to belong to him or his associates and use the money for
restitution.

The list of claimants is likely to be long. Trust funds have been set up in
Liberia and Sierra Leone for war victims, among them the thousands who were
mutilated by machetes. Each country may have claims for war damages and for
pilfering state coffers and resources like  diamonds and timber, prosecutors
have said.

Not least, the court could claim funds for its expenses on Mr. Taylor's defense.

The former Liberian dictator, who arrives for court in tinted glasses and
impeccable suits, has insisted he has almost no money and cannot even pay for
his defense. The governments of Nigeria and Liberia, where Mr. Taylor is
believed to have considerable investments and real estate, have not cooperated
with the court's requests for information and freezing his assets, prosecutors
said.

As a result, the court is paying $70,000 per month to his defense team, which
includes a dozen people. It pays an additional $30,000 per month in other
expenses, like the team's office rent and salaries for the four investigators
assigned to him.

Mr. Taylor, who had fretted about what he called the ''low level'' of his
court-appointed defense team, obtained a court order last summer providing him
with a large team of more senior lawyers.

If Mr. Taylor's assets are found, the court could bill him for his defense,
expected to cost $3 million to $4 million. Such costs are now paid by the
governments who help finance the United Nations-backed court.  The United
States, which had high hopes for Mr. Taylor in 1997 when he was elected
president, and backed him with aid and assistance, is a major donor.

Investigators say Mr. Taylor has demonstrated his skills in hiding money and
fooling people, including the court, before. He built his first fortune as a
government official in the 1980s and pocketed more than $900,000 before fleeing
an embezzling charge. He was arrested in Boston, but while awaiting extradition
he escaped from a Massachusetts jail and disappeared.

He is believed to have collected millions as a warlord in the 1990s from
entrepreneurs in exchange for favors.

''We know now that many of Taylor's assets are hidden off-shore or behind the
names of his associates,'' said Mr. Rapp, the chief prosecutor. But large cash
withdrawals during his tenure as president suggest that he spent much of it on
the war effort, according to investigators.

The United Nations has frozen $6 million in assets, in the name of Mr. Taylor or
his associates, in 10 countries. ''It's a start, but it can't be seized until we
prove it's Taylor's money,'' Mr. Rapp said.

The London lawyers are enlisting law enforcement agencies to press banks in
several financial havens to cooperate, according to Mr. Rapp, who said that some
countries, including the Bahamas and Switzerland, are already helping.

''Enough progress has already been made to show that more can be found,'' he
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Charles Taylor, left, the former president of Liberia, at his
trial in the Special Court for Sierra Leone at The Hague in January.(PHOTOGRAPH
BY POOL PHOTO BY MICHAEL KOOREN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SMUGGLING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); LARCENY & THEFT (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
PRISONS (78%); INDICTMENTS (77%); EVIDENCE (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CIVIL
WAR (77%); LAWYERS (73%); BANKING & FINANCE (73%); CHILD SOLDIERS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); SLAVERY (72%); DIAMOND
MINING (70%); ARMS TRADE (60%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); WESTERN AFRICA
(92%); GUINEA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1380 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Effort to Prohibit Waterboarding Fails in House

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 282 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The House on Tuesday failed to overturn President Bush's veto of legislation
that would have prohibited the Central Intelligence Agency from using
waterboarding, which simulates drowning, on terrorism suspects.

The measure would have limited the agency to 19 techniques approved in the Army
field manual on interrogation. The Army rules ban the use of waterboarding.

The C.I.A. director, Gen. Michael V. Hayden, has confirmed that the agency used
the technique on three terrorist suspects in 2002 and 2003.

The House roll call was 225 to 188, or 51 votes short of the two-thirds majority
required to override a veto. Mr. Bush has vetoed seven bills and has been
overridden only once.

The interrogation limits were part of the first intelligence authorization bill
produced by Congress in three years.

The chairman of the House Intelligence Committee, Representative Silvestre
Reyes, Democrat of Texas, framed the vote as a human rights referendum, saying,
''This is about torture.''

The ranking Republican on the committee, however, Representative Peter Hoekstra
of Michigan, called the measure ''ill-advised'' and said it was like giving
terrorists the American ''playbook'' on interrogation.

Mr. Bush said his veto on Saturday was not specifically about waterboarding but
about wanting the C.I.A. to have the flexibility to use legal and effective
interrogation methods that were not part of the Army regulations.

''I cannot sign into law a bill that would prevent me, and future presidents,
from authorizing the C.I.A. to conduct a separate, lawful intelligence program,
and from taking all lawful actions necessary to protect Americans from attack,''
Mr. Bush said in a statement.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LEGISLATION (90%);
VOTERS & VOTING (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); VETO (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (75%); REFERENDUMS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); PETER HOEKSTRA (58%); SILVESTRE REYES (58%);
MICHAEL HAYDEN (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1381 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 12, 2008 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Trial Begins for Croatian General Who Worked With Americans

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 803 words

DATELINE: PARIS


A popular Croatian general who led a brutal operation that drove the Serbs out
of Eastern Croatia near the end of the Balkans war went on trial in The Hague on
Tuesday for war crimes and crimes against humanity.

Gen. Ante Gotovina, working closely with American advisers, was the commander of
a military campaign in the summer of 1995  that put an end to the Serbian
occupation of Eastern Croatia and forced more than 150,000 Serbs to flee towns
and villages where they had lived for generations.

The four-day operation, in the Krajina region, was a turning point in the war,
celebrated by Croatia as the heroic recapturing of its homeland and mourned by
Serbia as the single largest event of ''ethnic cleansing'' of the 1991-1995 wars
that broke up Yugoslavia.

Prosecutors at the war crimes tribunal, while not disputing Croatia's right to
retake its land, have accused General Gotovina and his two co-defendants, Gens.
Ivan Cermak and Mladen Markac, of crimes including knowingly shelling civilian
targets, allowing their forces to go on violent rampages during and after the
campaign, terrorizing civilians, and looting and burning Serbian homes.

In his opening statement on Tuesday, the prosecutor, Alan Tieger, said  more
than 350 civilians were killed in August and September 1995, most of them not in
the heat of the battle, but executed in revenge actions.

Lawyers familiar with the trial say it may also shed more light on the
little-known covert American role during that decisive Croatian counteroffensive
against Serbia.

United States military advisers, among them retired and active personnel, helped
plan the operation, and Americans directed drone aircraft over the battle zone
to gain real-time intelligence for Croatian forces, Croatian officials have
said.

The United States is not implicated in any of the criminal charges related to
the operation, but some of its intelligence methods and sources may be
disclosed, lawyers at the court said. In the summer of 1995, the United States
and other Western nations were seeking to roll back Serbia's considerable
military gains in Bosnia and Croatia in order to create a viable peace plan.

Washington has taken a keen interest in the trial, and American diplomats have
visited the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague to discuss the case,
a former senior prosecutor said.

The importance of the trial to Croatia, where the three generals are considered
heroes, is evident from the battery of defense lawyers. The defense team
includes four lawyers with direct experience with the tribunal, which is
unprecedented. One is Greg Kehoe, a former tribunal prosecutor who leads General
Gotovina's defense.

Mr. Kehoe also worked for the United States as the top American lawyer at the
Iraqi Special Tribunal in Baghdad, where he ran the large office that built
criminal cases against Saddam Hussein and his top officials.

In court, the three defendants, who have pleaded not guilty, sat side by side,
flanked by United Nations security guards. As he arrived, General Gotovina
smiled and waved at the public gallery, then he and others listened to
translations of the proceedings. The trial could also be watched via video
transmission from the court. Croatian television broadcast the events live.

For the Croatian audience there may have been unwelcome disclosures in the
prosecutors' lengthy accounts of atrocities. Croatia's nationalist news media
have widely reported on actions by Serbs, often suppressing news from trials
that cast Croatians in a bad light.

Mr. Tieger, the prosecutor, detailed brutalities that he said were inflicted by
the Croatian military and the police on Serbian villagers. He said they burned
hundreds of homes, killed elderly people who could not leave, killed livestock
and poisoned wells to make sure no Serb refugees returned. The operation left
''a scarred wasteland of destroyed homes and villages,'' he said.

The prosecutor also cited comments from General Gotovina who, in the days after
the operation, referred to his troops as ''spoiled children'' and
''barbarians.''

Lawyers at the court have said  the three generals were the only  men to be held
accountable for the atrocities because the main political decision-makers,
President Franjo Tudjman and his inner circle, are  dead.

After Mr. Tudjman's death, Carla Del Ponte, the chief war crimes prosecutor at
the time, said her office had been close to issuing an indictment in which Mr.
Tudjman would be charged with heading a ''joint criminal enterprise'' that
included expelling Serbs. On Tuesday, the prosecution quoted from Mr. Tudjman's
speeches in which he called Krajina Serbs ''a cancer on the underbelly of
Croatia.''

The prosecution said it intended to call more than 130 witnesses. The trial is
expected to last more than a  year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14, 2008



CORRECTION: An article on Wednesday about the trial of a Croatian general who
led a brutal operation that drove Serbs out of the Krajina region of Croatia
near the end of the Balkans war referred incorrectly to the location of the
region. Krajina is in western Croatia, not eastern.

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Gen. Ante Gotovina led a 1995 operation against Serbs.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY ED OUDENAARDEN)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (50%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (65%)

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); IRAQ (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1382 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 13, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Court Upholds Ruling on Rwandan

BYLINE: By AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 346 words

DATELINE: ARUSHA, Tanzania


A United Nations war crimes court on Wednesday upheld the war crimes and
genocide conviction of a Roman Catholic priest and increased his sentence to
life in prison  for his part in the killings of 800,000 fellow Rwandans.

In April 1994, when pro-government Hutu militiamen were rounding up ethnic Tutsi
and moderate Hutu for slaughter across Rwanda,  1,500 parishioners of the
priest, the Rev. Athanase Seromba, took shelter in his church in the town of
Nyange.

Rather than seeking to protect his flock, Father Seromba, an ethnic Hutu, had
the church leveled by bulldozers and ordered  gunmen to shoot any Tutsis who
tried to flee the carnage, according to testimony introduced in  court.  There
were no survivors.

''Seromba knew that approximately 1,500 refugees were in the church,'' Judge
Mohamed Shahabuddeen said, handing down his ruling on the appeal.

''He committed genocide as well as extermination as a crime against humanity by
virtue of his role in the destruction of the church. The acts of Seromba are
sufficient to constitute direct participation in the crimes.''

Father Seromba was the first priest charged with genocide by the International
Criminal Court for Rwanda, which was set up to prosecute the planners of the
1994 massacre. He was convicted in 2006 and sentenced to 15 years in jail.

Both the prosecution and the defense appealed; prosecutors claimed the sentence
was too light, while Father Seromba continued to proclaim  his innocence.

On Wednesday, the court found in favor of the prosecution, rejecting the
defendant's appeal and increasing his sentence.

In the aftermath of the genocide, Father Seromba sought refuge in other parts of
Africa before going to Italy, where the Roman Catholic Church allowed him to
continue working.

Italy refused to execute the tribunal's arrest warrant, but in 2002 the priest
turned himself in.

Father Seromba was the first Catholic priest to face genocide charges before the
tribunal, although several other clergy members have been tried by the tribunal
and foreign courts in connection with the genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); RELIGION (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); ARRESTS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); ARREST
WARRANTS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (55%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (96%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%); AFRICA (78%)

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1384 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinians Unite in Anger Against Israeli Attack That Killed Four

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1101 words

DATELINE: BETHLEHEM, West Bank


It was a display of Palestinian unity rarely seen since the militant Islamic
group Hamas seized power in Gaza last summer and left the rival
pro-FatahPalestinian Authority struggling to hold on to the West Bank.

As thousands of men and women crowded into Manger Square on Thursday to attend
prayers and the funerals for four local militants killed by Israeli undercover
forces in a raid the day before, a general strike was observed throughout this
Muslim-Christian city of 30,000 people.

In the square, youths held flags representing the mainstream Fatah, Hamas, the
smaller, more extreme Islamic Jihad and the leftist Popular Front for the
Liberation of Palestine. The body of one of the victims, a local Islamic Jihad
leader, Muhammad Shehada, was draped with the increasingly popular emblem of the
Lebanese Shiite militia Hezbollah.

More than creating a temporary fusion of political and ideological divisions,
though, the killings enraged Fatah advocates of negotiations with Israel, who
posed questions about its commitment to peacemaking.

''The crime committed by Israel against our people aims to blow up the peace
process,'' said Muhammad Khalil al-Laham, a Fatah legislator who came to the
square, and whose voice rose in fury as row upon row of Muslim mourners bowed
down on the paving stones in silent prayer.

''Bethlehem was the calmest and most committed city,'' Mr. Laham said, noting
that Salam Fayyad, the Palestinian Authority prime minister, had planned an
international investors' conference to be held in the city in May under the
slogan, ''You can do business in Palestine.''

Israel strongly defended the killings on Thursday as a legitimate response to
terrorist acts. ''Yesterday, in Bethlehem, we again proved that the state of
Israel will continue to hunt and to strike any murderer who has Jewish blood on
his hands, and those who send him,'' said the Israeli defense minister, Ehud
Barak. ''It is unimportant how much time has elapsed. Israel's long arm will
reach him.''

The Israeli raid came at a delicate time for the authority and its president,
Mahmoud Abbas of Fatah. Egyptian mediators are trying to broker a truce that
would calm the hostilities between Israel and Hamas in and around Gaza, a truce
that Mr. Abbas called for after  violence spiraled there earlier this month.

Mr. Abbas's office issued an unusually strong statement after the Bethlehem
raid. ''These barbaric crimes reveal the true face of Israel, which speaks
loudly about peace and security all the while committing murders and executions
against our people,'' it said.

In a response, Islamic Jihad fired more than 20 rockets from Gaza at Israel on
Thursday, after refraining from launching any for nearly a week. Only a small
number of them fell inside Israel and they caused no casualties, the Israeli
military said. Before dawn the Israeli Air Force carried out a strike in Gaza,
also the first in nearly a week, hitting a rocket launcher, the military said.

To Israel, the four men were dangerous fugitives with long records in terrorism;
two had been on Israel's most wanted list for years. For the thousands who
attended their funerals they were local heroes of the Palestinian resistance who
had managed to survive this long. Mr. Shehada ran in the Palestinian elections
as an independent candidate in 2006 and won 7,000 votes. One of the companions
he was killed with, Issa Marzuk, 36, was voted onto the Bethlehem city council
on an Islamic Jihad ticket in 2005.

The four, including Ahmed Balboul, a local commander of Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades, were shot while riding together in a car.  Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades,
is  a militia affiliated with Fatah.

Palestinians say that all four had been hoping to be included in an amnesty
agreement with Israel, but that Israel had refused. The 178 militants Israel did
offer amnesty to last summer, under certain conditions, were all from Fatah.

Mr. Balboul, 48, had spoken  in recent months about his support for a negotiated
settlement of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Mr. Shehada, 45, had used ''the
language of resistance up to the last minute,'' said Ata Manaa, a journalist for
a local Bethlehem television station who interviewed the fugitive earlier this
week.

But many here believe that Mr. Shehada and his companions had not been  engaged
in violence against Israelis in recent years. ''Though they opposed the
Palestinian Authority's position,'' said Hassan Abed Rabbo, a spokesman for
Fatah, ''there was a clear commitment to the authority's decision to maintain
calm.''

Mark Regev, a spokesman for Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, said it was true that
the West Bank had been relatively quiet, ''but that,'' he added, ''is largely
because the Israeli Army is conducting these ongoing operations.'' The
Authority's own security forces are in a process of capacity building, said Mr.
Regev, ''but we have no doubt they could do much more than they have done.
They've been extremely reticent to take on the terrorist infrastructure,'' he
said.

There were no gunmen visible in Manger Square on Thursday, and only a couple of
traffic policemen in uniform. Other members of the security services joined the
mourners in civilian clothes. There was one  burst of gunfire in the air as the
funeral procession set off for the cemetery; otherwise, order prevailed.

''The Palestinian Authority doesn't control an inch of the West Bank,'' said
Shawqi Issa, the director of the Ensan Center for Human Rights in Bethlehem.
''Israel is everywhere.'' Nor, he said, does Israel want peace. ''Their strategy
is to put obstacles in the way every day.''

Mr. Issa was a classmate of Mr. Shehada's 30 years ago. The two happened to meet
in an elevator about 40 minutes before Mr. Shehada was killed. Mr. Shehada, who
was with Mr. Balboul, knew he was being pursued. ''He said, 'They don't want to
arrest me, they want to kill me,' '' Mr. Issa recalled.

Israeli Attacks Condemned

DAKAR, Senegal (Agence France-Presse) -- The United Nations secretary general,
Ban Ki-moon, sharply condemned the Israeli attacks in a speech here on Thursday
at the start of a meeting of the 57-nation Organization of the Islamic
Conference.

''Israel's disproportionate and excessive use of force has killed and injured
many civilians, including children. I condemn these actions and call on Israel
to cease such attacks,'' Mr. Ban told an audience that included the Palestinian
president, Mahmoud Abbas. ''At the same time,'' he added, ''I also condemn the
rocket attacks directed against Israel and call for the immediate cessation of
such acts.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sana Balboul, center, the wife of Ahmed Balboul, who was killed
in an Israeli raid, at his funeral on Thursday in Bethlehem. Thousands of
Palestinians prayed. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
 NASSER SHIYOUKHI/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
AL FATAH (90%); HAMAS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (78%); PALESTINE LIBERATION ORGANIZATION
(78%); TERRORISM (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); JEWS & JUDAISM (76%); CITY LIFE (75%);
PEACE PROCESS (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(70%); AIR FORCES (62%); ARMED FORCES (60%); MURDER (56%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (50%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%); HEZBOLLAH (91%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (83%); PALESTINE
LIBERATION FRONT (57%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (78%); EHUD BARAK (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); EGYPT (79%);
LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1416 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colombia: Uribe Offers To Release Rebels For Hostage's Freedom

BYLINE: By REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING AMERICAS; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 116 words


The government offered cash and reduced jail terms to leftist guerrillas in
exchange for releasing the politician Ingrid Betancourt after years of captivity
in jungle camps. Ms. Betancourt, left,  46, was kidnapped during her 2002
presidential campaign by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC,
and is suffering from malnutrition and hepatitis B, according to Colombia's
human rights ombudsman. President Alvaro Uribe said his government would
maintain a $100 million fund to pay rewards to guerrillas who free any of the
hundreds of kidnapping victims held by the FARC. On Thursday he signed a decree
allowing for a mass release of guerrillas from jail if Ms. Betancourt was freed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); HOSTAGE
TAKING (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (88%); MALNUTRITION (55%);
HEPATITIS (54%); HEPATITIS B (54%)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%)

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (75%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (95%)

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1421 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Colorado Petition Draws Charges of Deception

BYLINE: By DAN FROSCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 840 words

DATELINE: DENVER


Freddie Whitney was walking out of a King Soopers supermarket here this winter
when she was approached by three young men.

They politely asked if she was against discrimination and, if so, if she would
sign a petition that would legally end the practice in the state. After scanning
it briefly, Ms. Whitney, a 78-year-old African-American, signed it.

A few weeks later, Ms. Whitney says,  she was shocked to learn from a local
newspaper that she had unwittingly lent her support to a ballot measure called
the Colorado Civil Rights Initiative that seeks to eliminate state programs that
give preferential treatment to minorities and women.

The proposal is part of a larger effort organized by the conservative advocate
Ward Connerly, whose group, the American Civil Rights Coalition, is seeking to
disassemble affirmative action in five states this year: Arizona, Colorado,
Missouri, Nebraska and Oklahoma.

''My reaction was, 'Oh, my God, what have I done?' '' Ms. Whitney said. ''I have
children and grandchildren who have benefited from affirmative action.''

Several dozen Coloradans, some of them members of minorities, say they were
deceived into signing the petitions under the guise of ending discrimination,
and have complained to Colorado Unity, a coalition of civil rights groups that
is fighting Mr. Connerly's efforts.

Mr. Connerly, a former regent of the University of California, maintains that it
is entirely accurate to present the measure as ''ending discrimination,'' and
that the public has not been misled.

''It is not fraudulent when a person says they believe an initiative will
achieve certain results and the opponents happen to disagree,'' Mr. Connerly
said. ''Affirmative action is an amorphous term. It means different things to
different people.''

Mr. Connerly, who is black, pointed out that the language of the ballot measure,
which seeks to prohibit the state ''from discriminating against or granting
preferential treatment to any individual or group on the basis of race, sex,
color, ethnicity, or national origin,'' was approved by the state title board
and upheld by the State Supreme Court last September.

Mr. Connerly's supporters have gathered 128,044 signatures in Colorado, more
than the 76,000 needed for certification on the state's ballot in November. But
Bill Vandenberg, a co-chairman of Colorado Unity, said his group had fielded
complaints over how the signatures were collected and was considering taking Mr.
Connerly to court and filing a legal challenge with Colorado's secretary of
state, Mike Coffman.

Although Mr. Coffman's office has deemed the number of valid signatures
sufficient, it has also referred three complaints of deceitful soliciting to an
administrative law judge, said Richard Coolidge, a spokesman for the secretary
of state.

Mr. Vandenberg said Mr. Connerly's supporters had sought signatures specifically
from members of minorities, canvassing at Denver's Martin Luther King Day march
and along light-rail routes after Senator Barack Obama spoke at the University
of Denver in January.

''People were told that this would end discrimination, in some cases that it
would actually support affirmative action,'' Mr. Vandenberg said. ''If this is
how Ward Connerly and his supporters go about getting initiatives on the ballot,
what does it say about their integrity?''

This is not the first time that Mr. Connerly, who has successfully assisted on
similar proposals in California, Washington and Michigan, has been accused of
deception. In 2006 in Michigan, a federal judge criticized Mr. Connerly's
supporters as engaging in fraud by telling voters they were signing petitions in
support of affirmative action. But the judge, Arthur J. Tarnow, dismissed a
lawsuit against Mr. Connerly on the ground that his supporters had not violated
the federal Voting Rights Act because they did not discriminate in whom they
singled out for signatures.

If the Colorado measure is approved by voters in November, it will  prohibit the
state from granting preferential treatment to minorities and women in
employment, contracts and education.

The University of Colorado system, which includes 17 percent minority students,
says it has already begun reviewing more than 100 scholarships it offers to
minorities and women to decide how it will proceed if the measures passes.

For Dara Burwell, 25, one of dozens of people who contacted Colorado Unity after
signing the petition, the realization that she had inadvertently lent her
support to the measure was ''horrifying,'' she said.

Ms. Burwell, who is black and has actively supported affirmative action programs
in the past, said she had been  approached on the steps of a downtown library by
a young black man who spoke of justice for minorities. Ms. Burwell said she had
signed the petition thinking it was ''a standard nondiscrimination clause.''

''I'm angry, because this is so deceptive,'' she said. ''I've contributed to get
a measure on the ballot that stands for everything I don't believe in.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Freddie Whitney, above, signed what she was told was an
antidiscrimination petition in this Denver parking lot. Sponsored by Ward
Connerly, the measure seeks to end affirmative action in Colorado.(PHOTOGRAPH BY
KEVIN MALONEY FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 (PHOTOGRAPH BY JIM WILSON/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PETITIONS (92%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (91%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); REFERENDUMS (89%); BALLOTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (77%); LITIGATION (77%); RACE & RACISM
(77%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); AGENCY ADJUDICATION
(72%); ETHNICITY (72%); APPROVALS (70%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (70%); GRANDCHILDREN
(67%); SUPREME COURTS (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); JUDGES (60%);
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (54%)

PERSON: MIKE COFFMAN (55%)

CITY: DENVER, CO, USA (92%)

STATE: COLORADO, USA (95%); NEBRASKA, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA,
USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1425 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 3, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Memo Sheds New Light on Torture Issue

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON and SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 1031 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


A newly disclosed Justice Department legal memorandum, written in March 2003 and
authorizing the military's use of extremely harsh interrogation techniques,
offers what could be a revealing clue in an unsolved mystery: What
responsibility did top Pentagon and Bush administration officials have for
abuses committed by American troops at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq and in
Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; and elsewhere?

Some legal experts and advocates said Wednesday that the document, written the
month that the United States invaded Iraq, adds to evidence that the abuse of
prisoners in military custody may have involved signals from higher officials
and not just irresponsible actions by low-level personnel.

The opinion  was written by John C. Yoo of the Office of Legal Counsel, the
executive branch's highest authority on the interpretation of the law. It told
the Pentagon's senior leadership that inflicting pain  would not be considered
torture unless it caused ''death, organ failure or permanent damage,'' and it is
the most fully developed legal justification that has yet come to light for
inflicting physical and mental pressure on suspects.

While resembling an August 2002 memorandum drafted largely by Mr. Yoo, the March
2003 opinion went further, arguing more explicitly that the president's war
powers could trump the law against torture, which it said could not
constitutionally be enforced if it interfered with the commander in chief's
orders.

Scott L. Silliman, head of the Center on Law, Ethics and National Security at
Duke University and a former Air Force lawyer, said he did not believe that the
2003 memorandum  directly caused mistreatment. But Mr. Silliman added, ''The
memo helped to build a culture that, in the absence of leadership from the
highest ranks of the Pentagon, allowed the abuses at Abu Ghraib and elsewhere.''

Because opinions issued by the Office of Legal Counsel are ''binding on the
Defense Department,'' Mr. Silliman said, Mr. Yoo's opinion effectively sidelined
military lawyers who strongly opposed harsh interrogation methods.

In an e-mail message, Mr. Yoo, now a law professor at the University of
California, Berkeley,  rejected the idea that his memorandum helped create a
culture for mistreatment.

''The 'culture of abuse' theory has no reliable evidence to support it,'' Mr.
Yoo wrote. He noted that several military investigations had  found that what he
called ''the appalling abuses'' at Abu Ghraib were not authorized by any
military policy.

''While each case of abuse is regrettable,'' Mr. Yoo wrote, ''it is not possible
for a large organization charged with protecting the national security, under
extraordinary pressure, to perform its mission error-free.''

Top Pentagon officials including Donald H. Rumsfeld, the former defense
secretary, have said they never condoned  mistreatment of prisoners. But the
role played by senior military and civilian officials at the Pentagon has never
been fully explained, and it is not clear how the legal memorandum, which was
addressed to William Haynes, then the top Pentagon lawyer, influenced
interrogations.

Several Democratic lawmakers asserted on Wednesday that the memorandum led
directly to the abuses of detainees at Abu Ghraib, although the document
specifies that it applies only to ''unlawful combatants,'' a label that would
not apply to the largely Iraqi population captured during the Iraq war.

The memorandum did apply to all unlawful combatants detained outside the United
States, at a time when the Pentagon was struggling with the rules for
interrogations of detainees  at Guantanamo Bay and in other places, like
Afghanistan.

William C. Banks, a specialist on national security law at Syracuse University,
said that  the memorandum shed critical light on the Bush administration but
that it was ''far fetched'' to think it might be used to overturn convictions of
soldiers for abuse at Abu Ghraib or elsewhere.

The document was made public on Tuesday after it was declassified in response to
a request by the American Civil Liberties Union under the Freedom of Information
Act.

Both the August 2002 and March 2003 memorandums were formally withdrawn by the
Justice Department in 2004, after Mr. Yoo's successors at the Office of Legal
Counsel concluded that they  went too far.

Jonathan Hafetz, a lawyer representing Ali al-Marri, a Qatar citizen arrested in
the United States after the Sept. 11 attacks, said he believed that the March
2003 opinion  explained why his client was removed from the criminal justice
system and placed in a military jail in Charleston, S.C., in June 2003.

''I think they moved him to the military system to be able to use the harsh
techniques blessed in the Yoo memo,'' said Mr. Hafetz, of the Brennan Center for
Justice.

Mr. Marri said he was subjected to cold, shackled in uncomfortable positions,
deprived of sleep and otherwise mistreated.

Congressional Democrats used the 2003 memorandum on Wednesday  to renew their
criticism of the  administration for policies that Senator Patrick J. Leahy of
Vermont, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, said threatened ''our country's
status as a beacon of human rights.''

Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said the memorandum showed
that the administration ''adopted arguments that could be used by other nations
to try to justify the torture of American troops.''

Both senators  called for the release of other Justice Department opinions on
interrogation. At least two major ones written in May 2005 by Steven G.
Bradbury, the acting head of the Office of Legal Counsel, to justify harsh
methods remain secret.

David B. Rivkin, a former White House and Justice Department lawyer in the
Reagan and first Bush administrations, said that the wording of the 2003 opinion
might be ''overly broad,'' but that legal advisers like Mr. Yoo set out only
what might be done legally, not what should be done.

''In a post-Sept. 11 environment, the lawyers tried to give decision makers
broad legal flexibility,'' Mr. Rivkin said. ''I don't want to substitute my
judgment for John Yoo's as I sit in a comfortable office on a spring day in
2008.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); ETHICS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); PRISONS (76%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (73%); AIR FORCES
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE OFFICE OF LEGAL COUNSEL (56%); DUKE
UNIVERSITY (54%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1426 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 4, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Groups to Help Defend Detainees at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON and NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


The American Civil Liberties Union and one of the country's leading lawyers'
groups, the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers, said Thursday that
they had assembled experienced teams of lawyers to defend some of the most
notorious detainees at Guantanamo, including Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, who has
said he was the chief planner of the Sept. 11 attacks.

The joint statement by the two groups said they were preparing an $8 million
program to oppose vigorously the government's prosecutions of at least seven of
the detainees who were once held in secret Central Intelligence Agency prisons.

Those detainees, five of whom have  been charged with participation in the Sept.
11 attacks, include men who were held in harsh conditions and subjected to
aggressive interrogation techniques like waterboarding. The groups portrayed
their effort as part of an American tradition of providing vigorous
representation to unpopular defendants.

The groups said the Pentagon had not provided adequate financing to military
defense lawyers who are to be assigned to represent all detainees charged with
war crimes in a process that the groups said permitted  convictions based on
''secret evidence, hearsay  and confessions derived from torture.''

They also made clear that the lawyers provided by the groups were expecting to
use the detainees' cases to expose what they see as flaws in the Bush
administration's war-crimes system. ''Our involvement cannot cure the
fundamental flaws of this process,'' said Anthony D. Romero, executive director
of the A.C.L.U.

''We are stepping into the ring to make the proceedings as fair as possible
because we believe strongly in defending fundamental American values and
challenging the government's attempts to stack the deck in its favor.''

A Pentagon spokesman for the Office of Military Commissions, Maj. Bobby Don
Gifford, said the military had ''gone to great lengths to provide a system that
is full, fair and just'' and had exercised all possible efforts to provide the
resources necessary so that defense lawyers could adequately represent the
detainees.

The chief military defense lawyer for the Guantanamo cases, Col. Steven David,
said he knew few details of the groups' proposal but welcomed it. ''It is a huge
development in terms of the resources that might be available to the accused,''
Colonel David said. A detainee would have the right to accept or reject a
lawyer. None of the men the groups are offering to represent has been arraigned
at the war-crimes tribunal in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The groups said they had the resources to provide financing for the project,
which is to involve paying experienced criminal defense lawyers and death
penalty experts. But they said they were seeking foundation grants and other
sources of financing.

Many Guantanamo detainees have long been represented by volunteer American
lawyers in civil cases contesting their imprisonment, and several detainees who
are facing war-crimes charges also have civilian lawyers who have worked with
military defense lawyers.

In some cases there has been friction between the civilian and the military
lawyers. One lawyer who is involved in the military defense effort said Thursday
that there could be tensions over the extent to which legal efforts focus on
defending individual detainees and how much they focus on challenging the entire
military commission system.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); EVIDENCE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
JAIL SENTENCING (78%); MEN (78%); HEARSAY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); PRISONS (77%); TORTURE (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); FOUNDATIONS (71%); EXECUTIVES (71%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%); NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
CRIMINAL DEFENSE LAWYERS (84%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (88%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1440 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Emancipation Didn't Stop After All

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section E; Column 0; The Arts/Cultural Desk; BOOKS OF THE TIMES; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 945 words


SLAVERY BY ANOTHER NAME

The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans From the Civil War to World War II

By Douglas A. Blackmon

Illustrated. 468 pages. Doubleday. $29.95.

In ''Slavery by Another Name'' Douglas A. Blackmon eviscerates one of our
schoolchildren's most basic assumptions: that slavery in America ended with the
Civil War. Mr. Blackmon unearths shocking evidence that the practice persisted
well into the 20th century. And he is not simply referring to the virtual
bondage of black sharecroppers unable to extricate themselves economically from
farming.

He describes free men and women forced into industrial servitude, bound by
chains, faced with subhuman living conditions and subject to physical torture.
That plight was horrific. But until 1951, it was not outside the law.

All it took was anything remotely resembling a crime. Bastardy, gambling,
changing employers without permission, false pretense, ''selling cotton after
sunset'': these were all grounds for arrest in rural Alabama by 1890. And as Mr.
Blackmon explains in describing incident after incident, an arrest could mean a
steep fine. If the accused could not pay this debt, he or she might be
imprisoned.

Alabama was among the Southern states that profitably leased convicts to private
businesses. As the book illustrates, arrest rates and the labor needs of local
businesses could conveniently be made to dovetail.

For the coal, lumber, turpentine, brick, steel and other interests described
here, a steady stream of workers amounted to a cheap source of fuel. And the
welfare of such workers was not the companies' concern. So in the case of John
Clarke, convicted of ''gaming'' on April 11, 1903, a 10-day stint in the
Sloss-Sheffield mine in Coalburg, Ala., could erase his fine. But it would take
an additional 104 days for him to pay fees to the sheriff, county clerk and
witnesses who appeared at his trial.

In any case, Mr. Clarke survived for only one month and three days in this
captivity. The cause of his death was said to be falling rock. At least another
2,500 men were incarcerated in Alabama labor camps at that time.

This is a very tough story to tell, and not just because of its extremely
graphic details. Mr. Blackmon, who was reared in the Mississippi Delta and is
now the Atlanta bureau chief of The Wall Street Journal, must set forth a huge
chunk of history. He writes of how the emancipation of slaves left Southern
plantations ''not just financially but intellectually bereft'' because the
slaves' knowledge and experience could be indispensable; how the rise of
industry reshaped the South; how a new generation of African-Americans who had
not known slavery found themselves threatened by it; how slavery intersected
with efforts to unionize labor; and even how, once blacks lost their voting
rights but still had clout at the Republican convention, they were strategically
important to President Theodore Roosevelt's 1904 election campaign.

The roles of elected officials in acknowledging and stopping this new slavery
are a crucial part of Mr. Blackmon's story. Needless to say, it is complicated.
The book describes the 1903 investigation authorized by the Justice Department,
the trial of accused slave traders and the aggressive stance taken by Warren S.
Reese Jr., the United States attorney in Alabama, in prosecuting his case.

''As allegations of slavery in his jurisdiction multiplied, Reese demonstrated a
prehensile comprehension of the murky legal framework governing black labor,''
Mr. Blackmon writes, ''and a hard-nosed unwillingness to ignore the implications
of the extraordinary evidence that soon poured into his office.''

The resulting trial is among this book's many zealously researched episodes.
(Mr. Blackmon's sources range from corporate records to one ''Sheriff's Feeding
Account, 1899-1907.'') Its outcome was promising, but there were loopholes. As
one sign of this story's complexity, consider that the traders were tried on
charges of peonage.

Those charges turned out not to be applicable in Alabama. And in another such
case, lawyers would argue that the charge should instead be involuntary
servitude.  Reformers were dealing with ''a constitutional limbo in which
slavery as a legal concept was prohibited by the Constitution, but no statute
made an act of enslavement explicitly illegal.''

Mr. Blackmon's way of organizing this material is to bookend his legal and
historical chronicle with the personal story of Green Cottenham, a black man
born free in the mid-1880s. This gets ''Slavery by Another Name'' off to a shaky
start, if only because many of Mr. Blackmon's wordings are speculative. The book
underscores that if black Americans' enslavement to U.S. Steel (which, when it
acquired the Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad Company, became a prime offender)
is analogous to the slavery that occurred in Nazi Germany, it also emphasizes
that the American slaves' illiteracy meant there would be no written records of
their experience. So imagining Mr. Green's experience becomes something of a
stretch.

But as soon as it gets to more verifiable material, ''Slavery by Another Name''
becomes relentless and fascinating. It exposes what has been a mostly unexplored
aspect of American history (though there have been dissertations and a few books
from academic presses). It creates a broad racial, economic, cultural and
political backdrop for events that have haunted Mr. Blackmon and will now haunt
us all. And it need not exaggerate the hellish details of intense racial strife.

The torment that Mr. Blackmon catalogs is, if anything, understated here. But it
loudly and stunningly speaks for itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Slavery by Another Name (Book)>; Slavery by Another Name (Book)>

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Carl Weiss's 1898 photo of a chain gang in Thomasville, Ga.
(PHOTOGRAPH BY LIBRARY OF CONGRESS/DOUBLEDAY) (pg. E9)
Douglas A. Blackmon (PHOTOGRAPH BY MICHAEL A. SCHWARTZ)(pg. E9)
 John L. Spivak's 1932 photo of a prisoner punished in Georgia. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
HARRY RANSOM HUMANITIES RESEARCH CENTER/DOUBLEDAY) (pg. E9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); BOOK REVIEWS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); WORLD WAR II
(78%); WITNESSES (76%); CHILDREN (72%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (70%); SPECIAL
LIBRARIES (69%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (69%); LIVING CONDITIONS (69%); TORTURE
(69%); LABOR UNIONS (58%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (50%)

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (51%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBRARY OF CONGRESS (59%)

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (94%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); SOUTHEAST USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1441 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

INSIDE THE TIMES

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2246 words


INTERNATIONAL

FIGHTING IN BAGHDAD ENCLAVE

Is Said to Kill Dozen Iraqis

Fighting in the Shiite enclave of Sadr City in eastern Baghdad killed at least a
dozen Iraqis, and United States military officials said that three American
soldiers had died in Iraq in bomb attacks. The fighting may have been intended
to gain greater control of sites that have been used to launch deadly and highly
embarrassing volleys of rockets into American and Iraqi government complexes in
the Green Zone in central Baghdad.   PAGE A10

QAEDA COMMANDER BELIEVED DEAD

A paramilitary commander for Al Qaeda, who American intelligence officials say
was involved in the 2005 bombing of London's transit system and a foiled plot in
2006 to blow up commercial airliners flying over the Atlantic Ocean, is believed
to have died last December of hepatitis in the tribal areas of Pakistan.   PAGE
A8

MONKS DISRUPT MEDIA TOUR

Buddhist monks interrupted a government-managed news media tour of a monastery
in western China by waving a Tibetan flag and protesting that the authorities
were depriving them of their human rights, the second such disruption of
government efforts to control tours of Tibetan areas for foreign journalists.
PAGE A11

HAMAS BUILDUP DESCRIBED

Hamas is engaged in the broadest and most significant military buildup in its
history with help from Syria and Iran, according to a study by a research group
with ties to the Israeli military. The buildup will take years to complete, the
study says, but has already led to better infiltration into Israel and a rise in
the breadth and precision of rocket fire.   PAGE A12

TRYING TO AVERT VIOLENCE

The Southern African Development Community, a regional bloc of 14 nations,
called southern Africa's heads of state to a weekend meeting after Zimbabwe's
political opposition warned that the country's electoral standoff could turn
increasingly violent without intervention.   PAGE A8

Leverage for S. Korea Leader  A11

Election Violence in Nepal   A11

NATIONAL

RISE IN TOLL OF SUSPICIOUS DEATHS

That Are Linked to Blood Thinner

The number of suspicious deaths in the United States linked to the blood thinner
heparin during a 14-month period that began in January 2007 has risen to 62 from
19. The F.D.A. is investigating whether the deaths were caused by a contaminant
made in China that was added to the drug somewhere in the manufacturing process.
PAGE A13

A THIRST FOR TEXAS

Texas is reckoned to have 8,438 populated places, and Bob Phillips just may have
been in every one of them. Mr. Phillips has been on the back and front roads of
the state for 35 years, producing half-hour television programs broadcast weekly
within the state and then beamed via satellite to parts unknown. And the
thinking is that the appetite for tales of Texas is strong enough for Mr.
Phillips to go national.  PAGE A24

EDWARDSES NOT ENDORSING SOON

Though both remaining Democratic candidates have been courting them, Elizabeth
Edwards said that neither she nor her husband, John Edwards, would endorse one
anytime soon. She also called endorsements ''overrated,'' including any Mr.
Edwards might issue. Citing Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico's endorsement of
Senator Barack Obama, she said, ''was there really a change anywhere?''   PAGE
A17

DEATH SENTENCE OVERTURNED

The Ohio Supreme Court overturned the death sentence of a man convicted of
murder after concluding that he was mentally retarded. A lower court had ruled
that the man was not retarded based partly on the testimony of his former
girlfriend, whose mother was the victim. Psychologists who testified disagreed.
PAGE A21

BUSINESS

CONGRESS AND WHITE HOUSE

Clash Over Helping Homeowners

As legislation aimed at stabilizing the battered housing market advanced on both
sides of the Capitol, Congress and the Bush administration clashed over how best
to help more than a million homeowners in danger of foreclosure but seemed to
unite around the need for additional government action. Some conservative
Republicans argued that the government would only make things worse by bailing
out greedy lenders and irresponsible home buyers.  PAGE C1

MAPPING A WAY OUT OF TRAFFIC

Microsoft will introduce an improved nationwide Web-based driving directions
service intended to avoid traffic jams. The new service, an ambitious attempt to
apply machine learning techniques to the problem of traffic congestion by
predicting traffic movement, is a crucial element in Microsoft's strategy to try
to catch up to Google, the dominant search engine.  PAGE C3

DECIDING WHETHER TO DO IT YOURSELF

With more consumers owning high-definition TVs, calibration becomes more
important than with the old cathode-ray tube TV. One of the easiest ways to do
it is to ask the electronics store to adjust it for you. It may also be one of
the most expensive options. That's why other people turn to software. PAGE C6

New Chief for Japan's Central Bank C2

Mexico Proposes New Oil Legislation C2

Metro

PLEDGE TO REVIEW COUNCIL SPENDING

City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr. increased the pressure on the City
Council speaker, Christine C. Quinn, one of his potential rivals in the 2009
mayoral contest, informing her that he would impose more control over the
Council's discretionary spending in the wake of disclosures that it appropriated
millions of dollars to phantom organizations. Ms. Quinn has struggled to
distance herself from the issue.  PAGE B1

A TRIBUTE TO NORMAN MAILER

The highlights of the memorial for Norman Mailer at Carnegie Hall were the
intimate glimpses presented by his family. Kate Mailer, a daughter, recalled his
exhortation to take risks and face fears. ''It is hard to rebel against your
father when your father is Norman Mailer,'' she said. PAGE B7

DOORS OPEN ON NEW JERSEY RIDERS

Doors on moving New Jersey Transit trains have opened improperly at least five
times in the last two months, far more frequently than on Metro-North or Long
Island Rail Road trains. The incidents have shaken employees and riders alike.
''It's kind of dodgy,'' one commuter said. ''You could easily get thrown out the
door.''  PAGE B1

STYLES

SETTING HEARTS ALL AFLUTTER,

And Tracking the Rate

There exists for each of us a maximum heart rate, and some exercise addicts pay
great attention to what percentage of theirs they attain when working out. And
perhaps you've seen those people at the gym, with their monitors dutifully
strapped on. But, Gina Kolata writes, experts disagree on whether heart-rate
monitoring makes sense.   PAGE G1

OPRAH SWEAT HERE

The overall purpose is to promote Oprah-inspired accessories and housewares. But
for devoted fans, one corner of this store in Chicago is the center: it contains
bona fide castoffs from Ms. Winfrey. Imagine: the chance to walk a mile in her
shoes, literally. Does it matter whether they fit? And what about those underarm
stains?   PAGE G6

CLICKING CAMPUS TO CAMPUS

Maybe it's time to redefine what constitutes personal communication, and get
over that notion of actual human contact being required. Online college fairs,
for example, may not offer the face-to-face experience of traveling to campuses
situated hither and yon, but they sure are more efficient. And what's wrong with
Mom helping out?   PAGE G2

FINDING A FACE-LIFTER

Say you're a plastic surgeon, looking for more tummies to tuck, faces to lift
and breasts to augment, how do you drum up business? People looking for a
surgeon have lots of options; the surgeons themselves have to put their best
face forward. Think marketing budget. A Web site? That's a start. skin  PAGE G3
Corrals for Campfire Babies   G8

Because It Swings   G7

Where That Suit Has Been   G4

OBITUARIES

CLAUS LUTHE, 75

An influential German car designer whose1967 NSU Ro80, with its sloping hood and
tail-to-headlight crease line, was a precursor to many models of recent decades.
Mr. Luthe is credited with refining the work of his predecessor in developing
sleek cars that became status symbols for many baby boomers and greatly improved
profits for BMW.  PAGE B7

DORIS TILLETT, 91

A textile designer who with her husband created hand-printed fabrics for some of
America's most prominent decorators and also helped establish community-run
textile businesses in depressed New York neighborhoods, she was known for her
eclectic, bold designs, which included nautical, shell and floral motifs,
stripes and patterns based on traditional Japanese and Mexican handicrafts.
PAGE B7

SPORTS

PROTESTS A PREDICTABLE RESULT

Of a Choice for Olympic Host

Protests along the path of the Olympic torch have been building ever since 2001,
George Vecsey writes, when Beijing was chosen as the host for the 2008 Summer
Games. And the International Olympic Committee should have known, he adds, that
''the furies would pursue China in countries where furies are allowed to
demonstrate in the street.''   PAGE D1

CHASING HISTORY

As Tiger Woods begins his Masters pursuit for 2008, there are some opponents who
don't show up on the pairing sheets. Robert T. Jones Jr. is one of them, a
fellow named Jack W. Nicklaus, above, is another. So it goes when you announce
your plans to make history.  PAGE D1

TIGERS OFF TO FAST STOP

After the Detroit Tigers obtained Miguel Cabrera and Dontrelle Willis in one
trade and also picked up Edgar Renteria, there were high hopes for the team, and
primarily for its offense. The message to a prime division rival seemed to say,
Look out, Cleveland. But right now, Kenny Rogers said, ''we're the worst team in
baseball.'' But perhaps they turned a corner Wednesday night, winning, 7-2, and
vaulting to 1-7.  PAGE D5

ARTS

A CHINESE ART RECORD

The prices of Chinese contemporary artists have been soaring over the last few
years, and a 1995 painting sold for just over $6 million, the highest price ever
paid for a painting by a Chinese contemporary artist, in one of three Sotheby's
auctions in Hong Kong. In all, $51.77 million worth of art was sold.   PAGE E1

OUT OF THE 'RING' LOOP

Previous subscribers to Wagner's ''Ring'' cycle at the Metropolitan Opera won't
get first crack at tickets for the next round of the four operas, with
preferences instead going to subscribers to the regular Met season and to
patrons. Some Ringnuts (as they don't seem to mind being called) see that as
catering to the big spenders at the expense of true common-volk fans.   PAGE E2

SLAVERY'S OTHER NAME

''Slavery by Another Name'' rebuts the notion that the Civil War ended slavery
in the United States. The author, Douglas A. Blackmon, presents evidence of a
type of servitude in a book that, Janet Maslin writes in her review, ''becomes
relentless and fascinating'' when it dispenses with speculation and gets to its
verifiable material.   PAGE E1

CALL TO RELOCATE ARTS CENTER

An official's proposal to move the performing arts center planned for the former
World Trade Center site and instead build it atop a subway station planned at
Fulton Street and Broadway would, amount to yet another significant change in
the original master plan for ground zero and could signal another power struggle
between the city and the state.   PAGE E1

'Candide' Returns  E3

Pop Artist Meets Pointillist   E5

HOUSE & HOME

WHEN ONE PERSON'S TRASH

Is Another Person's Kitchen

Recyclers like Steve Feldman are persuading wealthy homeowners to donate to the
charity that he founded the Sub-Zero refrigerators and Bosch dishwashers they
would otherwise discard when customizing a new home. Mr. Feldman dismantles the
kitchens, provides donors with paperwork for a charitable tax deduction and
resells the appliances at a small fraction of the original price.  PAGE F6

HAVE YOU TRIED DUMPSTER DIVING?

The vintage cabinets were free on Craigslist. The Elfa storage system baskets
and carts were picked off the street. And the acoustical foam insulation for the
home music studio was found in a trash bin. The first in a new, occasional
series, ''On the Cheap,'' profiles a stay-at-home mom who, if there were an
Academy Award for renovating cheap and green, would probably go home with the
prize.  PAGE F8

EDITORIAL

THE WORLD FOOD CRISIS

Food prices are rising to levels not seen in a generation, sparking unrest from
Haiti to Egypt. High energy costs and a growing middle class in China and India
are driving up prices, but the rich world is making the problem worse by
subsidizing the production of biofuels.  PAGE A26

GOING SOFT ON CORPORATE CRIME

Federal prosecutors have been regularly offering settlements to companies for
wrongdoing that, in previous administrations, would most likely have led to
criminal charges. It is another disturbing example of how this administration
has taken the justice out of the Justice Department.  PAGE A26

QUALITY CARE AT BARGAIN PRICES

Reducing the high cost of medical care will require changing longstanding habits
-- no easy feat. But it is good to know that the famed Mayo Clinic in Minnesota
offers outstanding care at bargain prices at least compared with higher-priced,
equally prestigious medical centers elsewhere.  PAGE A26

OP-ED

GAIL COLLINS

The campaign for Scranton: Pinochle, the American dream and Article 300.  PAGE
A27

NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

This week is the 14th anniversary of the Rwandan genocide. We said ''never
again.'' There are concrete steps that President Bush can take if he wants to
end his shameful passivity regarding the slaughter in Darfur.  PAGE A27

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (86%); ANTICOAGULANTS (85%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); TERRORISM (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (76%); RELIGION (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES
(72%); RESEARCH REPORTS (71%); HAMAS (71%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (68%); JOURNALISM (68%);
BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (68%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (60%); HEPATITIS (55%);
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (54%); AIRLINES (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%); HAMAS (82%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

STATE: XIZANG, CHINA (73%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (94%); AFRICA (92%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (92%);
ISRAEL (92%); TIBET (92%); CHINA (79%); NEPAL (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1442 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Roadblocks Delay Tribunals at Guantanamo, Frustrating the Pentagon

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1406 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


When military officials announced war crimes charges against six detainees for
the Sept. 11 attacks two months ago, the move was part of an effort to
accelerate  the Bush administration's sluggish military commission system, which
has yet to hold a single trial.

But the Sept. 11 case immediately hit a snag. Military defense lawyers were in
short supply,  and even now, two months later, not one of the six detainees has
met his military lawyer.

The delay in getting lawyers to those detainees, which largely grew out of a
struggle within the Pentagon over legal resources, is indicative of the
confounding obstacles facing this latest effort to expedite the military
tribunals.

Since fall, when charges had been lodged against just three detainees, military
officials have charged 12 more terrorism suspects. Yet there is a growing
consensus among lawyers inside and outside the military that few of those cases
are likely to actually come to trial before the end of the Bush administration.

''Speed is going to be very, very difficult to accomplish here,'' said Stephen
A. Saltzburg, a military law expert at George Washington University. ''They may
be overconfident that if they just push ahead, all the ducks will end up in a
row. I don't think that's going to happen.''

The road to a trial is difficult in some cases partly because they involve
potential death penalties and claims of torture by interrogators, issues that
raise thorny legal questions that could take months or longer to sort out. But
even comparatively simple cases without capital penalty issues are proceeding
slowly.

In addition, just as the Pentagon is pushing to try cases in part to show the
viability of the tribunal system, some civil liberties groups and defense
lawyers are working to slow the pace, partly to keep the system from gaining
legitimacy by eliciting testimony against terrorism suspects that could inflame
Americans. They say they plan a dizzying array of challenges to try to prevent
any significant number of what they call political trials.

They are particularly focused on the Sept. 11 case, which for more than six
years has been expected to be the centerpiece of the Bush administration's
military commission system.

''The government can be assured that this will not be a quick show trial,'' said
Anthony D. Romero, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union.
''Not if we can help it.''

The A.C.L.U. and the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers announced
a plan last week to provide experienced defense lawyers for some detainees.

The standoff over the military lawyers for the Sept. 11 suspects grew out of a
long-running dispute over legal resources at the Pentagon. The chief military
defense lawyer for Guantanamo, Col. Steven David, said in an interview that he
lacked enough experienced lawyers and other staff members.

Guantanamo military defense lawyers have long said they are not given resources
by the Pentagon to match the investigative capability of the military
prosecution, which draws on the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central
Intelligence Agency and other agencies. Until a handful of new military lawyers
were appointed this week to represent Sept. 11 defendants, the military defense
office was sharply outnumbered, with 15 defense lawyers to battle 31
prosecutors.

But Brig. Gen. Thomas W. Hartmann, an official of the  Office of Military
Commissions at the Pentagon, argued that the defense office was staffed well
enough to have begun to defend the Sept. 11 case the day it was announced.

In a recent interview, General Hartmann, who has been pressing to move more
quickly on the Guantanamo cases, made clear that he was impatient. ''You have to
get the train moving so you can get to a destination,'' he  said. ''And the
train hadn't been moving.''

But even with enough lawyers, Colonel David said, there were countless
impediments to quick trials, including questions about how the tribunals are to
deal with detainees' claims of torture. Lacking precedents and clear rules, he
said, ''there are issues within issues within issues.''

At a news conference here on Wednesday, the deputy chief military prosecutor,
Col. Bruce A. Pagel, said that while the government wanted quick trials, the
pace would largely  be determined by military judges.

''There is just no predicting that,'' Colonel Pagel said. ''There are just too
many variables.''

Each of the 14 cases now pending presents legal tangles. In one, the morass grew
so thick that the judge scheduled pretrial proceedings after the date he had set
for the trial, evidently realizing that there were too many unresolved issues to
rush the case. In another, a detainee refused to leave his cell for an
arraignment and had to be forcibly extracted.

On Wednesday, proceedings were delayed when a detainee complained that the
tribunal translation was flawed. After that was resolved, the detainee, Ahmed
Mohammed Ahmed Haza al Darbi, declared the proceeding political and refused to
participate, adding, ''History will record these trials as a scandal against
you.''

Prosecutors planned this week to arraign two suspects, one who they say was a
Qaeda paymaster and the other, they say, a propaganda chief. But that
rudimentary step is not to go off as they had hoped. The case of the propaganda
chief had to be postponed because his military lawyer had recently left the
defense office, taking that case back to its starting point.

By chance, the alleged paymaster and the alleged propaganda chief were the first
ones identified for war crimes trials by the Pentagon back in 2004. Yet all
Guantanamo cases were derailed in 2006 when the Supreme Court struck down the
Bush administration's first war crimes system.

The first trial of a detainee under the new system is now scheduled for May 28.
But defense lawyers for that defendant, Salim Ahmed Hamdan, who was a driver for
Osama bin Laden, have filed nearly 30 legal motions, raising questions that
included procedural issues and basic challenges to the Guantanamo system itself.

Andrea J. Prasow, one of Mr. Hamdan's lawyers, said her experience in a
comparatively simple Guantanamo case showed the extraordinary complexities that
seem certain to entangle all of the battles here.

It may be possible, Ms. Prasow said, for one or two cases to be tried by the
fall. But, she said, ''I don't see how it is remotely possible for the others to
get under way.''

Some of the defense requests in Mr. Hamdan's case show the kinds of issues that
are tying prosecutors in knots. His lawyers have accused Pentagon officials of
improperly influencing the prosecution by directing that charges be filed for
political reasons and, the lawyers said,  demanding  ''sexy'' cases to attract
public attention. They also claim that Mr. Hamdan is so psychologically damaged
by the conditions under which he has been held that he is incapable of assisting
his lawyers.

The Hamdan defense has worried prosecutors by winning the right to submit
written questions to four detainees who were formerly held in secret C.I.A.
prisons.

The request to question prisoners like Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the
self-proclaimed mastermind of the Sept. 11 attack, brought strong objections
from prosecutors who said it could be a national security threat.

When a military judge allowed very limited written questions, the prosecutors
pleaded with him to reconsider. The judge stuck with his ruling.

But a major battle is expected if, as seems likely, Mr. Hamdan's defense follows
that request with a demand that those former C.I.A. detainees be called to
testify inpublic.

J. Wells Dixon, a lawyer at the Center for Constitutional Rights, said the
charges, which seek the death penalty against the six men charged with the 2001
attack, are so complex that defense teams in those cases will need months, if
not years, to prepare. The center represented one of the six men in a  case
challenging his detention before the war crimes charges were filed.

''There is no possibility,'' Mr. Dixon said, ''that these cases are going to
proceed to trial any time soon.''

General Hartmann said trials in any system could be subject to delays. But he
said he had told military prosecutors and court officials not to get distracted
as problems cropped up.

''My guidance to people,'' he said, ''is 'keep moving' and when the rocks start
to fall on you, you move a little faster.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: The shoes of detainees outside a cell at the Guantanamo Bay
detention center. Military tribunals have yet to begin, though many inmates have
been charged. (PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); TORTURE (78%); TESTIMONY (77%);
INTERVIEWS (64%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (63%); EXECUTIVES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1466 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Brown Urges Global Push To Solve Global Problems

BYLINE: By KATIE ZEZIMA

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


Europe and the United States must increase their efforts to solve global
problems like terrorism, the environment, hunger and poverty, Prime Minister
Gordon Brown of Britain said Friday in a wide-ranging speech at the John F.
Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum here.

''We urgently need to step out of the mind-set of competing interests and
instead find our common interests -- and we must summon up the best instincts
and efforts of humanity in a cooperative effort to build new international rules
and institutions for the new global era,'' Mr. Brown said. He was in Boston the
day after visiting Washington to meet with President Bush and the three major
candidates for the presidency.

Making numerous references to the post-World War II era and to Kennedy's push
for internationalism, Mr. Brown said that the world needed ''a new deal'' much
like the Marshall Plan, and that countries like the United States and Britain
must work to stabilize volatile nations and prevent crimes against humanity and
terrorism.

He praised President Bush for ''leading the world'' in the fight against
terrorism, and reaffirmed his support for a unified response that includes
freezing assets, tightening international law and imposing travel bans,  which
he said he and Mr. Bush discussed Thursday at the White House.

''He and I agree terrorism will ultimately be defeated only when it is isolated
and abandoned,'' the prime minister said. More must be done, however, to
intervene in countries shaken by conflict and to stamp out atrocities, he said.

''Instability in one country will affect stability in all countries; an
injustice anywhere is now a threat to justice everywhere,'' Mr. Brown said.
''And that is how we must respond: not walking away as we did in Rwanda at the
cost of thousands of lives, but by engaging as hard-headed internationalists.''

Mr. Brown continued to call for reform of the United Nations, the World Bank and
the International Monetary Fund, and urged a greater role for China, India,
South Africa and other emerging countries in those organizations and in the
Group of 8, which consists of leading industrialized countries. He also said
that the European Union, the African Union and other groups of countries should
help with humanitarian aid and peacekeeping in troubled nations.

''For the first time in human history, we have the opportunity to come together
around a global covenant, to reframe the international architecture and build
the truly global society,'' he said.

That covenant must include investments in education, disease prevention and the
elimination of food shortages, the prime minister said. He suggested a series of
international conferences next year to discuss how to make his proposals a
reality.

With a nod to Kennedy's creation of the Peace Corps in the 1960s, Mr. Brown
urged the creation of a global peace corps that would train its volunteers to
help rebuild countries.

He continued to call for an international agreement to combat climate change,
and urged the halving of carbon emissions by 2050.

''American leadership will be and is indispensable,'' Mr. Brown said. ''And now
is an opportunity for an historic effort in cooperation: a new dawn in
collaborative action between America and Europe.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (79%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); WAR ON TERROR
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FOOD CRISES & SHORTAGES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); FOOD CHARITIES (78%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (75%); GLOBALIZATION
(73%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%);
POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES
(72%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (67%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (62%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); LIBRARIES (57%);
WORLD WAR II (54%)

ORGANIZATION: MARSHALL PLAN (56%)

PERSON: GORDON BROWN (91%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (91%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); CHINA (79%);
INDIA (79%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1469 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

European Officials Agree on Framework for Outlawing Online Terror Recruiting

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO and STEPHEN CASTLE; Elaine Sciolino reported from
Paris, and Stephen Castle from Brussels.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: PARIS


European Union justice ministers agreed Friday to toughen laws across their
27-nation bloc to punish those who promote violence and recruit people for
terrorist attacks.

Reflecting mounting anxiety that the Internet has become a crucial tool for
would-be terrorists, the agreement will make it a crime to disseminate terrorist
propaganda through the Internet for recruiting, training and bomb-making
purposes.

European Union officials described the agreement as a framework that member
countries would have to incorporate into their own laws.

Countries that already have strong antiterrorism laws, like Spain and Britain,
which have suffered terrorist attacks and give sweeping powers to the police and
investigators in terrorism cases, will not need to make significant changes. But
countries with more lenient rules, like Sweden and Denmark, may need to adopt
new, tougher legislation.

The new rules, aimed at codifying terrorist crimes among countries with very
different histories and experiences with terrorism, underscore a growing
consensus that in the campaign against terrorism, the mere transmission of
information and ideas could be considered a criminal act.

The agreement is intended to help the police find and arrest suspects in
cross-border investigations, but also to prevent radicalization.

''The Internet is used to inspire and mobilize local terrorist networks and
individuals in Europe,'' thus ''functioning as a 'virtual training camp,' '' the
ministers said in their agreement. In a separate move, the ministers agreed on a
plan for tighter controls on the sale of explosives and other bomb-making
materials.

In an interview in Brussels on Tuesday, Gilles de Kerchove, the European Union's
counterterrorism coordinator, acknowledged that the Internet was becoming an
even more dangerous tool for radicalization, and that member states had to
develop a  revolutionary joint strategy to counter its message.

He said that preventing radicalization was one of the major challenges facing
member states, and one of the toughest subjects on which to forge agreement.

''It's a real challenge because most of the policies are in the hands of the
member states,'' Mr. de Kerchove said.

While the European Union as a whole has improved cooperation among its members
in investigations and border control, he called prevention of radicalization an
area ''where we may do better.''

The new initiative ''important because the Internet plays a huge role -- in
incitement, in communication, in providing information on how to mount an
attack,'' he said.

The agreement updates antiterrorism laws passed by the European Union after the
attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The laws were aimed at preventing potential
terrorists from exploiting loopholes in various legal systems across the
continent.

It could make it easier for authorities to shut down Web sites disseminating
terrorist propaganda and bomb-making instructions, and to identify and pursue
proselytizers and recruiters. It could also help courts and administrative
authorities demand that Internet service providers remove information considered
dangerous.

Friso Roscam Abbing, European Commission spokesman on justice and interior
issues, said it was not known how many nations would have to change their laws.
It was now up to member nations to analyze whether  their legislation matches
the goals laid down, he said.

Each member country will decide the severity of prison sentences.

The agreement is likely to face opposition in countries where the preservation
of civil liberties and freedom of expression can outweigh  security concerns.

The ministers defended their initiative as a balanced approach to a widening
problem.

''We have been able to strike a very sensitive balance between two important
goals,'' said Lovro Sturm, justice minister of Slovenia, after the meeting on
Friday. ''We have to make sure that we respect the human rights and fundamental
freedom of the citizens. On the other hand this enables us to lead a more
effective fight against terrorism. This improves the capability of the E.U. to
prevent terrorist offenses.''

In a separate initiative, the ministers agreed to create a European database to
give member governments permanent access to information on incidents and attacks
involving explosive devices. The database, which will be run by Europol, the
European police agency, will monitor the sale of bomb-making materials and
include an early warning system on stolen explosives and other equipment.

Earlier this month, Europol said that the number of arrests connected to
terrorism doubled in the European Union in 2007 compared with the year before.
Most of the attacks carried out within the bloc, it said, were linked to
separatist movements, rather than militant Islam.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); INTERNET
& WWW (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (79%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%);
COMPUTER NETWORKS (72%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (67%); INTERVIEWS (64%);
INTERNET SERVICE PROVIDERS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (93%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (74%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (97%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); NORDIC COUNTRIES
(79%); DENMARK (79%); BELGIUM (74%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1470 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torture Sessions

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 616 words


Ever since Americans learned that American soldiers and intelligence agents were
torturing prisoners, there has been a disturbing question: How high up did the
decision go to ignore United States law, international treaties, the Geneva
Conventions and basic morality?

The answer, we have learned recently, is that -- with President Bush's clear
knowledge and support -- some of the very highest officials in the land not only
approved the abuse of prisoners, but participated in the detailed planning of
harsh interrogations and helped to create a legal structure to shield from
justice those who followed the orders.

We have long known that the Justice Department tortured the law to give its
Orwellian blessing to torturing people, and that Defense Secretary Donald
Rumsfeld approved a list of ways to abuse prisoners. But recent accounts by ABC
News and The Associated Press said that all of the president's top national
security advisers at the time  participated in creating the interrogation
policy: Vice President Dick Cheney; Mr. Rumsfeld; Condoleezza Rice, the national
security adviser;  Colin Powell, the secretary of state;  John Ashcroft, the
attorney general;  and George Tenet, the director of central intelligence.

These officials did not have the time or the foresight to plan for the aftermath
of the invasion of Iraq or the tenacity to complete the hunt for Osama bin
Laden. But they managed to squeeze in dozens of meetings in the White House
Situation Room to organize and give legal cover to prisoner abuse, including
brutal methods that civilized nations consider to be torture.

Mr. Bush told  ABC News this month that he knew of these meetings and approved
of the result.

Those who have followed the story of the administration's policies on prisoners
may not be shocked. We have read the memos from the Justice Department
redefining torture, claiming that Mr. Bush did not have to follow the law, and
offering a blueprint for avoiding criminal liability for abusing prisoners.

The amount of time and energy devoted to this furtive exercise at the very
highest levels of the government reminded us how little Americans know, in fact,
about the ways Mr. Bush and his team undermined, subverted and broke the law in
the name of saving the American way of life.

We have questions to ask, in particular, about the involvement of Ms. Rice, who
has managed to escape blame for the catastrophic decisions made while she was
Mr. Bush's national security adviser, and Mr. Powell, a career Army officer who
should know that torture has little value as an interrogation method and puts
captured Americans at much greater risk. Did they raise objections or warn of
the disastrous effect on America's standing in the world? Did anyone?

Mr. Bush has sidestepped or quashed every attempt to uncover the breadth and
depth of his sordid actions. Congress is likely to endorse a cover-up of the
extent of the illegal wiretapping he authorized after 9/11, and we are still
waiting, with diminishing hopes, for a long-promised report on what the Bush
team really knew before the Iraq invasion about those absent weapons of mass
destruction -- as opposed to  what it proclaimed.

At this point it seems that getting answers will have to wait, at least, for a
new Congress and a new president. Ideally, there would be both truth and
accountability. At the very minimum the public needs the full truth.

Some will call this a backward-looking distraction, but only by fully
understanding what Mr. Bush has done over eight years to distort the rule of law
and violate civil liberties and human rights can Americans ever hope to repair
the damage and ensure it does not happen again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ARMIES (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); APPROVALS (76%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (75%); WIRETAPPING (50%)

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); OSAMA
BIN LADEN (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1476 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Illinois: Ruling On Watch Lists

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; NATIONAL BRIEFING MIDWEST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 134 words


A federal magistrate judge in Chicago has ruled that protecting state secrets is
not a valid argument for the government to refuse to tell American citizens
whether they are on the terrorism watch list, the Terrorist Screening Database.
The ruling, signed on April 16 but made public by the American Civil Liberties
Union of Illinois on Wednesday, ordered the Department of Homeland Security and
the F.B.I. to give the court the files regarding the 10 Muslim or Arab-American
plaintiffs who filed a lawsuit starting in 2005, seeking court protection from
what they contend is unwarranted harassment at the border. The magistrate judge,
Sidney I. Schenkier of Federal District Court, said the court could review the
information to decide whether it should remain classified. The F.B.I. said it
had no comment.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MAGISTRATES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
JUDGES (90%); ARAB AMERICANS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); LITIGATION
(88%); SUITS & CLAIMS (86%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%)

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES
UNION (58%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (57%)

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (73%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1477 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 24, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawyer Scolds Cambodia Tribunal Judges

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 545 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Cambodia's genocide tribunal abruptly adjourned a pretrial hearing for a Khmer
Rouge leader on Wednesday after his lawyer, who is French, erupted at the judges
because thousands of pages of documents had not been translated into French.

The judges later said they would issue a warning to the lawyer, Jacques Verges,
for courtroom conduct that caused the hearing's postponement.

Mr. Verges, 83, who is representing Khieu Samphan, the former Khmer Rouge
president, in his appeal against pretrial detention, has earned notoriety with a
client list that has included the Nazi Gestapo officer Klaus Barbie, the
Venezuelan terrorist Carlos the Jackal and Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav president.

The tribunal has charged Mr. Khieu Samphan with crimes against humanity and war
crimes committed when the Communist Khmer Rouge held power from 1975 to 1979.
About 1.7 million people died from starvation, disease, overwork and execution
as a result of the group's policies in trying to build a classless society.

Mr. Khieu Samphan, 76, has repeatedly denied responsibility for any atrocities.

Mr. Verges stormed out of Wednesday's closed-door hearing, telling reporters
that judges had asked Mr. Khieu Samphan to find a new lawyer.

''French is an official language of the tribunal,'' he told the reporters, in
French. ''There is not one page of the case file against Mr. Khieu Samphan
translated into French.'' He added, ''I should be capable of knowing what my
client is blamed for.''

After Mr. Verges refused to participate further, the judges suggested that Mr.
Khieu Samphan might want to appoint a new lawyer to represent him -- and then
adjourned the hearing.

''I have been a lawyer for 50 years; it is the first time I have seen judges ask
an accused to change his lawyer,'' Mr. Verges said. ''This is a scandal!''

One of the Cambodian prosecutors, Chea Leang, said the court was facing
difficulty translating thousands of pages of documents for all its cases into
the three official languages used by the tribunal, Khmer, English and French.

But she contended that Mr. Verges's refusal to participate in the hearing
because the documents had not been  translated into French was ''unreasonable''
because the proceedings were not part of the actual trial.

Mr. Verges and Mr. Khieu Samphan have said they have known each other since they
both were active in left-wing student activities in Paris in the 1950s.

Mr. Khieu Samphan has been detained by the tribunal since Nov. 19. He is one of
five former senior leaders in custody. The long-delayed tribunal is expected to
hold its first trial this year. Many fear that the Khmer Rouge's aging leaders
could die before being brought to justice.

Mr. Khieu Samphan's lawyers say that he held no real power as the Khmer Rouge's
head of state and that he is not guilty of the crimes with which he is charged.

Mr. Khieu Samphan has blamed the Khmer Rouge chief, Pol Pot, who died in 1998,
for the group's policies.

Expressionless before the court, Mr. Khieu Samphan stood when asked to introduce
himself Wednesday and said he lived a life of poverty after the fall of the
Khmer Rouge.

''I didn't have any job, and after leaving the jungle, I depended on my wife,
who supported the whole family,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (71%); TERRORISM (70%); STARVATION (68%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (58%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); FRANCE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1482 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 27, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Master and Servant

BYLINE: By JOYCE HOR-CHUNG LAU.

Joyce Hor-Chung Lau is an editor in the Hong Kong office of The International
Herald Tribune.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 720 words


WHITE CARGO

The Forgotten History of Britain's White Slaves in America.

By Don Jordan and Michael Walsh.

Illustrated. 320 pp. New York University Press. Paper, $18.95.

Every schoolchild recognizes certain images of this nation's darker side: slaves
kidnapped from their native lands, shipped in disease-ridden holds, traded like
animals, and then whipped and worked on America's plantations.

Don Jordan and Michael Walsh, both of whom have made documentaries and both of
whom live in London, retell that familiar tale -- although the victims here are
not Africans but English, Irish and Scottish people, sent to the colonies
largely against their will in the 17th and 18th centuries.

''White Cargo'' begins with the discovery of a 17th-century skeleton in Maryland
in 2003; it turned out to be that of a boy, about 16 years old, who had suffered
from tuberculosis and injuries consistent with hard labor. Presumably he had
been a slave, since his body had not been properly buried, but thrown into the
basement of a home near Annapolis, ''in a hole under a pile of household
waste.'' He was northern European, probably British, one of tens of thousands of
victims of a century-long practice, stretching from Boston to Barbados, that
treated whites as slaves and that largely predated both the black slave trade
and American independence.

Mainstream histories refer to these laborers as indentured servants, not slaves,
because many agreed to work for a set period of time in exchange for land and
rights. The authors argue, however, that slavery applies to any person who is
bought and sold, chained and abused, whether for a decade or a lifetime. Many
early settlers died long before their indenture ended or found that no court
would back them when their owners failed to deliver on promises. And many never
achieved freedom or the American dream they were seeking.

This vividly written book tells the tale from both sides of the Atlantic. Its
condemnation is aimed at both American planters and the English elite, who were
blinded by greed, arrogance and a desire to get rid of their ''society's
sweepings.'' Horribly, one of the first groups sent to America was made up of
street children, ages 8 to 16, who arrived in 1619. This slave trade, which the
authors say was often ''dressed up in bright humanitarian clothes'' for the
public, later extended to beggars, Gypsies, prostitutes, dissidents, convicts
and anyone else who displeased the upper classes. Founders like George
Washington do not fare particularly well, but Sir John Popham and Oliver
Cromwell come off worse. Benjamin Franklin is one of the few good guys.

''White Cargo'' is meticulously sourced and footnoted -- which is wise, given
its contentious material -- but it is never dry or academic. Quotations from
17th- and 18th-century letters, diaries and newspapers lend authenticity as well
as color. Excerpts from wills, stating how white servants should be passed down
along with livestock and furniture, say more than any textbook explanation
could. The authors are not only historians, but also natural storytellers with a
fine sense of drama and character.

Despite the heaviness of the subject matter, their playful way with words and
love of literary allusion come through. There are kidnapping victims of the kind
written about in Daniel Defoe's ''Colonel Jack,'' and a tumultuous ocean voyage
that may have inspired Shakespeare's writing of ''The Tempest.''

What little discussion there is about this forgotten bit of American history is
sometimes linked to those with ulterior political motives, usually interested in
delegitimizing current-day discourse about race or the teaching of black
history. ''White Cargo,'' which was first published in Britain last year, has a
refreshing sense of distance and neutrality. The authors take care to quote
African-American sources and clearly state that they have no wish to play down
the horrors of the much larger black slave trade that followed.

If anything, Jordan and Walsh offer an explanation of how the structures of
slavery -- black or white -- were entwined in the roots of American society.
They refrain from drawing links to today, except to remind readers that there
are probably tens of millions of Americans who are descended from white slaves
without even knowing it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: White Cargo (Book)>; White Cargo (Book)>

GRAPHIC: DRAWING: John Popham sent convicts to America. (PAINTING FROM NATIONAL
PORTRAIT GALLERY, LONDON)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); SLAVERY (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%);
TUBERCULOSIS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%);
WRITERS (69%); CHILDREN (66%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY (59%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); ANNAPOLIS, MD, USA (56%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%); MARYLAND USA (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); BARBADOS (79%); SCOTLAND
(73%); NORTHERN EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1505 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 9, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In a Changing World, an Ever-Evolving Terrorism

BYLINE: By EDWARD ROTHSTEIN

SECTION: Section E; Column 0; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; BOOKS OF THE
TIMES; Pg. 38

LENGTH: 1427 words


TERROR AND CONSENT

The Wars for the Twenty-First Century

By Philip Bobbitt

672 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $35.

When the Barbary pirates were in their prime, they were paid homage and
protection money by every major shipping nation. In the 17th and 18th centuries
these northern African corsairs, many of whom traced their ancestry to the
Muslims expelled from Spain, seized privately owned ships, demanding ransom,
selling captives into slavery and compelling conversions to Islam.

By 1794, after the pirates decided that the United States was worthy of
attention, they had captured 11 American ships and held 119 hostages. As
president, John Adams authorized the payment of tribute; by 1800, $2 million had
been paid.  When Thomas Jefferson succeeded Adams, he pursued a more successful
course of confrontation.

In current parlance the pirates were terrorists, since they sought to instill
terror in innocent victims to further their own ends. But as Philip Bobbitt
points out in his powerful, dense and brilliant new book, ''Terror and Consent:
The Wars for the Twenty-First Century,'' in the late 18th century they were also
quite different from the terrorists we now know. They resembled the type of
''territorial states'' they preyed upon. Emulating them, the pirates demarcated
their terrain, humiliated their nemeses and copied ''the mercantile, cynical
manners of the era.''

That style of terror, Mr. Bobbitt argues, was far different from the kind
practiced by the 20th-century Irish Republican Army, which in turn was far
different from the tactics of 21st-century Al Qaeda.

But in each case, Mr. Bobbitt suggests, the ambitions and techniques of an era's
terrorist groups reflected the states they were confronting. He does not mean
these to be symmetries like those implied by the assertion that one man's
terrorist is another's freedom fighter. Mr. Bobbitt, who teaches law at the
University of Texas and Columbia University and directs the Center for National
Security at Columbia -- and who has held positions in six United States
administrations -- is too subtle to accept a formulation that has become little
more than a relativist mantra.

Mr. Bobbitt's broad perspective grows out of his 2002 work ''The Shield of
Achilles'' (Knopf), which presents a magisterial theory on how the evolution of
the state -- from the princely states of the Renaissance to the modern
nation-state and beyond -- led to a corresponding change in the nature of
warfare. That survey reached its climax in the ''Long War'' -- what Mr. Bobbitt
calls the two World Wars and the cold war -- in which nations wrestled over
which governing ideology would hold sway, with Fascism and Communism ultimately
defeated by ''parliamentary democracy.''

Now Mr. Bobbitt has focused on the newly forming world he began to explore in
that earlier volume. A fresh interpretation of terrorism, he insists, is
urgently needed.

So different is contemporary terrorism from its ancestors, he suggests, and so
distinct are the kinds of battles that will take place that ''it will take some
time before the nature and composition of these wars are widely understood.''
And wars, he insists, are what they should be called. He writes: ''We will not
win the Wars against Terror if we do not understand the novelty of the problem
we face.''

He argues that misunderstandings of the situation have led to a flawed American
strategy in Iraq, to moral failings in the treatment of prisoners in Abu Ghraib
and Guantanamo and to a risk of militarizing American domestic life. But Mr.
Bobbitt also says that accurate perceptions lay behind the very impulse to call
this struggle a ''war on terror.'' He sees in modern terrorism ''a threat to
mankind that is unprecedented''  and predicts that in facing it, more changes
will come than during the Long War.

Mr. Bobbitt explains that in the 20th century the nation-state obtained its
legitimacy by guaranteeing the well-being of its people, under varied ideologies
like Communism and democracy. The ''terrorists of the nation state,''  as he
calls them, wished to undo that order in the name of ''national liberation.''

Such ''nation state terrorism'' led to the idea that terrorists were essentially
freedom fighters. An alphabet soup of terrorist groups, including the I.R.A. and
P.L.O., defined themselves around such ambitions.

Similar groups still exist, of course, but the ascendancy now is with Al Qaeda
and its ilk. They are not interested in national liberation or mercantile
success. They seek to break down the established order of states and enthrone
another form of authority (overseen by Islamic jihadists). Such groups are
global and decentralized, prepared to ''outsource'' their attacks and readily
trade weaponry and secrets. In all this, Mr. Bobbitt argues, they are warped
images of a new kind of state, of which the United States and the European Union
are prime examples: the ''market state.''

Such a state defines its main ambition not as seeking the well-being of its
people, but as maximizing the opportunities it offers its citizens. The very
notion of globalization developed to explain the market state's range and
impact. And in the new world in which communications networks and market forces
are entangled, the battle is joined.

There are consequences to these new formations. Contemporary terrorist groups,
Mr. Bobbitt shows, are far less concerned with the death of innocents than their
predecessors; they are not seeking to sway public opinion, but to expand their
domain of terror. Weapons of mass destruction become so much more threatening
because traditional ideas of deterrence have less sway -- and this at the very
moment when the global marketplace offers frightening options.

But when facing this new market-state world, we often mistakenly apply the older
nation-state model, which blinds us to both opportunities and dangers. Mr.
Bobbitt traces many of the early errors in Iraq to a misconception that the
confrontation was a traditional battle between nation-states.

Similar misconceptions, he argues, are at the root of the idea that terrorism
could possibly be controlled by police action; in such an approach the need to
anticipate and preclude terrorist action, rather than punish it, is overlooked.
Even the structure of intelligence agencies, Mr. Bobbitt argues, is a relic of
the battles last fought.

''As long as we continue to think in twentieth century, nation state terms,'' he
writes, ''we will not be able to develop doctrines and capabilities''
appropriate for new threats.

In his view those threats strike at the foundation of the modern state, seeking
to affect its policies and structure. They attempt to replace an authority that
derives from the ''consent of the governed'' with a condition of fear and
horror,  transforming a ''state of consent'' into a ''a state of terror.'' That
makes Mr. Bobbitt adamant that the United States demand more of itself,
championing the very rule of law that terrorists seek to overturn. This is an
advocacy that he finds lacking in the conflicting regulations and
extraterritorial prisons the United States established after 9/11.

He acknowledges that the task will not be easy. Once-helpful distinctions become
useless. Police action and military force, disaster relief and strategic
operations, domestic investigations and international espionage: boundaries have
already started to disappear. The Wars on Terror will also require the state to
deal with mass catastrophe whatever its cause; hurricanes will demand the same
humanitarian skills and strategic foresight as an explosion of a dirty bomb.

So Mr. Bobbitt shifts the paradigm for understanding terrorism. The challenges
posed by the conflict become more clear but also more daunting as he illuminates
them. He barely begins to address the more knotty particulars: how to overcome
the lifelong support for terror that so skews Palestinian opinion, or how to
reformulate international laws when international institutions are inadequate
and unreliable. He is also more confident than I am that a shift in the approach
of the United States to the world order will sufficiently inspire international
change. But there is so much to think about in this book that the disagreements
it inspires are part of its value.

There is also a tragic consciousness overshadowing it, evident in the fragments
of poetry Mr. Bobbitt cites throughout. He quotes St. Augustine, calling the
looming task ''mournful work'': ''sustaining relative good in the face of
greater evil.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

TITLE: Terror and Consent (Book)>; Terror and Consent (Book)>

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY MATTHEW FULLER/RANDOM HOUSE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); EXTORTION (90%); MARITIME PIRACY (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); COLD WAR
(78%); RELIGION (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); HOSTAGE TAKING (76%);
VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%);
SLAVERY (71%)

COMPANY: TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY FOX INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (54%)

TICKER: FOX (NASDAQ) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS
(58%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1524 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

O Pioneer!

BYLINE: By RICHARD LINGEMAN.

Richard Lingeman is a senior editor of The Nation. His next book, ''The Nation
Guide to the Nation,'' will be published in January.

SECTION: Section BR; Column 0; Book Review Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 1375 words


IDA: A SWORD AMONG LIONS

Ida B. Wells and the Campaign Against Lynching.

By Paula J. Giddings.

Illustrated. 800 pp. Amistad/HarperCollins Publishers. $35.

If slavery is America's original sin, lynching is its capital crime. The
historical memory dies hard: only last year, three nooses were hung from a
schoolyard tree contested by white and black students in Jena, La.

The wave of mob killings of blacks in the South -- by hanging, burning, shooting
and torture -- started after the end of Reconstruction. These public murders
were carried out with the real purpose of keeping blacks in their place,
economically and socially. The practice was supported by leading citizens and
became a popular public spectacle, a carnival of cruelty that drew excited
crowds.

According to ''Rope and Faggot,'' the 1928 study by the N.A.A.C.P. general
secretary Walter White, between 1882 and 1927 there were 4,951 lynchings in the
United States. About a third of them were aimed at whites, mainly in the West;
92 of the victims were women.

Ida B. Wells-Barnett was one of the first African-Americans to raise an informed
protest against this outrage. Paula Giddings's devoted and scrupulous biography
is not the first study of this pioneering woman, but it is a comprehensive work
that attempts to portray her as part of the progressive movement that emerged
among the black bourgeoisie in post-bellum America. Wells-Barnett dedicated her
life to bringing lynchings to the attention of America and the world.
Determined, outspoken and fearless, an incendiary pamphleteer, she was
politically astute, anticipating the tactics of the civil rights movement.
Giddings, a professor of African-American studies at Smith College and author of
''Where and When I Enter,'' a history of black women activists, brushes in the
historical context of Wells-Barnett's campaign ably, if in occasionally numbing
detail. Excavating scattered letters, fragmented diaries and second-hand
references to her writings for short-lived African-American weeklies, Giddings
aims, she writes, to uncover the achievements of a bold woman whose militancy
and ''dominating style'' sometimes cost her allies in her own day and proper
credit in the eyes of history.

Ida Bell Wells was born to slave parents in 1862 in Holly Springs, Miss. Her
father, a skilled carpenter, and mother, a housekeeper, were struck down by
yellow fever when Ida was 16. Giddings writes of this turning point:
''Throughout the remainder of her life, she struggled to turn the negative
emotions of abandonment into a righteous determination to reform herself and the
society that had forsaken her race.''

A precociously mature, bright and pretty teenager, standing barely five feet,
Wells took charge of the upbringing of her younger siblings with help from
relatives. She got some higher education, became a voracious reader with a love
of Shakespeare and showed a talent for writing. She turned to teaching school to
support her family, eventually moving in 1880 to Memphis. There she siphoned off
some of her energy into journalism, turning out a column for a local
African-American paper that regularly challenged the racist libels of the white
press. Yet she remained very much the Victorian young lady who admired ''noble
true womanhood and perfect ladyship'' and vowed to curb her ''unfeminine''
anger.

Her craving for ''perfect ladyship'' toughened into a demand for respect. Black
women at the time were often demeaned as dusky temptresses, which presumably
explained their illicit sexual attraction to so many white men. Wells lashed out
against the ''wholesale contemptuous defamation of black women'' and the
''refusal to believe there are among us mothers, wives and maidens who have
attained a true, noble and refining womanhood.'' Her determination to be treated
as a lady provoked her first clash with white supremacy, in 1883, when she
violently resisted being ejected from the whites-only ''ladies car.'' She sued
the railroad, but the Tennessee Supreme Court, in a preview of Plessy v.
Ferguson, ruled she was no lady, merely a ''mulatto passenger,'' separable and
unequal, whose intention wasn't to ride comfortably but to ''harrass'' and
litigate.

Wells's anti-lynching crusade hinged on a word ladies did not utter: ''rape.''
Defenders of the Snopesian New South, fearing Northern capitalists would pull
out investments, claimed that lynching was a necessary response to an epidemic
of attacks on white women by ravening black men. Defying Victorian gentility,
Wells debunked this propaganda with evidence that accusations of rape were a
factor in less than one-third of lynchings.

The campaign that became her life's work really started in 1892 with the murders
of her friend Tommie Moss and two others by a Memphis mob. Moss's offense had
nothing to do with rape; he was defending the cooperative grocery of which he
was president against a group of whites he believed were bent on destroying it.
A solid citizen who also worked as a postman, Moss was captured with two others
and jailed. A mob abducted them and put them to a slow, painful death by
gunshots. The Memphis Appeal-Avalanche boasted that the lynching was ''one of
the most orderly of its kind ever conducted.''

Wells, who had since moved to New York, was shocked by Moss's death. It was
''our first lesson in white supremacy,'' she declared. Writing about the affair
in Free Speech, the paper she began editing in 1889, she almost got herself
lynched by daring to suggest that white men who ''overreach'' in charges of rape
might end up being ''very damaging to the moral reputation of their women.''
Infuriated whites trashed her newspaper office and would have killed her had she
not been out of town.

Wells decided to stay in New York, and soon set down in an African-American
paper a long article, ''The Truth About Lynching,'' expanding on her contention
that some white women chose to consort with black men and that black women were
exploited by white men. She called for boycotts and strikes by blacks to protest
lynchings. ''The Winchester rifle,'' she wrote, ''should have a place of honor
in every black home,'' since government refused to protect them. She herself
bought a gun, but investigative journalism was her primary weapon. From a
variety of platforms, she broadcast authoritative facts, statistics and case
histories.

One of her pamphlets was devoted to an 1899 auto-da-fe in Palmetto, Ga., where a
laborer named Sam Hose was accused of killing his employer, raping his wife and
throwing their baby onto the floor. (A private detective hired by Wells showed
that the wife had never in fact accused Hose of rape.) Hose was taken to the
town square, tied to a tree and stripped naked. His ears, fingers and penis were
sliced off, and then he was burned alive. Afterward, bits of charred bone,
slices of liver and even parts of the tree were sold as souvenirs.

The tide of lynchings continued to terrorize Southern blacks well into the 20th
century. Local authorities covered up for the mobs, while the federal government
looked the other way. In the early 1920s the federal anti-lynching legislation
Wells-Barnett had championed died in the Senate.

Meanwhile, Ida had in 1895 married a Chicago lawyer named Ferdinand Barnett, a
feminist who contributed his legal skills to the cause, suing to enforce
Illinois's anti-lynching laws. She settled in Chicago and bore four children,
even as she continued lecture tours and meetings and ran The Conservator, a
black paper her husband owned. Inspired by Jane Addams, she created programs for
young black men and women patterned after those of Hull House. Susan B. Anthony
endorsed her cause, and Wells joined the suffragists. But Anthony and others in
the movement feared alienating their Dixie membership, so Wells concentrated on
organizing black women to get out the vote for race candidates in local
elections. Not long before her death in 1931, she ran unsuccessfully for state
senator.

Ida Wells-Barnett was among the first to grasp that the battle against lynching
was the moral cutting edge of African-Americans' struggle for equality. In
fighting words and brave personal witness, she exposed lynching as a crime
against a people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); SLAVERY (89%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (78%); WRITERS (78%); PROFILES &
BIOGRAPHIES (78%); HISTORY (77%); MURDER (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (76%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES
(76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (76%); CAPITAL CRIMES (72%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (72%); WOMEN (71%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (68%)

COMPANY: HARPERCOLLINS PUBLISHERS INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); NAICS451211 BOOK STORES (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

STATE: MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1526 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 18, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hezbollah's Actions Ignite Sectarian Fuse in Lebanon

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH and NADA BAKRI

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1767 words

DATELINE: MENIEH, Lebanon


For two and a half days, Hussein al-Haj Obaid lay on the floor of a darkened
warehouse in west Beirut, blindfolded and terrified. Militiamen loyal to
Hezbollah had kidnapped him at a checkpoint after killing his nephew right in
front of him.

Throughout those awful days, as his kidnappers kicked and punched him, applied
electrical shocks to his genitals and insulted him with sectarian taunts, he
could hear the chatter of gunfire and the crash of rocket-propelled grenades
outside, where Hezbollah and its allies were taking control of the capital.

He returned to this northern village only after family members won his release
just over a week ago by threatening the kidnappers with retaliation. By that
time Mr. Obaid, a Sunni Muslim, had gained a whole new way of seeing his Shiite
countrymen and his native land.

''We cannot go back to how we lived with them before,'' he said as he sat with
relatives and friends at home here. ''The blood is boiling here. Every boy here,
his blood is boiling. They push us, they push us, they push us.''

Those feelings are being echoed throughout Lebanon. After almost a week of
street battles that left scores dead and threatened to push the country into
open war, long-simmering Sunni-Shiite tensions here have sharply worsened, in an
ominous echo of the civil conflict in Iraq.

Hezbollah's brief takeover of Beirut led to brutal counterattacks in northern
Lebanon, where Sunni Muslims deeply resented the Shiite militant group's display
of power. The violence energized radical Sunni factions, including some
affiliated with Al Qaeda, and extremist Sunni Web sites across the Arab world
have been buzzing with calls for a jihad to avenge the wounded pride of Lebanese
Sunnis.

Although the crisis eased Thursday after Arab diplomats brokered a deal to
restart political talks among the factions, the questions that have crippled the
government for 18 months remain unresolved. It is not yet clear that enough
international consensus exists among the key powers involved in Lebanon -- Iran,
Syria, Saudi Arabia and the United States -- for a durable power-sharing
agreement.

Meanwhile, many Lebanese agree that the hardening of Sunni-Shiite animosities --
reminiscent of the Muslim-Christian fault line during the country's 15-year
civil war -- is likely to make any future conflict here more violent.

''The Sunni-Shiite conflict is in the open now, it's been triggered and
operationalized,'' said Paul Salem, director of the Carnegie Middle East Center
in Beirut. ''This is a deep wound, and it's going to have serious repercussions
if it's not immediately and seriously addressed.''

Lebanese political leaders have tried hard to avoid stirring sectarian
sentiment, emphasizing the religious diversity of both the governing coalition
and the Hezbollah-led opposition movement. In a speech delivered the day before
Hezbollah supporters seized the capital, the group's leader, Hassan Nasrallah,
went out of his way to deny that Sunni-Shiite tensions were an issue.

But after Hezbollah supporters humiliated Lebanon's main Sunni political leader,
Saad Hariri -- crushing his weak militia, forcing his party's television station
off the air and burning two of his movement's buildings -- many of Mr. Hariri's
supporters were enraged, and they said they would look to another Sunni leader
who would help them fight back.

That sentiment has stirred fears that moderate, secular Sunni leaders like Mr.
Hariri could lose ground to more radical figures, including the jihadists who
thrive in Lebanon's teeming Palestinian refugee camps. Fatah al Islam, the
radical group that fought a bloody three-month battle with the Lebanese Army in
a refugee camp in northern Lebanon last year, issued a statement Thursday
condemning Hezbollah's actions. The group also gave a warning: ''He who pushes
our faces in the dirt must be confronted, even if that means sacrificing our
lives and shedding blood.''

A New Kind of Conflict

The Sunni-Shiite conflict is relatively new in Lebanon, where the long civil war
that ended in 1990 revolved mostly around tensions between Christians and
Muslims, and their differences over the Palestinian presence in the country. But
after Iran helped establish Hezbollah in the early 1980s, Lebanon's
long-marginalized Shiites steadily gained power and stature. They have also
grown in numbers. Although there has been no census since 1932, Shiites are
widely believed to be more numerous than Sunnis or Christians, the country's
other major groups.

Tensions began to rise in 2005 after Syrian troops ended their long occupation
of Lebanon, leaving the country's factions to broker a power-sharing agreement.
Hezbollah established a crucial alliance with Michel Aoun, a former general and
one of the country's most powerful Christian leaders, to oppose the
Western-backed government of Prime Minister Fouad Siniora, a Sunni.

In late 2006, sectarian street battles began taking place in mixed Sunni-Shiite
neighborhoods, mostly among young followers of Mr. Hariri's Future Movement and
the Amal Party, a Hezbollah ally. The fighting was prompted by hard feelings
after Hezbollah's withdrawal from the cabinet and its subsequent campaign to
bring down Mr. Siniora, who refused to step down despite the resignation of all
the cabinet's Shiite ministers.

As the conflict grew worse, there were rumors that Mr. Hariri was training a
Sunni militia to counter Hezbollah, and even cultivating links with jihadists.

But when the battle finally broke wide open just over a week ago, a different
reality emerged.

Hezbollah and its allies, angered by government decisions that threatened the
group's communication network, sent their fighters into the streets, blocking
crucial roads and skirmishing with Sunni militia fighters. Mr. Nasrallah had
labeled the government's actions a declaration of war, but it was a war only one
side was prepared for.

A Terrifying Ordeal

Mr. Obaid was one of many Sunni men who drove to Beirut after hearing that
Hezbollah was attacking the offices of his political patron, Mr. Hariri. On
arriving in the city, he stopped at a checkpoint, where militiamen asked him
where he was from.

He barely had time to answer, he said, before the men -- who recognized him as a
Sunni from his northern accent -- opened fire on the car, riddling it with
bullets and killing Mr. Obaid's young nephew, Abdo.

Mr. Obaid got out and tried to run, but the men caught him and took him to a
warehouse, where he endured two and a half days of torture. He took off his
shirt to show a reporter the fresh scars.

''They gave me a hard, hard time, brother,'' said Mr. Obaid, who speaks English
with a strong Australian accent, a legacy of 13 years he spent in that country.

''They did not even ask for my ID card, they just hear my voice,'' Mr. Obaid
said. ''They treated us like animals, like animals.''

Meanwhile, as the street fighting went on in west Beirut on May 8 Mr. Hariri's
Sunni militia had proved to be largely mythical: its fighters were quickly
thrashed. Some were given orders not to fight, so as to avoid a massacre.

The next day, as Hezbollah fighters and their allies were taking control of west
Beirut, one Sunni fighter ran up to a group of young men in the Sunni stronghold
of Tarik Jadideh and told them it was over.

''Hurry up, run away, it is over, there is nothing left,'' the gunman said,
before running off himself. ''They are coming after us, and this time with
shoes, not weapons, to humiliate us even more.''

Before long, a sense of communal victimhood and rage spread. On the way to a
funeral  on May 10 for one of the young Sunni men killed during the battles,
mourners walked in a procession while chanting, ''Shiites are the enemies of
God.''

As the pallbearers approached a store owned by a Shiite man, some mourners
rushed in and urged the man to close it out of respect. He refused, and the
mourners began smashing his windows with rocks and chairs. Enraged, the man got
his AK-47 assault rifle and began firing into the crowd, killing two mourners
and wounding others.

As terrified mourners ran from the scene, the funeral procession turned into a
sectarian riot, with Sunnis angrily destroying every store owned by Shiites in
the neighborhood.

At one point, as the rioters reached an abandoned juice shop, they stopped to
eat kiwis, strawberries and carrots. But one angry mourner turned on them in
rage.

''What are you doing?'' he shouted. ''You can't eat these fruits, they are
forbidden. They were bought with Shiite money.''

Solidifying Hatred

After the extent of Hezbollah's victory dawned on May 9, revenge attacks began
taking place outside the capital. In the mountains east of Beirut, Druse
militiamen kidnapped three Hezbollah members, and the bodies of two of them were
soon found outside a hospital, shot and stabbed. In northern town of Halba, an
angry mob set fire to the offices of a militia allied with Hezbollah and killed
11 of its members.

Much of this violence began along factional lines, with some Sunni opposition
members fighting alongside Shiites in the opposition militias.

But with Christians on both sides sitting out the violence, the battles took on
an increasingly sectarian tone. And when Hezbollah fighters drove up into the
mountains, many of their Druse allies deserted them or even changed sides,
preferring to fight alongside their fellow Druse against the Shiite invaders.

As the violence ebbed, rumors of sectarian massacres began to spread, adding
fuel to the wounded pride of Lebanese Sunnis and posing a new challenge that
Lebanon's weak state is ill prepared to deal with.

''Rumors of these violations are spreading like wildfire and solidifying
communal hatred,'' said Nadim Houry, a researcher on Lebanon and Syria for Human
Rights Watch. ''This will lead to acts of revenge if the state does not act
quickly to hold perpetrators accountable.''

In the meantime, as Lebanon's leaders meet in Qatar for their latest efforts to
hammer out a compromise, Lebanese television stations affiliated with the
opposed political camps are replaying taped segments that underscore a sense of
communal grievance. In one of them, Sahar Khatib, an anchor for the television
station that was forced off the air during the conflict, addresses Hezbollah
supporters in a long, anguished tirade.

''This grudge against us, why?'' Ms. Khatib shouts, staring angrily at the
camera. ''I am someone who believes in God, not sects. Now you have awakened
this sectarianism in me. Look at your victims, victims like me, one after
another.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Hussein al-Haj Obaid, a Sunni, was tortured by Shiites loyal to
Hezbollah in Lebanon. ''The blood is boiling here,'' he said. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
BRYAN DENTON FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) (pg.A1)
 During a funeral procession in a Sunni neighborhood of Beirut on May 10, above,
a clash erupted between Sunni mourners and a Shiite shopowner, who fired into
the crowd. Two people were killed. By Thursday, the crisis had eased, and the
cleanup was under way in Beirut, left. (PHOTOGRAPH BY BRYAN DENTON FOR THE NEW
YORK TIMES) (pg.A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HEZBOLLAH (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%);
DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); TERRORISM (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CIVIL WAR (76%);
AL-QAEDA (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (71%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (65%)

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%)

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (95%)

COUNTRY: LEBANON (95%); IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);
SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1530 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Joe Lieberman, Would-Be Censor

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 555 words


The Internet is simply a means of communication, like the telephone, but that
has not prevented attempts to demonize it -- the latest being the ludicrous
claim that the Internet promotes terrorism.

Senator Joseph Lieberman of Connecticut is trying to pressure YouTube to pull
down videos he does not like, and a recent Senate report and a bill pending in
Congress also raise the specter of censorship. It is important for online speech
to be protected against these assaults.

Mr. Lieberman recently demanded that YouTube take down hundreds of videos
produced by Islamist terrorist organizations or their supporters. YouTube
reviewed the videos to determine whether they violated its guidelines, which
prohibit hate speech and graphic or gratuitous violence. It took down 80 videos,
but left others up. Mr. Lieberman said that was ''not enough,'' and demanded
that more come down.

Earlier this month, the Senate homeland security committee, which is led by Mr.
Lieberman, issued a report titled ''Violent Islamist Extremism, the Internet,
and the Homegrown Terrorist Threat.'' The report identified the Internet as
''one of the primary drivers'' of the terrorist threat to the United States.

All of this comes against the backdrop of a troubling Congressional
antiterrorism bill that also focuses on the Internet. The Violent Radicalization
and Homegrown Terrorism Prevention Act, which passed the House last year by a
404-to-6 vote, would establish a commission to study the terrorist threat and
propose legislation. The bill, which the Senate has not acted on, has a finding
that the Internet promotes radicalization and terrorism.

Although the report by the homeland security committee stopped short of making
recommendations for reining in online speech, it did ask ''what, if any, new
laws'' were needed. The answer is that no new laws are needed -- or justifiable
-- any more than it would be tolerable to enact laws restricting speech over the
telephone, in a newspaper or a book, on a street corner, or in a church, mosque
or synagogue.

While it is fortunate that Mr. Lieberman does not have the power to tell YouTube
that it must remove videos, it is profoundly disturbing that an influential
senator would even consider telling a media company to shut down
constitutionally protected speech. The American Civil Liberties Union has warned
that the ''Homegrown Terrorism'' bill and related efforts ''could be a precursor
to proposals to censor and regulate speech on the Internet.''

Not only do these efforts contradict fundamental American values, it is not
clear if they would help fight terrorism. Even if YouTube pulled down every
video Mr. Lieberman did not like, radical groups could post the same videos on
their own Web sites. Trying to restrain the Internet is a game of
''whack-a-mole'' that cannot be won, says John Morris of the Center for
Democracy and Technology. Having the videos on YouTube may even be a good thing,
because it makes it easier for law enforcement officials, the media and the
public to monitor the groups and their messages.

Terrorism is a real concern. All Americans know that. They also know that if we
give up our fundamental rights, the terrorists win. If people use speech to
engage in criminal acts, they should be prosecuted. Cutting off free speech is
never the right answer.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); CENSORSHIP (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INTERNET
SOCIAL NETWORKING (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PHOTO & VIDEO SHARING (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (89%); LEGISLATION (89%);
INTERNET & WWW (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); PENDING LEGISLATION (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%); RELIGION (61%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (56%)

PERSON: JOE LIEBERMAN (92%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1532 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 25, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congo Ex-Official Is Held in Belgium on War Crimes Charges

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 280 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Jean-Pierre Bemba, who was once a rebel leader and, later, the vice president of
Congo, was arrested near Brussels late Saturday at the request of the
International Criminal Court, a court prosecutor said.

''We are waiting for Belgian authorities to order his transfer to the I.C.C.,''
the prosecutor, Beatrice Le Fraper, said.

The arrest warrant for Mr. Bemba, 45, was originally issued on May 16 but was
not made public until he was detained. He faces four war crimes charges and two
charges of crimes against humanity, allegedly committed in the Central African
Republic when his militia was fighting there.

But another prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, made it clear that the investigation
was ongoing and that the order for Mr. Bemba would not be the only warrant
issued in the case.

Mr. Bemba, a multimillionaire, ran for president in October 2006, losing to the
incumbent, Joseph Kabila.

He also led the rebel group Movement for the Liberation of Congo, which later
converted itself into a political party. He served as one of Congo's four vice
presidents from 2003 to 2006.

In 2002, Mr. Bemba's group was asked by former President Ange-Felix Patasse from
the Central African Republic to come into his country and put down a coup
attempt. While there, the group  was accused of widespread rights abuses.

After Mr. Patasse was ousted in 2003, his successor pressed charges of rape and
murder against Mr. Bemba and referred the case to the International Criminal
Court in The Hague.

The United Nations has accused the group of cannibalism, a charge it denies.

In recent months, Mr. Bemba had been living in exile in Portugal. He is facing
charges of high treason in Congo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); COUPS (78%); TREASON (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); SEX OFFENSES
(73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (92%); BELGIUM (91%); NETHERLANDS (90%);
CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1545 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 5, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinian President Seeks Renewed Talks With Hamas

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER; Taghreed El-Khodary contributed reporting from Gaza
City.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 751 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, called unexpectedly late Wednesday for
a resumption of dialogue with the Islamic militant group Hamas, a move that
could herald a breakdown of his peace talks with Israel.

In a short televised speech, Mr. Abbas, who is based in the West Bank, expressed
his desire to restore national unity. Hamas took control of Gaza in June 2007.

Mr. Abbas said that if talks with Hamas succeeded, he would call for legislative
and presidential elections. His term is supposed to end in January.

The Hamas takeover followed a brief but bloody factional war that ended with the
routing of the Fatah forces loyal to Mr. Abbas. He subsequently fired the
Hamas-led unity government, in which Fatah had participated, and appointed an
alternative government in the West Bank.

Hamas has long declared its readiness for negotiations to heal the national
division, but Fatah has demanded that Hamas rescind control of Gaza first. Mr.
Abbas's tone on Wednesday was more neutral, and Hamas leaders in Gaza welcomed
the speech.

Ahmed Youssef, an adviser to the Hamas government in Gaza, said the language was
''very positive'' and opened the door for dialogue ''without placing any
conditions for the first time.''

Saeb Erekat, a senior aide to Mr. Abbas, denied on Wednesday that Fatah had
dropped its demand for Hamas to ''revoke its coup d'etat in Gaza.'' But, in an
interview on Tuesday in Ramallah on the West Bank, Mr. Erekat hinted about the
need for renewed dialogue. ''I have a problem internally with Hamas, and it is
not going to be solved by bullets,'' he said.

Israel resumed peace talks with Mr. Abbas only after he broke away from Hamas.
Israel has had indirect contact with Hamas to explore the possibility of a
temporary cease-fire in and around Gaza, so far without success. But Israel has
refused to have direct contact with the group, which it considers a terrorist
organization, and it has threatened to cut off talks with Mr. Abbas if he
rejoins forces with Hamas.

In any case, the Israeli-Palestinian peace talks that were initiated at the
United States-sponsored conference in Annapolis, Md., last fall have yielded
little. With the Israeli prime minister, Ehud Olmert, embroiled in a corruption
investigation and the country apparently moving toward early elections, there
seems little chance of an agreement on Palestinian statehood this year.

The chief of the Palestinian negotiating team, Ahmed Qurei, said Wednesday that
''only a miracle'' would make it work.

Mr. Youssef, the Hamas adviser, interpreted Mr. Abbas's call for dialogue as a
sign of distress. ''He has been disappointed by the American administration and
his Israeli negotiators,'' Mr. Youssef said, adding that Mr. Abbas had been
losing the respect of his people ''on a daily basis.''

The Palestinians have been frustrated by Israel's refusal to freeze settlement
activity in the West Bank. Israel says it will not build new settlements, but
construction continues on existing ones,  mainly in the large blocs that Israel
intends to retain under any permanent agreement.

On Sunday the Israeli Housing Ministry said it was proceeding with plans to
build more than 800 apartments in two Jewish suburbs in East Jerusalem. The
Palestinians claim that territory, which Israel annexed after the 1967 war, as
part of a future state.

Against this backdrop,  Mr. Abbas's prime minister, Salam Fayyad, started a
high-profile dispute with Israel on Wednesday when he called on the European
Union to refuse Israel's request to upgrade its ties with the union. Mr. Fayyad
said that Israel should first meet its obligations, ''especially those related
to halting all settlement activities and other violations of human rights in
Palestine.''

Mr. Fayyad sent a letter to the European Union with a similar message in late
May, his adviser Jamal Zakout said.

An Israeli government official expressed ''deep regret and disappointment'' on
Wednesday at what he called the Palestinians' efforts to ''undermine'' Israel's
relations with Europe.

Al Qaeda Seeks Blockade's End

CAIRO (AP) -- Al Qaeda's No. 2 leader called on Muslims to start a holy war to
break Israel's economic blockade of the Gaza Strip, in an audio recording posted
Wednesday on an Islamic militant Web site.

In the 11-minute tape, a voice purportedly belonging to the Qaeda official,
Ayman al-Zawahri, says in Arabic that ''the sons of the nation should break the
shackles of the treacherous regimes and move to wage jihad.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Mahmoud Abbas said that if talks with Hamas succeeded, he would
call for elections. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ABBAS MOMANI/A.F.P. -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (94%); PEACE PROCESS (92%); AL FATAH (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); COUPS
(77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); RELIGION (73%); WAR &
CONFLICT (70%); CORRUPTION (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (93%); EHUD OLMERT (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%); ANNAPOLIS, MD, USA (58%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%); MARYLAND USA (58%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1548 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arraigned, 9/11 Defendants Talk of Martyrdom

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1310 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


When at last he got the chance to speak, Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, the
self-proclaimed planner of the Sept. 11 attacks, on Thursday called President
Bush a crusader and ridiculed the trial system here as an inquisition.

Mr. Mohammed, the former senior operations chief for Al Qaeda, said he would
represent himself and dared the Guantanamo tribunal to put him to death.

''This is what I want,'' he told a military judge here, in his first appearance
to answer war crimes charges for the terrorism attacks that killed 2,973 people
and set America on a path to war.

''I'm looking to be martyr for long time,'' he said in serviceable English,
improved, perhaps, by five years of custody, including three in secret C.I.A.
prisons.

The arraignment on Thursday of Mr. Mohammed and four other detainees the
government says were high-level coordinators of the Sept. 11 attacks was the
start of hearings in the case, which is the centerpiece of the Bush
administration's war crimes system here.

But it was also the first public appearance by Mr. Mohammed, who has long cast
himself in the role of superterrorist, claiming responsibility in the past not
only for the 2001 plot, but for some 30 others, including the murder of Daniel
Pearl, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal.

A bushy gray beard all but covered Mr. Mohammed's face, so familiar from the
well-known photograph of him in a baggy undershirt that was taken the day of his
capture in Pakistan in 2003. On Thursday, he worked to get as much control as
possible over the proceedings.

Peering through big black-rimmed glasses, he rejected American lawyers as agents
of the Bush administration's ''crusade war against Islamic world.'' He said the
lawyers could stay to help him as advisers.

He quickly staked out his position as the leader of the accused men. He gestured
to them, shared animated conversations while the proceedings droned on and, at
one point, turned his chair toward the back of the courtroom to face his
co-defendants, lined up in a row behind him.

His strategy seemed to work. One of the detainees, a military lawyer said,
decided to reject his lawyers on Thursday, after a few minutes in the courtroom.
Another, Mustafa Ahmed al-Hawsawi, was intimidated by Mr. Mohammed, said his
designated lawyer, Maj. Jon Jackson.

By day's end, each of Mr. Mohammed's four co-defendants had said he wanted to
represent himself. That could turn a trial into a jumble of rhetoric and a new
opportunity for critics to attack the Guantanamo system as designed to get easy
convictions.

Each of the five men remained seated when the judge asked that they rise for the
formal arraignment.

''I reject this session,'' said Walid bin Attash, a detainee known as Khallad,
who investigators say selected and trained some of the hijackers. Ramzi bin
al-Shibh, who was to have been one of the hijackers, said that he too, like Mr.
Mohammed, was ready for martyrdom.

He recalled that he had ''tried for 9/11'' but was denied an American visa so
had missed his chance.

The judge, Col. Ralph H. Kohlmann, agreed to permit three of the men to
represent themselves. He said he wanted more information on Major Jackson's
assertion. In Mr. Shibh's case, he said he wanted to  investigate a new report
on Thursday from a military lawyer that Mr. Shibh has been on psychotropic
medication.

When Judge Kohlmann asked Mr. Shibh why he was taking the medication, security
officials cut the sound fed to reporters in a glassed-in gallery and a satellite
press center. It was one of half a dozen times in a long court day when a
private national-security consultant to the court cut the sound when detainees
appeared to be discussing what several of them said had been years of torture.

Mr. Mohammed managed to get the reference through the censor twice.

''After torturing,'' he said, warming to his subject, ''they transfer us to
Inquisitionland in Guantanamo.''

Central Intelligence Agency officials have said that Mr. Mohammed was one of
three detainees subjected to the simulated drowning technique known as
waterboarding.

The sound was cut twice when Mr. Mohammed seemed to be discussing his claim.

He was far from shy, and he looked lean compared with the photograph taken of
him after his 2003 capture. He chanted verses in Arabic and then translated them
into English. He vied with  Judge Kohlmann for control of the courtroom.

''Go ahead,'' he told the judge from time to time when there was a pause, as if
he, at the shiny new defense table in a specially built courtroom here, and not
the man in the black robe on the bench, were in charge.

He was, Mr. Mohammed said cheerfully, unable to accept lawyers who knew little
of Islamic law. He asked that the five men facing terrorism, conspiracy and
other charges for the Sept. 11 attacks be permitted to meet. They needed, he
said, to plan ''one front.''

The request for a meeting, like most requests from the defense on Thursday, was
rejected by Judge Kohlmann.

All five accused men were held in the secret C.I.A. program and transferred to
Guantanamo to face charges in the military commission system.

''Sit down,'' the judge barked out a few times as defense lawyers assigned to
the cases by the military and by the American Civil Liberties Union tried to
slow the proceedings.

The lawyers said that Mr. Mohammed and the other men had not had enough
opportunity to meet with them. As a result, they said, the detainees could not
understand the implications of representing themselves with their lives
potentially on the line. No one would prevail with the argument that the
arraignment could not proceed as scheduled, Judge Kohlmann announced.

The Pentagon has been pressing to move its war crimes cases quickly after years
of delays and legal setbacks. Critics, including a former chief military
prosecutor, have said there is intense political pressure to start the trials by
the end of the Bush administration.

The Pentagon general who has become the most visible advocate of the commission
system, Thomas W. Hartmann, has repeatedly said that accelerating the filing and
prosecution of charges is not motivated by politics.

Whatever the motivation, it was clear inside the wire of the new court complex
in the bright sun here that the Guantanamo trial system had begun its most
important test. Reporters from Italy, Pakistan, Britain and Canada mixed with
Americans crowded into a press center for the first glimpse of Mr. Mohammed and
his co-defendants.

The expansive new courtroom, built specifically for the Sept. 11 case, provided
an austere setting. It is a big, windowless white room, decorated only with a
large American flag and the seals of each of the American military branches.

The reporters and a handful of observers from human rights, military and legal
groups sat in an observation room at the rear. Sound to the room was delayed 20
seconds, so people in the proceedings rose and sat on occasion before their
voices could be heard.

In the courtroom, the prosecutors sat to the right at three long tables. On the
left, there were six long tables, the final one unused. At the end of each
table, a detainee sat, in a white prison uniform. Only one, Mr. Shibh, was
shackled to the floor.

Mr. Mohammed, who is sometimes known as K.S.M., was at the first table. He could
not, he explained, work easily with lawyers trained in the American legal
system, which he described as evil. ''They allow same sexual marriage,'' he
said, ''and many things are very bad.''

He held his own in rapid fire back-and-forth with the judge dealing with the
particulars of the proceedings, but then would retreat into another world. When
Judge Kohlmann explained the risks of going through a death penalty case without
a lawyer, Mr. Mohammed answered: ''Nothing shall befall us, save what Allah has
ordained for us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, right, and Walid bin Attash at their
arraignment on Thursday in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL COURTROOM
SKETCH BY JANET HAMLIN)
 Part of the legal complex of the United States Military Commissions at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.(PHOTOGRAPH BY POOL PHOTO BY BRENNAN LINSLEY)(pg. A16)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%);
JUDGES (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); PRISONS (76%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); MURDER (57%); RELIGION (50%)

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (54%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (58%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (93%); PAKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1550 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2008 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel to Loosen Limits on Gazans Intending to Study Abroad

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 604 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV


Senior Israeli officials said Thursday that they would no longer stop all
Palestinians who had foreign study grants from leaving Gaza and would look
favorably upon their applications for exit permits. The move departs from the
near total Israeli ban on movement out of Gaza, the Hamas-controlled coastal
strip, since late 2007.

The officials said the decision had been made by Defense Minister Ehud Barak in
the aftermath of the embarrassing misunderstanding with the American State
Department last week that resulted in the cancellation of Fulbright grants to
Gaza and then a hurried reinstatement of them. The officials, from the Defense
Ministry, spoke on the condition that they not be identified by name. ''We are
going to let out students, but in limited numbers,'' one senior official said.
''We're not talking about hundreds.''

He said that Israel's policy was caught between two aims: to weaken Hamas, the
anti-Israel militia that took full control of Gaza one year ago, by imposing a
siege on its territory, and to avoid a humanitarian catastrophe there. That
means allowing the entry of 70 truckloads of crucial supplies every day and
letting out hundreds of emergency medical cases, but almost nothing else.

But, he said, because Israel hopes in the future to have a neighbor that is less
poor and better educated, encouraging some study grants abroad is very much in
Israel's interest. The population of Gaza is about 1.5 million.

The grants that will be honored include not only American ones like the
Fulbright and specific university scholarships, but also those from many
countries in Europe, Asia and the Persian Gulf. It seemed likely that some
students would be permitted to cross out of southern Gaza through Egypt, while
others would go through the crossing into Israel.

But the central policy of closing Gaza remains in place. After the Hamas
takeover, the Israeli government decided it no longer wanted responsibility for
Gaza, so the Defense Ministry's coordinator of government activities in the
territories, Maj. Gen. Yosef Mishlev, was instructed to reject exit requests
except urgent medical ones.

Still, when Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice read last Friday of the
cancellation of the Fulbright grants, she told her lieutenants to get the
Israelis to let the grant recipients out and to reinstate the scholarships, and
that is now happening.

On Wednesday, an American Consulate car picked up four of the seven Fulbright
scholars from the Gaza border to take them for visa interviews in Jerusalem, the
first formal step in their journey to advanced study in the United States. The
other three were still being checked by the Shin Bet internal security service.

Lower-level State Department officials had apparently assumed that the new
stricter closing of Gaza would make it impossible to get the students out, so
the officials canceled their grants. They said their exit permit requests for
the students were not answered. But Israeli officials said the Americans had
failed to draw their attention to the requests as worthy of exception and
expediting.

Now, the ministry will pursue a modified policy whereby all Gazans with grants
to study abroad will submit their names for clearance to the West Bank-based
Palestinian Authority, which also opposes Hamas. Then the names will go to
General Mishlev, who will try to move their applications forward for exit
permits.

Human rights groups that disapprove of Israel's restrictive policy toward Gaza
say hundreds of Gazans want to study abroad. But the Israeli officials said
repeatedly that those leaving would be limited in number.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: A boy waiting for a travel permit, and Fulbright grantees,
Hadeel Abukwaik, left
Doa Abu Amsha, center
and Nadel Telbani at the Gaza border on Wednesday. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MARCO
LONGARI/AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)
 Abdulrahman Abdullah is one of the seven Gazan Fulbright recipients whose
grants were canceled, then reinstated. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMMED ABED/AGENCE
FRANCE-PRESSE -- GETTY IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STUDY ABROAD PROGRAMS (90%); FOREIGN STUDENTS (90%); HAMAS (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (88%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); GRANTS & GIFTS (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%)

PERSON: EHUD BARAK (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (78%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (78%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(94%); ASIA (79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1562 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 12, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia: War Crimes Fugitive Arrested

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 75 words


The Serbian police arrested one of the four remaining war crimes fugitives
wanted by the United Nations tribunal in The Hague. The suspect, Stojan
Zupljanin, was arrested outside Belgrade, said Bruno Vekaric, spokesman for
Serbia's war crimes prosecution office. Mr. Zupljanin was a Bosnian Serb police
commander during the civil war in the 1990s. The tribunal wants him on charges
of crimes against humanity for overseeing Serbian-run prison camps.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1570 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Task for Senator Obama

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 161 words


To the Editor:

In ''The Sex Speech'' (column, June 12), Nicholas D. Kristof urges Barack Obama
to address women's rights issues like maternal mortality.

As it happens, Senator Obama has an opportunity right now to demonstrate his
commitment to women and girls.

The Trafficking Victims Protection Act is up for reauthorization. In December
2007, the House overwhelmingly passed a bill strengthening the law to enable
more effective prosecution of sex traffickers. Sadly, these criminal provisions
were dropped by Senators Joseph R. Biden Jr. and Sam Brownback in the
trafficking reauthorization bill they recently introduced.

Senator Obama could help ensure that the Senate legislation incorporates the
criminal justice provisions included in the House bill and does justice to the
victims of sex trafficking. Such action could go a long way in establishing his
credibility with women voters.

Jessica Neuwirth

President, Equality Now

New York, June 12, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (93%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SEX
TRAFFICKING (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN (90%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2012 (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CRIMINAL LAW (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); VOTERS &
VOTING (65%)

ORGANIZATION: EQUALITY NOW (56%)

PERSON: BARACK OBAMA (91%); JOE BIDEN (57%); SAMUEL BROWNBACK (56%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1575 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Genocide Continues

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; EDITORIAL; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 507 words


Despite the dispatch of United Nations peacekeepers to Darfur and the issuing of
international arrest warrants for leaders of the genocide, the killing goes on.
So does the burning of villages, the bombing of schools and the systematic rape
of women and girls. And it will continue until the Security Council shows the
will to stop it.

The Council needs to get more peacekeepers, helicopters and reconnaissance
planes in the field, enforce the arrest warrants and increase diplomatic and
financial pressure to get Sudan to stop obstructing the work of the
peacekeepers. But the Council has shown little urgency in doing any of that.

Thwarted by Sudan and the United Nations' own bureaucratic rules, far less than
half of an anticipated force of 26,000 international soldiers and police
officers is now in Darfur. That is too small to protect the population, or even
the peacekeepers themselves. An additional 100,000 people have been forced from
their homes since the peacekeepers began arriving in January.

The Council (and separately the European Union) must ensure that Khartoum's
leaders pay a price for their cruelty -- through expanded visa and financial
sanctions against those coordinating the genocide as well as an expanded arms
embargo. The International Criminal Court should get strong backing from the
Council when it presents further charges next month.

Responsibility for the Darfur horrors lies squarely with the government of
Sudan. Its army, air force and intelligence agencies have directly participated
in the attacks. Ministers have coordinated the genocidal campaign. Ahmad Harun,
sought by the International Criminal Court for planning atrocities while the
deputy interior minister, has been promoted to minister of humanitarian affairs.
He used that position to block the delivery of aid to Darfur refugee camps and
to thwart the effective deployment of United Nations peacekeepers.

But a minority of Council members, led by China, have let their economic
interests -- in Beijing's case substantial investments in Sudan's abundant oil
supplies -- trump their moral and legal responsibility to thwart genocide. Last
week, China's president, Hu Jintao, used stronger-than-usual language to urge
Khartoum to cooperate with United Nations peacekeepers and enforce a cease-fire
in Darfur. If China is prepared to back up those words with a tougher line in
the Security Council, it could make a huge difference.

The Bush administration has its heart in the right place on Darfur. Its special
envoy, Richard Williamson, has been a strong advocate for action, and Washington
has imposed stiff sanctions of its own. But what's needed is stronger action by
the Council as a whole.

Darfur's plight is not yet hopeless, but without greater international
commitment it may become so. As the criminal court's prosecutor told the
Security Council on June 5, it takes a lot of planning and organization to
commit massive crimes.

''But mostly,'' he said, ''it requires that the rest of the world look away and
do nothing.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); ARMIES (78%); BOMBINGS
(78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
MILITARY SURVEILLANCE (76%); AIR FORCES (76%); SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE
AIRCRAFT (76%); REFUGEES (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); EUROPEAN UNION (67%); ARMS EMBARGOES (66%); REFUGEE
& RELIEF CAMPS (63%); HELICOPTERS (56%); FINES & PENALTIES (56%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (55%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: HU JINTAO (50%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%); BEIJING, CHINA (53%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (53%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (70%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1576 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Khmer Rouge Trial, Victims Will Not Stand Idly By

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


If Sok Chear had her way, she would slice the elderly man into ribbons and pour
salt into his wounds. She would beat him up and torture him and give him
electric shocks to make him talk.

For Ly Monysar, even that would not be enough. ''Only killing them will make me
feel calm,'' he said. ''I want them to suffer the way I suffered. I say this
from the heart.''

Sok Chear, an office worker, and Ly Monysar, a security guard, are two of the
millions of Cambodians who suffered for four years in the late 1970s under the
brutal Communist Khmer Rouge, which caused the deaths of 1.7 million people.

Three decades later, five aging former Khmer Rouge leaders are in custody and
awaiting trial. And Sok Chear and Ly Monysar have an innovative role to play in
the tribunal, where the first case is expected to begin this autumn.

They are two of hundreds of people who have applied to the court to be
recognized officially as victims of the Khmer Rouge and to bring parallel civil
cases against them.

They will have a chance not to beat and torture them but to seek mostly symbolic
reparations -- a monument, perhaps, or a museum or trauma center.

It is a controversial experiment in this unusual hybrid tribunal, which is
administered jointly by the United Nations and the Cambodian government and
comprises elements of Cambodian and international law.

''For the first time in history, the internal rules of a tribunal will give
victims of crimes the possibility to participate as parties,'' said Gabriela
Gonzalez Rivas, deputy head of the tribunal's victims unit.

Victims have been included in other comparable tribunals, like the International
Criminal Court, but their role has been more limited.

As civil parties, the victims here will have standing comparable to those of the
accused, including rights to participate in the investigation, to be represented
by a lawyer, to call witnesses and to question the accused at trial, according
to a court statement.

''Participation in these types of proceedings is a tool of empowerment,'' Ms.
Rivas said. ''People can tell their story, feel that what happened to them is a
consideration, a recognizing that what happened to them shouldn't have
happened.''

The inclusion of victims is part of the evolution and refining of the mechanisms
of international justice, said Diane Orentlicher, special counsel of the Open
Society Justice Initiative, in a telephone interview from New York.

''There has been a growing recognition, after 15 years of international and
hybrid courts like this one, not to exclude victims from the justice that is
being dispensed on their behalf,'' she said. The Cambodia tribunal has been
accused of compromising international standards of justice with its awkward
admixture of Cambodian law and its vulnerability to manipulation by the
country's strongman, Prime Minister Hun Sen, who exercises control over the
Cambodian judiciary.

The participation of victims is drawing more criticism, partly from people
concerned for the rights of the accused and the preservation of the presumption
of innocence.

Victor Koppe, a defense  lawyer for one of the Khmer Rouge leaders, Nuon Chea,
called the presumption of innocence ''the most fundamental issue'' in the case.

''The question is whether or not everything in this tribunal is
institutionalized in such a way that only guilty verdicts can come,'' he said.

Other critics say the court is being distracted by social agendas from its core
task of seeking justice for crimes against humanity.

''I would put this under the category of therapeutic legalism,'' said Peter
Maguire, an expert on international justice and author of ''Facing Death in
Cambodia.''

''This is an invention of the 1990s, where people freighted the trials with all
this baggage,'' Mr. Maguire said. ''How do you measure closure, how do you
measure truth, how do you measure reconciliation? These are not empirical
categories.''

These added elements can also encumber an already tortuously slow process, the
critics say.

Almost two years of the tribunal's budgeted three-year mandate have passed since
it was set up in August 2006, after nearly a decade of contentious negotiation
between the United Nations and the Cambodian government.

Nearly a year has passed since the first of the five defendants was charged in
the case. Most analysts are confident that more money will be found from
international donors to extend the life of the tribunal, which began with a
budget of $53 million. But as Mr. Maguire put it, this court needs to get
hustling.

So far, Ms. Rivas said, about 1,300 people who say they were victims have
applied to participate. About half seek to be civil parties, while the other
half offer evidence that could be submitted to prosecutors. Most names have been
channeled through a documentation center or through human rights groups.

Ten people have been accepted so far as civil parties, she said.

As the number grows, it is likely that they will be combined into class actions
representing religious or ethnic groups, victims of particular crimes or other
parties.

Theary Seng, 37, a Cambodian-born American lawyer who lost her parents to the
Khmer Rouge, is organizing two groups of orphans -- including Sok Chear, Ly
Monysar and herself -- to bring civil cases.

In February at a pretrial hearing, Ms. Seng became the first and so far the only
victim to address the court, standing face to face with Nuon Chea, whom she
blames for the deaths of her parents.

Though her words were addressed to the court, she said, her eyes were locked
directly with those of Nuon Chea, 82, the most senior of the five imprisoned
leaders -- the man Sok Chear said she wants to flay.

In a short statement, Ms. Seng contrasted the legal protections that Nuon Chea
is receiving with the arbitrary arrest and abuse she said she and her younger
brother suffered as children under the Khmer Rouge.

Noun Chea, the Khmer Rouge ideologue, was sometimes known as Brother Number Two
to Pol Pot, the Khmer Rouge leader, who died in 1998.

''He was stoic, stoic,'' Ms. Seng said, recalling the confrontation. ''He's
completely stoic. Eighty percent of the time I was addressing him in my
statement. He didn't break the stare.''

Nearly one-fourth of the Cambodian population died between 1975 and 1979 from
execution, torture, starvation and overwork in the mass labor brigades the Khmer
Rouge created.

Today, though, most of the survivors are as stoic as their victimizers. When
asked about the tribunal, most simply say they want to know who caused their
suffering and why.

But the approach of the court sessions has aroused the feelings of many people,
and those who have applied to participate are among those with the strongest
emotions.

Sok Chear, 32, who said she was raped and brutalized as a girl by the Khmer
Rouge, remains inconsolable over the loss of her father, an engineer, who
disappeared into the hands of the black-clothed cadre and never returned.

''We were always waiting for him to come home, but he never came,'' she said.
''We were always waiting and waiting. Even now, I still look around -- maybe my
father is still alive.''

Tears still come when she talks about him.

''He gave me rice to eat and I want to repay him,'' she said, ''even one plate
of rice, my gift to him, even one plate for him to eat from his daughter.''

Ly Monysar, 41, is a broken man, poor and sick and bitter, his voice quavering
as he tells of the loss of his entire family when he was 9.

He sustains himself with fantasies of revenge every bit as chilling as the
calculated brutality  men like Nuon Chea are accused of.

''I want to kill all those people who did this to me,'' he said. ''And if I
can't, I'll come back in the next life and find them. I'll create my own
genocidal regime and take my revenge on them all.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Ly Monysar, left, lost his family when he was 9, and Sok Chear
says she was raped as a girl. They are among hundreds of Cambodians who have
applied to be recognized in court as a tribunal sits in judgment against former
leaders of the Khmer Rouge. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ROBERT JAMES ELLIOTT FOR THE
INTERNATIONAL HERALD TRIBUNE) (pg. A8)
 Cambodians lighted incense last month on the outskirts of Phnom Penh during a
ceremony honoring people who died under the Khmer Rouge. (PHOTOGRAPH BY CHOR
SOKUNTHEA/REUTERS) (pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); SENIOR CITIZENS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); WITNESSES (68%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (65%);
INTERVIEWS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1580 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 18, 2008 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Notes Show Confusion on Interrogation Methods

BYLINE: By MARK MAZZETTI and SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 1020 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


When military officers at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, struggled in the fall of 2002 to
find ways to get terrorism suspects to talk, they turned to the one agency that
had spent several months experimenting with the limits of physical and
psychological pressure: the Central Intelligence Agency.

They took  the top lawyer for the C.I.A.'s Counterterrorist Center to
Guantanamo, where he explained that the definition of illegal torture was
''written vaguely.''

''It is basically subject to perception,'' said the lawyer, Jonathan M. Fredman,
according to meeting minutes released Tuesday at a Senate hearing. ''If the
detainee dies, you're doing it wrong.''

The minutes of the October 2002 meeting give an extraordinary glimpse of the
confusion among government lawyers about both the legal limits and the
effectiveness of interrogation methods. The new documents also reveal for the
first time the close collaboration between the C.I.A. and the Defense Department
on harsh interrogation methods.

At the meeting, lawyers talked openly about the ''need to curb the harsher
operations'' during visits from observers with the International Committee of
the Red Cross and about moving some prisoners to keep them out of sight  at
those times.

And Mr. Fredman, the C.I.A. lawyer, warned his military counterparts never to
videotape aggressive interrogations because they will ''look ugly.'' His comment
came more than five years before the Justice Department opened a criminal
investigation into the destruction of C.I.A. interrogation videotapes.

The hearing was the first in a series of sessions planned by the Senate Armed
Services Committee, which has spent the last two years investigating the origins
of the harsh methods that found their way to Iraq and Afghanistan.

Much of the hearing focused on how interrogation techniques used by the Pentagon
to train military personnel to withstand the rigors of captivity were reverse
engineered for use against detainees in American custody. The techniques, based
on the treatment American prisoners might expect from cold war enemies, were
used both by the C.I.A. at its secret overseas jails for suspected high-level
members of Al Qaeda and at Guantanamo and other military detention centers.

A military psychologist who studies the effect of those techniques on American
forces told the Senate panel how concerned he was upon learning in 2002 that one
of the techniques, waterboarding, was being considered for use against terrorism
suspects.

''I responded by asking, 'Wouldn't that be illegal?' '' said the psychologist,
Dr. Jerald Ogrisseg.

The military never used waterboarding, which simulates the experience of
drowning, but the C.I.A. used it on three prisoners with the approval of the
Justice Department.

The 2002 meeting at Guantanamo showed how C.I.A. lawyers believed they had found
a legal loophole permitting the agency to use ''cruel, inhuman or degrading''
methods overseas as long as they did not amount to torture.

In ''rare instances, aggressive techniques have proven very helpful,'' Mr.
Fredman said, according to the minutes.

A military lawyer at Guantanamo, Lt. Col. Diane Beaver, interjected, ''We will
need documentation to protect us.''

''Yes,'' Mr. Fredman said, ''if someone dies while aggressive techniques are
being used, regardless of cause of death, the backlash of attention would be
severely detrimental.''

The documents revealed deep divisions inside the military as the possibility of
harsh methods was debated.

Three weeks after the October 2002 meeting, Mark Fallon, the deputy commander of
the Criminal Investigation Task Force at Guantanamo, wrote an e-mail message
expressing shock at the language of Mr. Fredman and others in the meeting
minutes.

''This looks like the kinds of stuff Congressional hearings are made of,'' Mr.
Fallon wrote. ''Someone needs to be considering how history will look back at
this.''

Asked about Mr. Fredman's reported remarks, a C.I.A. spokesman, George Little,
said he could not comment on ''purported remarks in an e-mail account of a
meeting held nearly six years ago.'' But Mr. Little  said the C.I.A.
interrogations had been  approved by the Justice Department and ''saved innocent
lives.'' (Mr. Fredman, now a lawyer for the director of national intelligence,
was not available for comment.)

The hearing also provided rare public testimony from William J. Haynes II, the
Defense Department's general counsel until March, who sparred at length with
senators seeking to pin on him some responsibility for the harsh tactics and the
worldwide outrage they provoked.

Documents released Tuesday show that some of Mr. Haynes's aides in July 2002
sought out information about aggressive interrogations.

Mr. Haynes fended off attacks by Democrats and some Republicans, noting that the
Defense Department has 10,000 lawyers and saying he had no time to conduct legal
research himself on which methods were permitted.

Moreover, Mr. Haynes said, ''as the lawyer, I was not the decision maker. I was
the adviser.''

Senator Jack Reed, Democrat of Rhode Island, said he thought Mr. Haynes's advice
had led American soldiers drastically astray. ''You degraded the integrity of
the United States military,'' Mr. Reed said.

Even as Congress continued this week to rake over the Bush administration's
decisions in 2002, 17 former F.B.I., C.I.A. and military officers with
interrogation experience gathered in Washington to discuss how interrogation
programs should be revamped under the next president. Human Rights First, an
advocacy group, organized the meeting in part because both Senators Barack Obama
and  John McCain, the expected presidential nominees, are outspoken opponents of
harsh physical pressure in interrogation.

The Bush administration ''took a serious wrong turn that led to terrible,
terrible consequences,'' said one of the former interrogators, Stuart A.
Herrington, a retired Army colonel who conducted interrogations in Vietnam and
Panama and during the Persian Gulf war of 1991.

''We need to get our act together and do this right going forward,'' Mr.
Herrington said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: Lt. Col. Daniel J. Baumgartner Jr. of the Air Force, with
protesters behind him, at a Senate hearing on Tuesday about interrogation
techniques used on detainees at Guantanamo Bay. (PHOTOGRAPH BY DOUG MILLS/THE
NEW YORK TIMES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); PSYCHOLOGY (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PRISONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); COLD WAR (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (76%); TORTURE
(76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (73%);
APPROVALS (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (64%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (51%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%); US AIR FORCE (59%);
INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (55%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED
CRESCENT MOVEMENT (55%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (73%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1588 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2008 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Interrogation Of a 9/11 Mastermind

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3830 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


In a makeshift prison in the north of Poland, Al Qaeda's engineer of mass murder
faced off against his Central Intelligence Agency interrogator. It was 18 months
after the 9/11 attacks, and the invasion of Iraq was giving Muslim extremists
new motives for havoc. If anyone knew about the next plot, it was Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed.

The interrogator, Deuce Martinez, a soft-spoken analyst who spoke no Arabic, had
turned down a C.I.A. offer to be trained in waterboarding. He chose to leave the
infliction of pain and panic to others, the gung-ho paramilitary types whom the
more cerebral interrogators called ''knuckledraggers.''

Mr. Martinez came in after the rough stuff, the ultimate good cop with the
classic skills: an unimposing presence, inexhaustible patience and a willingness
to listen to the gripes and musings of a pitiless killer in rambling, imperfect
English. He achieved a rapport with Mr. Mohammed that astonished his fellow
C.I.A. officers.

A canny opponent, Mr. Mohammed mixed disinformation and braggadocio with details
of plots, past and planned. Eventually, he grew loquacious. ''They'd have long
talks about religion,'' comparing notes on Islam and Mr. Martinez's Catholicism,
one C.I.A. officer recalled. And, the officer added, there was one other detail
no one could have predicted: ''He wrote poems to Deuce's wife.''

Mr. Martinez, who by then had interrogated at least three other high-level
prisoners, would bring Mr. Mohammed snacks, usually dates. He would listen to
Mr. Mohammed's despair over the likelihood that he would never see his children
again and to his catalog of complaints about his accommodations.

''He wanted a view,'' the C.I.A. officer recalled.

The story of Mr. Martinez's role in the C.I.A.'s interrogation program,
including his contribution to the first capture of a major figure in Al Qaeda,
provides the closest look to date beneath the blanket of secrecy that hides the
program from terrorists and from critics who accuse the agency of torture.

Beyond the interrogator's successes, this account includes new details on the
campaign against Al Qaeda, including the text message that led to Mr. Mohammed's
capture, the reason the C.I.A. believed his claim that he was the murderer of
the Wall Street Journal reporter Daniel Pearl and the separate teams at the
C.I.A.'s secret prisons of those who meted out the agony and those who asked the
questions.

In the Hollywood cliche of Fox's ''24,'' a torturer shouts questions at a bound
terrorist while inflicting excruciating pain. The C.I.A. program worked
differently. A paramilitary team put on the pressure, using cold temperatures,
sleeplessness, pain and fear to force a prisoner  to talk. When the prisoner
signaled assent, the tormenters stepped aside. After a break that could be a day
or even longer, Mr. Martinez or another interrogator took up the questioning.

Mr. Martinez's success at building a rapport with the most ruthless of
terrorists goes to the heart of the interrogation debate. Did it suggest that
traditional methods alone might have obtained the same information or more? Or
did Mr. Mohammed talk so expansively because he feared more of the brutal
treatment he had already endured?

A definitive answer is unlikely under the Bush administration, which has
insisted in court that not a single page of 7,000 documents on the program can
be made public. The C.I.A. declined to provide information for this article, in
part, a spokesman said, because the agency did not want to interfere with the
military trials planned for Mr. Mohammed and four other Qaeda suspects at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The two dozen current and former American and foreign intelligence officials
interviewed for this article offered a tantalizing but incomplete description of
the C.I.A. detention program. Most would speak of the highly classified program
only on the condition of anonymity.

Mr. Martinez declined to be interviewed; his role was described by colleagues.
Gen. Michael V. Hayden, director of the C.I.A., and a lawyer representing Mr.
Martinez asked that he not be named in this article, saying that the former
interrogator believed that the use of his name would invade his privacy and
might jeopardize his safety. The New York Times, noting that Mr. Martinez had
never worked undercover and that others involved in the campaign against Al
Qaeda have been named in news articles and books, declined the request. (An
editors' note on this issue has been posted on The Times's Web site at
nytimes.com/world.)

The very fact that Mr. Martinez, a career narcotics analyst who did not speak
the terrorists' native languages and had no interrogation experience, would end
up as a crucial player captures the ad-hoc nature of the program. Officials
acknowledge that it was cobbled together under enormous pressure in 2002 by an
agency nearly devoid of expertise in detention and interrogation.

''I asked, 'What are we going to do with these guys when we get them?' ''
recalled A. B. Krongard, the No. 3 official at the C.I.A. from March 2001 until
2004. ''I said, 'We've never run a prison. We don't have the languages. We don't
have the interrogators.' ''

In its scramble, the agency made the momentous decision to use harsh methods the
United States had long condemned. With little research or reflection, it
borrowed its techniques from an American military training program modeled on
the torture repertories of the Soviet Union and other cold-war adversaries, a
lineage that would come to haunt the agency.

It located its overseas jails based largely on which foreign intelligence
officials were most accommodating and rushed to move the prisoners when word of
locations leaked. Seeking a longer-term solution, the C.I.A. spent millions to
build a high-security prison in a remote desert location, according to two
former intelligence officials. The prison, whose existence has never been
disclosed, was completed -- and then apparently abandoned unused -- when
President Bush decided in 2006 to move all the prisoners to Guantanamo.

By then, whether it was a result of a fear of waterboarding, the patient
trust-building mastered by Mr. Martinez or the demoralizing effects of
isolation, Mr. Mohammed and some other prisoners had become quite compliant. In
fact, according to several officials, they had become a sort of terrorist focus
group, advising their captors on their fellow extremists' goals, ideology and
tradecraft.

Asked, for example, how he would smuggle explosives into the United States, Mr.
Mohammed told C.I.A officers that he might send a shipping container from Japan
loaded with personal computers, half of them packed with bomb materials,
according to a foreign official briefed on the episode.

''It was to understand the mind of a terrorist -- how a terrorist would do
certain things,'' the foreign official said of the discussions of hypothetical
attacks. Thus did the architect of 9/11 become, in effect, a counterterrorism
adviser to the American government he professed to despise.

A Break in Pakistan

When Mr. Martinez flew to Pakistan early in 2002, he was joining an increasingly
desperate campaign to catch and question anyone who might know the plans for the
next terrorist attack.

Months had passed since Sept. 11, 2001, without a single senior Qaeda figure
being taken alive. Intelligence agencies were alarmed by the eavesdropping
''chatter'' about threats. But without a high-level terrorist in custody, the
government had few sources to warn of plots in progress.

Then, in February 2002, the C.I.A. station in Islamabad, Pakistan, learned that
Abu Zubaydah, Al Qaeda's logistics specialist, was in Lahore or Faisalabad,
Pakistani cities 80 miles apart with a combined population of more than 10
million. The hunt for the terrorist's electronic trail grew intensive.

Armed with Abu Zubaydah's cellphone number, eavesdropping specialists deployed
what some called the ''magic box,'' an electronic scanner that could track any
switched-on mobile phone and give its approximate location. But Abu Zubaydah was
careful about security: he turned his phone on only briefly to collect messages,
not long enough for his trackers to get a fix on his whereabouts.

That was when Mr. Martinez arrived, beginning what would be an unlikely
engagement with the world's worst terrorists.

The son of a C.I.A. technician who worked on the agency's secret communications
and eventually became a senior executive, Mr. Martinez grew up in Virginia,
majored in political science at James Madison University and went directly into
the C.I.A. training program not long before his father retired. He wound up in
the agency's Counternarcotics Center, learning to sift masses of phone numbers,
travel records, credit card transactions and more to search for people.

''Deuce had a reputation as one of those eggheads who could sit down with a lot
of data and make sense out of it,'' said one former C.I.A. officer who knew him
well. In the agency's great cultural divide, he was a stay-at-home analyst, not
an ''operator,'' one of the glamorous spies who recruited foreign agents
overseas. His tool was the computer, and until the earthquake of 9/11 his
expertise was drug cartels, not terrorist networks.

After the attacks, officials recognized that tracking drug lords was not so
different from searching for terrorist masterminds, and Mr. Martinez was among a
half dozen or so narcotics analysts moved to the Counterterrorist Center to
become ''targeting officers'' in the hunt for Al Qaeda.

Colleagues say Mr. Martinez, then 36, threw himself into the new work with a
passion. On a wall at the American Embassy in Islamabad, he posted a large,
blank piece of paper. He wrote Abu Zubaydah's phone number at the center. Then,
over a week or so, he and others added more and more linked phone numbers from
the eavesdropping files of the National Security Agency and Pakistani
intelligence. They excluded known institutions like mosques and shops and
gradually built a map of the network of contacts around Abu Zubaydah.

''It was a spider's web,'' said one person who saw the telephone chart.
''Aesthetically it was quite pretty.''

Using the numbers, and premises linked to them, Mr. Martinez and his colleagues
sought to identify Abu Zubaydah's most likely hide-outs. They could not reduce
the list to fewer than 14 addresses in Lahore and Faisalabad, which they put
under surveillance. At 2 a.m. on March 28, 2002, teams led by Pakistan's Punjab
Elite Force, with Americans waiting outside, hit the locations all at once.

One of the SWAT teams found Abu Zubaydah, protected by Syrian and Egyptian
bodyguards, at a handsome house on Canal Road in Faisalabad. It held bomb-making
equipment and a safe loaded with $100,000 in cash, according to a terrorism
consultant briefed on the event. Photographs of the raid reviewed by The Times
last month showed Abu Zubaydah, a cleanshaven 30-year-old Palestinian, shot
three times during the raid, lying face down in the back of a Toyota pickup
before he was taken to a hospital.

At first, Abu Zubaydah fell in and out of consciousness, emerging occasionally
to speak incoherently -- once, evidently imagining himself in a restaurant,
ordering a glass of red wine, a C.I.A. official said. The agency, desperate to
keep him alive, flew in a Johns Hopkins Hospital surgeon to consult. Within a
few days, Abu Zubaydah was flown to Thailand, to the first of the ''black
sites,'' the agency's interrogation facilities for major Qaeda figures.

Thailand, which had long faced Muslim insurgents in its south, became the first
choice because C.I.A. officers had a very close relationship with their
counterparts in Bangkok, according to one American intelligence official. At
first, the official said, ''they didn't even tell the prime minister.''

Inside a 'Black Site'

It was at the Thai jail, not far from Bangkok, that Mr. Martinez first tried his
hand at interrogation on Abu Zubaydah, who refused to speak Arabic with his
captors but spoke passable English. It was also there, as previously reported,
that the C.I.A. would first try physical pressure to get information, including
the near-drowning of waterboarding. The methods came from the military's SERE
training program, for Survival, Evasion, Resistance and Escape, which many of
the C.I.A.'s paramilitary officers had themselves completed. A small version of
SERE had long operated at the C.I.A.'s Virginia training site, known as The
Farm.

Senior Federal Bureau of Investigation officials thought such methods
unnecessary and unwise. Their agents got Abu Zubaydah talking without the use of
force, and he revealed the central role of Mr. Mohammed in the 9/11 plot. They
correctly predicted that harsh methods would darken the reputation of the United
States and complicate future prosecutions. Many C.I.A. officials, too, had their
doubts, and the agency used contract employees with military experience for much
of the work.

Some C.I.A. officers were torn, believing the harsh treatment could be
effective. Some said that only later did they understand the political cost of
embracing methods the country had long shunned.

John C. Kiriakou, a former C.I.A. counterterrorism officer who was the first to
question Abu Zubaydah, expressed such conflicted views when he spoke publicly to
ABC News and other news organizations late last year. In a December interview
with The Times, before being cautioned by the C.I.A. not to discuss classified
matters, Mr. Kiriakou, who was not present for the waterboarding but read the
resulting intelligence reports, said he had been told that Abu Zubaydah became
compliant after 35 seconds of the water treatment.

''It was like flipping a switch,'' Mr. Kiriakou said of the shift from
resistance to cooperation. He said he thought such ''desperate measures'' were
justified in the ''desperate time'' in 2002 when another attack seemed imminent.
But on reflection, he said, he had concluded that waterboarding was torture and
should not be permitted. ''We Americans are better than that,'' he said.

With Abu Zubaydah's case, the pattern was set. With a new prisoner, the
interrogators, like Mr. Martinez, would open the questioning. In about
two-thirds of cases, C.I.A. officials have said, no coercion was used.

If officers believed the prisoner was holding out, paramilitary officers who had
undergone a crash course in the new techniques, but who generally knew little
about Al Qaeda, would move in to manhandle the prisoner. Aware that they were on
tenuous legal ground, agency officials at headquarters insisted on approving
each new step -- a night without sleep, a session of waterboarding, even a
''belly slap'' -- in an exchange of encrypted messages. A doctor or medic was
always on hand.

The tough treatment would halt as soon as the prisoner expressed a desire to
talk. Then the interrogator would be brought in.

Interrogation became Mr. Martinez's new forte, first with Abu Zubaydah; then
with Ramzi bin al-Shibh, the Yemeni who was said to have been an intermediary
between the 9/11 hijackers and Qaeda leaders, caught in September 2002; and then
with Abd al-Rahim al-Nashiri, the Saudi accused of planning the bombing of the
American destroyer Cole in 2000, who was caught in November 2002.

Mr. bin al-Shibh quickly cooperated; Mr. Nashiri resisted and was subjected to
waterboarding, intelligence officials have said. C.I.A superiors offered Mr.
Martinez and some other analysts the chance to be ''certified'' in what the
C.I.A. euphemistically called ''enhanced interrogation methods.''

Mr. Martinez declined, as did several other C.I.A. officers. He did not condemn
the tough methods, colleagues said, but he was learning that his talents lay
elsewhere.

Another Suspect Is Seized

The hunt for Khalid Shaikh Mohammed involved the entire American intelligence
establishment, with its billion-dollar arrays of spy satellites and global
eavesdropping net. But his capture came down to a simple text message sent from
an informant who had slipped into the bathroom of a house in Rawalpindi, near
the Pakistani capital, Islamabad.

''I am with K.S.M.,'' the message said, according to an intelligence officer
briefed on the episode.

The capture team waited a few hours before going in on the night of March 1,
2003, to blur the connection to the informant, a walk-in attracted by the offer
of a $25 million reward. The informant, described by one American who met him as
''a little guy who looked like a farmer,'' would later get a face-to-face thank
you from George J. Tenet, then the C.I.A. director, at the American Embassy in
Abu Dhabi, intelligence officials say, and he was resettled with his reward
money under a new identity in the United States.

Within days, Mr. Mohammed was flown to Afghanistan and then on to Poland, where
the most important of the C.I.A.'s black sites had been established. The secret
base near Szymany Airport, about 100 miles north of Warsaw, would become a
second home to Mr. Martinez during the dozens of hours he spent with Mr.
Mohammed.

Poland was picked because there were no local cultural and religious ties to Al
Qaeda, making infiltration or attack by sympathizers unlikely, one C.I.A.
officer said. Most important, Polish intelligence officials were eager to
cooperate.

''Poland is the 51st state,'' one former C.I.A. official recalls James L.
Pavitt, then director of the agency's clandestine service, declaring.
''Americans have no idea.''

Mr. Mohammed met his captors at first with cocky defiance, telling one veteran
C.I.A. officer, a former Pakistan station chief, that he would talk only when he
got to New York and was assigned a lawyer -- the experience of his nephew and
partner in terrorism, Ramzi Yousef, after Mr. Yousef's arrest in 1995.

But the rules had changed, and the tough treatment began shortly after Mr.
Mohammed was delivered to Poland. By several accounts, he proved especially
resistant, chanting from the Koran, doling out innocuous information or offering
obvious fabrications. The Times reported last year that the intensity of his
treatment -- various harsh techniques, including waterboarding, used about 100
times over a period of two weeks -- prompted worries that officers might have
crossed the boundary into illegal torture.

His cooperation came in fits and starts, and interrogators said they believed at
times that he gave them disinformation. But he talked most freely to Mr.
Martinez.

An obvious chasm separated these enemies -- the interrogator and the prisoner.
But Mr. Martinez shared a few attributes with his adversary that he could
exploit as he sought his secrets. They were close in age, approaching 40; they
had attended public universities in the American South (Mr. Mohammed had studied
engineering at North Carolina A&T); they were both religious; and they were both
fathers.

Mr. Mohammed, according to one former C.I.A. officer briefed on the sessions,
''would go through these emotional cycles.''

''He'd be chatty, almost friendly,'' the officer added. ''He liked to debate. He
got to the stage where he'd draw parallels between Christianity and Islam and
say, 'Can't we get along?' ''

By this account, Mr. Martinez would reply to the man who had overseen the
killing of nearly 3,000 people: ''Isn't it a little late for that?''

At other times, the C.I.A. officer said, Mr. Mohammed would grow depressed,
complaining about being separated from his family and ranting about his cell or
his food -- a common theme for other prisoners, including Abu Zubaydah, who
protested when the flavor of his Ensure nutrition drink was changed.

Sometimes Mr. Mohammed wrote letters to the Red Cross or to President Bush with
his demands; the letters went to C.I.A. psychologists for analysis.

And there were the poetic tributes to Mr. Martinez's wife, scribbled in Mr.
Mohammed's ungrammatical English and intended as a show of respect for his
interrogator, according to a colleague who heard Mr. Martinez's account.

But as time passed, Mr. Mohammed provided more and more detail on Al Qaeda's
structure, its past plots and its aspirations. When he sometimes sought to
mislead, interrogators often took his claims immediately to other Qaeda
prisoners at the Polish compound to verify the information.

The intelligence riches ultimately gleaned from Mr. Mohammed were reflected in
the report of the national 9/11 commission, whose footnotes credit his
interrogations 60 times for facts about Al Qaeda and its plotting -- while also
occasionally noting assertions by him that were ''not credible.''

The interrogations the commission cited began just 11 days after Mr. Mohammed's
capture and ended just days before the commission's report was published in
mid-2004. Together they amount to a detailed history of Mr. Mohammed's
initiation into terrorism along with his nephew, Mr. Yousef; his plotting of
mayhem from Bosnia to the Philippines; and his alliance with Osama bin Laden, to
whom the egotistical Mr. Mohammed was reluctant to defer.

Mr. Mohammed also claimed a role in a long list of completed and thwarted
attacks. Human rights advocates have questioned some of Mr. Mohammed's claims,
including the beheading of Mr. Pearl, the Wall Street Journal reporter,
suggesting that they may have been false statements made to stop torture.

But Mr. Martinez told colleagues that Mr. Mohammed volunteered out of the blue
that he was the man who killed Mr. Pearl. The C.I.A. at first was skeptical,
according to two former agency officials. Intelligence analysts eventually were
convinced, however, in part because Mr. Mohammed pointed out to Mr. Martinez
details of the hand and arm of the masked killer in a videotape of the murder
that appeared to show it was him.

''He was a leader,'' said a foreign counterterrorism official briefed on the
episode. ''He wanted to demonstrate to his people how ruthless he could be.''

Divergent Paths

On June 5,  Mr. Mohammed made a theatrical return to the public eye at his
Guantanamo Bay arraignment, with a long, graying beard and a defiant insistence
that the American military commission could do no more to him than give him his
wish: execution and martyrdom.

His interrogator has moved on, too. Like many other C.I.A. officers in the
post-9/11 security boom, Mr. Martinez left the agency for more lucrative work
with government contractors.

His life today is quiet by comparison with the secret interrogations of 2002 and
2003.  But Mr. Martinez has not turned away entirely from his old world. He now
works for Mitchell & Jessen Associates, a consulting company run by former
military psychologists who advised the C.I.A. on the use of harsh tactics in the
secret program.

And his new employer sent Mr. Martinez right back to the agency. For now, the
unlikely interrogator of the man perhaps most responsible for the horrors of
9/11 teaches other C.I.A. analysts the arcane art of tracking terrorists.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 25, 2008



CORRECTION: The Central Intelligence Agency asked The New York Times not to
publish the name of Deuce Martinez, an interrogator who questioned Khalid Shaikh
Mohammed and other high-level Al Qaeda prisoners, saying that to identify Mr.
Martinez would invade his privacy and put him at risk of retaliation from
terrorists or harassment from critics of the agency.

  After discussion with agency officials and a lawyer for Mr. Martinez, the
newspaper declined the request, noting that Mr. Martinez had never worked under
cover and that others involved in the campaign against Al Qaeda have been named
in news stories and books. The editors judged that the name was necessary for
the credibility and completeness of the article.

The Times's policy is to withhold the name of a news subject only very rarely,
most often in the case of victims of sexual assault or intelligence officers
operating under cover.

Mr. Martinez, a career analyst at the agency until his retirement a few years
ago, did not directly participate in waterboarding or other harsh interrogation
methods that critics describe as torture and, in fact, turned down an offer to
be trained in such tactics.

The newspaper seriously considered the requests from Mr. Martinez and the
agency. But in view of the experience of other government employees who have
been named publicly in books and published articles or who have themselves
chosen to go public, the newspaper made the decision to print the name.

A chart on Sunday with the continuation of a front-page article about the
C.I.A.'s secret interrogation program misidentified the Pakistan cities where
two major Al Qaeda figures, Abu Zubaydah and Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, were
captured. As the article correctly noted, Mr. Zubaydah was captured in
Faisalabad, not Rawalpindi, and Mr. Mohammed was captured in Rawalpindi, not
Karachi. The chart also misstated the year of Mr. Mohammed's capture. As the
article also correctly noted, he was captured in March 2003, not 2002.

The chart also overstated what is known about the location where the two men
were held en route from a prison in Poland to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. While it is
possible that the location may have been in the Middle East, that information
has not been confirmed.

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE PATH TO GUANTANAMO: Clockwise, from top left: the house in
Faisalabad, Pakistan, where Abu Zubaydah was seized in 2002
the Szymany Airport in Poland near a C.I.A. ''black site''
a sketch of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, standing, during his arraignment this month
and the media operations hangar at the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
(PHOTOGRAPHS BY PIERS BENATAR FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES
POOL PHOTO BY BRENNAN LINSLEY
JANET HAMLIN) (pg.A12)
INFORMATION: Ramzi bin al-Shibh, seized as a terrorist suspect in 2002, soon
cooperated with his interrogators. (PHOTOGRAPH BY ASSOCIATED PRESS) (pg.A13)
DRAWING: A courtroom artist's sketch of Khalid Shaikh Mohammed, a primary
suspect in the 9/11 attacks. (DRAWING BY JANET HAMLIN INFORMATION) (pg.A1)
 CHART: THE TRAIL OF TWO DETAINEES: Two important figures in Al Qaeda were
secretly detained by the Central Intelligence Agency for interrogation, before
they were brought to Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (pg.A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Series

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); RELIGION (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); TORTURE (89%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); MURDER
(58%); TEXT MESSAGING (50%)

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (51%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); AL-QAEDA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%); CUBA (90%); POLAND (88%); PAKISTAN
(79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1590 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The New Pariahs?

BYLINE: By NOAH FELDMAN.

Noah Feldman, a contributing writer, teaches law at Harvard and is a fellow at
the Council on Foreign Relations.

SECTION: Section MM; Column 0; Magazine Desk; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1055 words


No country is wholly free of anti-immigrant prejudice, whether it is the United
States, where illegal immigration was a hot-button issue in the Republican
primaries, or post-apartheid South Africa, where economic migrants were recently
burned to death. But in many Western European countries today, something new and
insidious seems to be happening. The familiar old arguments against immigrants
-- that they are criminals, that their culture makes them a bad fit, that they
take jobs from natives -- are mutating into an anti-Islamic bias that is
becoming institutionalized in the continent's otherwise ordinary politics.

Examples abound. The Swiss People's Party sponsors ads in which three white
sheep push one black sheep off the Swiss flag -- and wins 29 percent of the
vote. In Belgium, the Vlaams Belang deploys a clever variation, publicly
praising Jews and seeking their support against Muslims, whom it tellingly
describes as ''the main enemy of the moment.'' Meanwhile, the Dutch politician
Geert Wilders calls Islam ''the ideology of a retarded culture.''

Even Britain, which has afforded Muslims a more welcoming environment, has had
some worrying moments. A few years back, a Labor M.P. called for an end to ''the
tradition of first-cousin marriages'' among Pakistanis and other South Asians in
Britain. The basis for her suggestion was the claim that Pakistanis in Britain
were more likely than the general population to suffer from recessive autosomal
genetic disorders. Of course, so are Ashkenazi Jews, but you can hardly imagine
an M.P. proposing to limit Jews' marriage choices for this reason, especially
given the historic Nazi allegation of Jewish genetic inferiority.

What is so striking about these forms of prejudice, which go beyond ordinary
anti-immigrant feeling, is that they are taking root in otherwise enlightened,
progressive states -- states where the memory of the Holocaust has often led to
the adoption of laws against anti-Semitism and racism. The reasons, therefore,
must surely go beyond economic or cultural insecurity.

One factor that cannot be ignored is the threat of terrorism, so closely
associated today with radical Islam. In London, Madrid and Amsterdam, terrorist
acts have been perpetrated by Muslim immigrants or (more worrisome still) their
children. Yet it must be remembered that Europe has also suffered homegrown
terrorist attacks, motivated by everything from national liberation (in the
cases of the Irish Republican Army or the Basque E.T.A.) to radical leftism
(Baader-Meinhof and the Brigate Rosse). Europeans are, therefore, to a degree
acclimated to terror, undercutting its power as an explanation. And in the U.S.,
which on Sept. 11 suffered much greater terrorist damage than any European
country ever has, anti-Muslim bias does not have the political weight that it
does in Europe.

Well-meaning Europeans sometimes argue that unlike the U.S., their countries are
traditionally ''homogeneous'' and have little experience with immigration.
Generalized anti-immigrant feeling, they suggest, has come to rest on Muslims
simply because they are increasingly visible. In France, the specter of the
''Polish plumber'' undercutting French workmen's wages played a role in recent
votes, suggesting the possibility of an equal-opportunity bias. But hostility to
Eastern European migrants, though real enough, still does not run as deep as
corresponding hostility to Muslims.

The perception of cultural difference may help explain this disparity. Muslim
immigrants are depicted in European political rhetoric as not merely backward
but also illiberal, contradicting Europe's now-prevalent commitment to tolerance
of homosexuality and sex out of wedlock. At the same time, Muslims are thought
to be forcing their children to maintain practices like the head scarf, which is
banned in many French schools.

Certainly it is reasonable for free societies to encourage immigrants to adopt
their own liberal values. A Dutch requirement that potential immigrants view a
film depicting topless bathers and gay couples may seem a little childish, but
it is not a human rights violation, and it may even help prepare immigrants for
the different world they are poised to enter. Schools should teach the values of
the surrounding society, including respect for different lifestyles.
Nevertheless, a hallmark of liberal, secular societies is supposed to be respect
for different cultures, including traditional, religious cultures -- even
intolerant ones. There is something discomfiting about a selective respect that
extends to the Roman Catholic Church, with its rejection of homosexuality and
women priests, but excludes Islam for its sexism and homophobia.

This leaves another, more controversial explanation for anti-Muslim attitudes in
Europe: even after 60 years of introspection about the anti-Semitism that led to
the Holocaust, Europeans are not convinced that culturally and religiously
different immigrants should be treated as full members of their societies.
European anti-Semitism between the world wars featured accusations of
criminality, religious backwardness, genetic inferiority and, above all, the
impossibility of assimilation. And it is no coincidence that significant numbers
of the Jews in Western Europe were immigrants or children of immigrants from
farther east.

The U.S. had its own terrible legacy of legalized racism in the form of the Jim
Crow laws, which Hitler imitated for his own purposes. In the aftermath of World
War II, however, we began slowly and agonizingly to come to terms with this
past. Racial bias is still with us, but so is self-consciousness about our
problems and how they must be overcome.

In Europe, by contrast, Hitler's horrifying success at killing so many Jews
meant that the burgeoning postwar societies of the continent never had to come
to terms with difference, because it was to a great extent eradicated. Today, as
the birthrate for European Muslims far outstrips that for their neighbors, it is
as if Europe's discomfort with difference is being encountered for the first
time. In theory, Europe remembers the Holocaust. But the depth of that memory
may be doubted when many Europeans seem to have forgotten that their continent
was home to other outsiders well before the arrival of today's Muslim minority.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY ALEXANDRA BOULAT)
CHART: ATTITUDE CHECK: Percentage of citizens who think Muslims in their country
mostly want to...
 (CHART BY CHARLES M. BLOW, Source: The Pew Global Attitudes Project, 2006)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (92%); RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (90%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); RACE &
RACISM (90%); TERRORISM (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (84%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (77%);
HOLOCAUST (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); POLITICS (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); MENTAL RETARDATION (75%); BURN INJURIES (72%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (69%); GENETIC DISEASES (69%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (65%)

CITY: AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (71%); LONDON, ENGLAND (55%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); WESTERN EUROPE
(92%); PAKISTAN (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); BELGIUM (79%); SPAIN (71%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1591 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 22, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel in the Season of Dread

BYLINE: By ETHAN BRONNER

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1336 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


-- After a year of painful violence -- Hamas rockets flying into Israeli
communities, soldiers killed and wounded on forays into Gaza -- one might have
expected the start of a six-month cease-fire with Hamas to be hailed here as
good news. Yet what was the front page headline in Maariv newspaper that day?
''Fury and Fear.''

That says a great deal about the mood in Israel, a widely shared gloom that this
nation is facing alarming threats both from without and within. Seen from far
away, last week must have offered some hope that the region was finally at, or
near, a turning point: the truce with Hamas, negotiated by Egypt, started on
Thursday; other Palestinian-Israeli talks were taking place on numerous levels
that both sides said were opening long-closed issues; there were also
Turkish-mediated Israeli negotiations with Syria, and a new offer to yield
territory to Lebanon along with a call for direct talks between Jerusalem and
Beirut.

But it looked very different here. Most Israelis consider the truce with Hamas
an admission of national failure, a victory for a radical group with a vicious
ideology. As they look ahead, Israelis can't decide which would be worse, for
the truce to fall apart (as polls show most expect it to do), or for Hamas
actually to make it last, thereby solidifying the movement's authority in
Palestinian politics over the more secular Fatah. Moreover, most think that
Syria should not get back the Golan Heights -- its ostensible aim in talking
with Israel -- and that the truces and negotiations amount to little without the
return of captured Israeli soldiers held for the past two years.

Indeed, the ''fury'' in the headline of Maariv, a mass-selling center-right
paper, was at the failure, in the Hamas deal, to free Cpl. Gilad Shalit, still
held by Hamas after being  seized two years ago. And the ''fear'' was about the
fates of two other Israeli soldiers, Eldad Regev and Ehud Goldwasser, who had
been captured by the Lebanese militia Hezbollah. The militia seems to be on the
verge of completing a prisoner swap with Israel, but most everyone here dreads
that the two Israelis are dead, and the swap will involve only their remains.

The backdrop for all of this is the fear of Iran's growing power and the world's
inability so far to stop it from working on atomic weaponry. But it is not only
foreign relations that so depresses the Israeli public. It is also that their
political system is in crisis with the leaders under investigation and feuding
among themselves.

''It is not 'the situation' that darkens the mood here in Israel,'' wrote Yossi
Sarid, a longtime leftist politician, in an opinion article in the newspaper
Haaretz. ''It is the lack of exit from the situation. There is not really any
hope for change. Who will rescue us from depression? Who will give us
expectations?''

Mr. Sarid said Israelis envied those Americans who are pinning hopes on Barack
Obama as representing a new generation of leaders; Israel, he said, is stuck
with the same leaders who never go away.

Sasson Sara, a 57-year-old grocery store owner in Sderot, the town in southern
Israel that should be happiest that the Hamas rockets have been stopped, seemed
to confirm this contempt for the leadership when the truce with Hamas was
announced. ''To me, this is an agreement of surrender, like Chamberlain,'' he
said, referring to British appeasement of Hitler in the 1930s.

Asked if he was really comparing Israel's prime minister, Ehud Olmert, to
Neville Chamberlain, Mr. Sara said: ''Olmert is a bit younger. But he is tired.
He acted to save himself. All this 'calm' agreement will take a heavy price from
us in the future.''

Mr. Sara's use of the word ''calm'' (''regiah'' in Hebrew) was telling. No one
quite knows what to call the current accord. Many use the Arabic word
''tahadiya,'' which is what Hamas has chosen; the word means not quite a truce,
not quite a cease-fire, but some temporary cessation of hostilities.

The Israelis have chosen the word ''calm,'' which Doron Rosenblum, a
longstanding and offbeat Haaretz columnist, notes, ''brings to mind the cliched
cinematic images of raging mental patients being brought into a hospital.
Someone ran wild in the cuckoo's nest, was given a jolt of electricity or a
tranquilizer, and is now blinking quietly in his padded cell.''

One point many commentators made last week is that while there may be a state of
''calm'' with Hamas, there is still nothing resembling that between Mr. Olmert
and his defense minister, Ehud Barak. They remain at war. And the feuding goes
beyond the two of them.

Both of Mr. Olmert's two main lieutenants, Mr. Barak and Foreign Minister Tzipi
Livni, have called publicly for him to resign over an investigation into whether
he took envelopes of cash from an American Jewish businessman. Everyone assumes
there will be a new government by year's end. Yet a vote tentatively planned for
the coming week in Parliament, on whether to dissolve itself and trigger new
elections, may not happen because so many parliamentarians worry they will not
be re-elected.

Meanwhile, Mr. Barak spent part of Friday in a meeting with the families of the
missing soldiers, the topic that has most gripped the nation. Interviews with
their relatives have dominated coverage in recent days because it was widely
assumed that no self-respecting Israeli government would accede to a truce with
Hamas without getting back Mr. Shalit.

The Israeli Army radio station, which has a wide audience, has been punctuating
nearly every hour's broadcast with an announcement of the need to ''bring our
sons home.'' This is not merely a turn of phrase suggesting a collective
conceit; Israelis relate to one another like members of a large family, and the
gnawing pain felt by Mr. Shalit's parents is widely shared in a country where
the vast majority of young people serve in the military.

In fact, one of the most striking things about Israel's internal political
conversation is how personal it is. This is a tiny country of seven million that
often finds itself at the center of international debate. And while Israelis
often complain about this -- why aren't hundreds of journalists and human rights
activists worried about North Korea or Uganda or Saudi Arabia? -- they also take
an odd pride in it, as if it were evidence of their secret suspicion that world
history really does revolve around the fate of the Jews and their homeland.

The result is a public discourse that amounts to a bizarre mix of geopolitics
and distinctly local news. It is not out of character for the morning radio
broadcast to spend 10 minutes on whether Syria is building a nuclear weapon
followed by 10 minutes on a young bride whose wedding was ruined when one of the
sound system speakers fell on her foot. Since both are given equal weight, it
can be hard to separate out the pain of one family from the strategic needs of
the state. This makes it challenging for Israelis to step back far enough to
gain a view of what is happening.

Tony Blair, the former prime minister of Britain, who has spent part of the past
year as an international envoy to the Palestinians, said on Thursday that it
could be very hard for everyone involved to gain a grasp on this conflict.

''The view of what is happening here tends to lurch between unjustified optimism
-- pretty rare, actually -- to unnecessarily bleak pessimism, which is more
common,'' he said in a conversation in his Jerusalem offices. ''There is a
cease-fire now and both sides think the other's commitment is tactical rather
than strategic.''

He added that, as he now understands it, what started in late 2000 when the
second Palestinian uprising began and Israel counterattacked was ''a complete
breakdown in the credibility of peace.'' For most of the time since then, he
said, no one on either side took the prospect of peace seriously. Now, he
argues, that must change, adding, ''It is our job, step by step, to rebuild the
credibility of that process.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: THE FRONT: Line Sderot, an Israeli town on Gaza's border, spent
all spring in fear of rocket attacks.(PHOTOGRAPH BY URIEL SINAI/GETTY IMAGES)
 CLINGING TO POWER: Ehud Olmert.(PHOTOGRAPH BY  POOL PHOTO BY DAVID FURST)(pg.
WK4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HAMAS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); POLITICS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (74%); HEZBOLLAH (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (53%);
INVESTIGATIONS (50%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%)

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (90%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); SYRIA (92%);
LEBANON (90%); TURKEY (79%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1593 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Bush Paradox

BYLINE: By DAVID BROOKS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 789 words


Let's go back and consider how  the world looked in the winter of 2006-2007.
Iraq was in free fall, with horrific massacres and ethnic cleansing that sent a
steady stream of bad news across the world media. The American public delivered
a stunning electoral judgment against the Iraq war, the Republican Party and
President Bush.

Expert and elite opinion swung behind the Baker-Hamilton report, which called
for handing more of the problems off to the Iraqi military and wooing Iran and
Syria. Republicans on Capitol Hill were quietly contemptuous of the president
while Democrats were loudly so.

Democratic leaders like Senator Harry Reid considered the war lost. Barack Obama
called for a U.S. withdrawal starting in the spring of 2007, while Senator Reid
offered legislation calling for a complete U.S. pullback by March 2008.

The arguments floating around the op-ed pages and seminar rooms were
overwhelmingly against the idea of a surge -- a mere 20,000 additional troops
would not make a difference. The U.S. presence provoked violence, rather than
diminishing it. The more the U.S. did, the less the Iraqis would step up to do.
Iraq was in the middle of a civil war, and it was insanity to put American
troops in the middle of it.

When President Bush consulted his own generals, the story was much the same.
Almost every top general, including Abizaid, Schoomaker and Casey, were against
the surge. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice was against it, according to
recent reports. Iraqi Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki called for a smaller
U.S. presence, not a bigger one.

In these circumstances, it's amazing that George Bush decided on the surge. And
looking back, one thing is clear: Every personal trait that led Bush to make a
hash of the first years of the war led him to make a successful decision when it
came to this crucial call.

Bush is a stubborn man. Well, without that stubbornness, that unwillingness to
accept defeat on his watch, he never would have bucked the opposition to the
surge.

Bush is an outrageously self-confident man. Well, without that self-confidence
he never would have overruled his generals.

In fact, when it comes to Iraq, Bush was at his worst when he was humbly
deferring to the generals and at his best when he was arrogantly overruling
them. During that period in 2006 and 2007, Bush stiffed the brass and sided with
a band of dissidents: military officers like David Petraeus and Raymond Odierno,
senators like John McCain and Lindsey Graham, and outside strategists like Fred
Kagan of the American Enterprise Institute and Jack Keane, a retired general.

Bush is also a secretive man who listens too much to Dick Cheney. Well, the
uncomfortable fact is that Cheney played an essential role in promoting the
surge. Many of the people who are dubbed bad guys actually got this one right.

The additional fact is that Bush, who made such bad calls early in the war, made
a courageous and astute decision in 2006. More than a year on, the surge has
produced large, if tenuous, gains. Violence is down sharply. Daily life has
improved. Iraqi security forces have been given time to become a more effective
fighting force. The Iraqi government is showing signs of strength and even
glimmers of impartiality. Iraq has moved from being a failed state to, as Vali
Nasr of the Council on Foreign Relations has put it, merely a fragile one.

The whole episode is a reminder that history is a complicated thing. The traits
that lead to disaster in certain circumstances are the very ones that come in
handy in others. The people who seem so smart at some moments seem incredibly
foolish in others.

The cocksure war supporters learned this humbling lesson during the dark days of
2006. And now the cocksure surge opponents, drunk on their own vindication, will
get to enjoy their season of humility. They have already gone through the stages
of intellectual denial. First, they simply disbelieved that the surge and the
Petraeus strategy was doing any good. Then they accused people who noticed
progress in Iraq of duplicity and derangement. Then they acknowledged military,
but not political, progress. Lately they have skipped over to the argument that
Iraq is progressing so well that the U.S. forces can quickly come home.

But before long, the more honest among the surge opponents will concede that
Bush, that supposed dolt, actually got one right. Some brave souls might even
concede that if the U.S. had withdrawn in the depths of the chaos, the world
would be in worse shape today.

Life is complicated. The reason we have democracy is that no one side is right
all the time. The only people who are dangerous are those who can't admit, even
to themselves, that obvious fact.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); IRAQ WAR (78%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (64%)

COMPANY: AMERICAN ENTERPRISE INSTITUTE FOR PUBLIC POLICY RESEARCH (50%)

INDUSTRY: SIC8733 NONCOMMERCIAL RESEARCH ORGANIZATIONS (50%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); HARRY REID (73%); BARACK OBAMA (71%); DICK CHENEY
(58%); RAY ODIERNO (58%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); DAVID
PETRAEUS (58%); NOURI AL-MALIKI (56%); JOHN MCCAIN (56%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1595 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Hague: Serb Police Chief On Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 108 words


Stojan Zupljanin, a former Bosnian Serb police chief who is accused of
atrocities against Bosnian Muslims and Croats, made his first appearance in The
Hague before the United Nations tribunal that will try him. Arrested by the
police in Serbia on June 11, Mr. Zupljanin declined to enter a plea. He was
indicted on seven counts of war crimes and six of crimes against humanity,
accused of murder, torture, unlawful detention, forcible deportation, the
destruction of villages and political, racial and religious persecution. Mr.
Zupljanin, 56, sat mostly stoically as the charges were read out, apart from an
occasional sigh and shake of his head.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (88%); RELIGION
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INDICTMENTS (87%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); DEPORTATION (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (92%);
SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1597 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Soccer 1, Mugabe 0

BYLINE: By PETER GODWIN.

Peter Godwin is the author of ''When a Crocodile Eats the Sun.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 623 words


IN these last few weeks, the full nature of Robert Mugabe's repressive regime in
Zimbabwe has been cruelly exposed. With his increasingly brazen resort to
torture and hit squads to terrorize his own people, Mr. Mugabe has crossed a
moral line. Some United Nations lawyers now say there is enough evidence to
charge him with crimes against humanity.

Morgan Tsvangirai, the leader of the Movement for Democratic Change and Mr.
Mugabe's opponent in Friday's runoff presidential election, had little choice
but to pull out of the race. (Mr. Tsvangirai has taken refuge in the Dutch
embassy in Harare.) Proceeding with elections would have ensured the murder of
even more of his supporters. Any middle ground in this conflict has disappeared.

Standing amid the ruins of Zimbabwe looms the vacillating, dithering, morally
compromised figure of Thabo Mbeki, the president of South Africa -- hitherto the
point man in the region -- who was supposed to help ensure a free and fair
outcome in the Zimbabwean election. Even at this late stage, with death squads
on the move, Mr. Mbeki is still trying to persuade the Movement for Democratic
Change to participate as a junior partner in some sort of Kenya-style unity
government.

Mr. Tsvangirai and his followers -- who have remained nonviolent, participated
in three rigged elections and tried to inhabit ''democratic space'' as it
diminished to a sliver -- are understandably loath to join in an administration
with the very people who have been attacking them. What's more, joining would
only reward Mr. Mugabe for his violent repression. The solution for Zimbabwe is
simple: a free and fair election.

The international community has no choice but to delegitimize Mr. Mugabe's
regime. For a start, the ''results'' of Friday's election should not be
recognized. In effect, the world should no longer acknowledge Mr. Mugabe as
Zimbabwe's president. And should the opposition set up a government in exile,
the West should move to deal with that government instead, based on the results
of the March election, in which Mr. Tsvangirai drew more votes than Mr. Mugabe.

Of course, South Africa could use its economic power to draw Mr. Mugabe's rule
to an end in weeks rather than months. Yet Mr. Mbeki has steadfastly refused to
act, providing a protective cloak for Mr. Mugabe's repression. And just a few
weeks ago, even as opposition members were being tortured, Mr. Mbeki visited
Zimbabwe, allowing himself to be garlanded at the airport and displayed on
state-run TV with a broadly grinning Mr. Mugabe. In the United Nations Security
Council, where South Africa currently has a seat, Mr. Mbeki has opposed attempts
to put the political situation in Zimbabwe on the agenda.

If Mr. Mbeki's cost-benefit calculus has been such that he hasn't seen it
necessary to take tougher action, perhaps it's time to change that calculus.
Perhaps, for example, now is not the time for you to book a safari to South
Africa. Or for you, or any institution that manages your funds, to make new
investments in the country.

Most important, there is the FIFA soccer World Cup, for which South Africa is to
act as host in 2010. That may seem like a long way off, but South Africa is
already investing huge amounts both financially and politically, for what is
supposed to be its triumphal coming-out party. Maybe Zimbabwe should become to
the South Africa-hosted World Cup what Tibet has been to the Beijing Olympics --
the pungent albatross that spoils every press conference and mars every
presentation with its insistent odor.

Perhaps it's time to share the Zimbabweans' pain, to help persuade Mr. Mbeki to
bear down on its source by threatening to grab the world's soccer ball and take
our games elsewhere.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: DRAWING (DRAWING BY GRADY WHITE)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); MURDER
(76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); POLITICS (76%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (76%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); EVIDENCE
(72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); ELECTION FRAUD (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (58%)

PERSON: MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (79%); THABO MBEKI (79%)

CITY: HARARE, ZIMBABWE (79%)

COUNTRY: ZIMBABWE (97%); SOUTH AFRICA (93%); NETHERLANDS (79%); KENYA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1615 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 1, 2008 Tuesday
                         The New York Times on the Web

An Interview With Abdelmalek Droukdal

BYLINE: By THE NEW YORK TIMES

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg.

LENGTH: 4607 words


Following is a transcript of audio responses to questions from The New York
Times for Abdelmalek Droukdal, the leader of Al Qaeda in the Islamic Maghreb.
The responses were in Arabic and were translated by The New York Times.


The New York Times: Why did you join Al Qaeda?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: Praise to God and peace and blessing be upon God's prophet,
his family, his companions and his allies. As for the answer to your question,
why did we join Al Qaeda? We say, why shouldn't we join Al Qaeda? God ordered us
to be united, to be allied, to cooperate and fight against the idolaters in
straight lines. The same way they fight us in military allies and economic and
political mass-groupings. Why shouldn't we join our brothers while almost all
these nations got united against the Muslims and separated them, and divided
their land, and took away Al Aksa mosque out of their hands, and consumed their
goodness, and destroyed their morals? Then look at the crimes that happen in
Gaza and Iraq and Afghanistan, and Somalia and others places. These crimes are
committed by the Jew-crusader ally. But when the Muslims get together to defend
themselves, they blame them for getting together and accused them with
mass-grouping, and made an approach about their unity. Yes, we see that it's our
duty to join Al Qaeda so that we can have our fight under one flag and one
leadership in order to get ready for the confrontation. An ally is faced by
another ally, and unity is faced by unity. The joining was a legitimate
necessity by the book of our God and the sunnah of our prophet, peace and
blessing be upon him. It was a mindful necessity imposed by the actual reality
and the international system that is full with injustice against the Muslims.
Many analysts and observers are mistaken when they think that our joining was a
result of secular accounts and self interests. We are a jihadi ancestral
community. We rely on legitimacy (from religion) before anything else as a base
of our decisions.

The New York Times: What have you gained from your relation with Al Qaeda, and
conversely what has Al Qaeda gained from your joining?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: As we mentioned in our previous answer that our joining to
Al Qaeda wasn't a deal that we try to gain something out of it, as many of those
who call themselves experts in jihadi groups promote. In reality, they are way
far from the real understanding of the jihadi ancestral movement. We say that we
realized and we got from this joining many goals. The most important one is that
we believe that we won and acquired the pleasure of God by following his order.
God's says ''hold on to the rope of God and do not be dispersed.'' If there was
nothing to realize from this joining except following the order of this verse,
we would never hesitate to do so.

Secondly, we realized a condition and a reason for victory. If difference and
division are causes of weakness and defeat as it was mentioned in our religion
''And fall into no disputes, lest ye lose heart and your power departs.''
(Koran: Chapter 8, Verse 46). Unity is a reason of strength and victory. This is
a universal norm that even the infidels are aware of. All these mass-groupings
and the international alliances are proof of that. We Muslims must be the ones
who apply this universal norm.

Thirdly, by this unity we brought grief and sorrow to our enemies the Jews and
apostates and crusaders.

These are some of the most important goals, which are many, thank god. We hope
that we got our God's pleasure, and the confidence of our nation, and that we
made terrorized our enemy.

The New York Times: We understand that the correspondence between you,
Abdelmalek Droukdal, and Abu Musab al-Zarqawi in 1994 and 1995 by e-mail played
a decisive role in your joining to Al Qaeda. Is that true?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: The date that you mentioned is wrong. Maybe you meant the
years 2004 and 2005. Yes, we don't deny the pivotal role of the martyr of the
nation Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, may God bless him, in the joining operation since
its first phases. We ask God to reward him with the best reward for what he has
done for Islam, jihad, and for the nation. Nevertheless, we don't underestimate
the efforts of many of the brothers. Because the joining operation relied on
other channels and contacts that other brothers participated in them. May God
reward them goodness on our behalf and Islam's behalf.

The New York Times:  Did Abu Laith al-Libi and Atiyah Abdel Rahman help in
making your contact with Al Qaeda?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: We don't want to mention persons in particular, but there
was a participation from many brothers to make the contact and there are many
channels that allow us to do it. Thank God.

The New York Times:  As we understand, you continue to communicate with Qaeda
leaders in Waziristan. Is this true? And what is the nature of the information
you exchange?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: We care about staying in contact with our brothers in
Afghanistan or Iraq or any other jihad side. Our project is one. Therefore, we
have to help, advise, consult each other, and exchange the experiences and
coordinate the efforts to face the world's crusade war against Islam.

The New York Times:  Does Al Qaeda give you any assistance? And if so, what is
the nature of this assistance?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: We and Al Qaeda are one body. It's normal that they get
stronger by us and we get stronger by them. They back us up and we back them up.
They supply us and we supply them with any kind of support, loyalty, advice and
available support.

The New York Times:  Do you have any support in Europe? And if so, how much and
what kind?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: Yes, there are people who are sympathetic with us in Europe
and elsewhere. The Muslims are sympathetic with Al Qaeda because its cause is
just. Also, most of the Muslims including those residing in Europe are against
the crusade war lead by America, and they hate the Arab regimes that are working
as agents and that crushed their people and sold the Palestinian cause in the
give-up market. But what should be thought about is that whoever is arrested by
the European governments in Spain, France, Britain or Italy and allegedly say
that they are related to our organization, all that is a lie, and deception, and
injustice. The problem is that the European government started judging the
Muslims about their intentions and their sympathy with the Muslims' causes. This
comes from the crusade's religious hate that moves the West, and that blew up
all the bright slogans that they hold dear, such as freedom, forgiveness, human
rights and justice, those slogans that they hurt our hearing with for years.

The New York Times:  How many active fighters do you have?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: Thank God we have enough fighters to make our enemies lose.
It doesn't matter if they were in hundreds or thousands, because the numeric
factor in the unification doctrine is the last and the weakest of the
influencing factors in the equation of victory or defeat. We have a holy Koran
and a pure sunnah [the way of the Prophet Muhammad] and a large history that has
a balance of tests, and it's full with examples that prove that the victory of
the believers during all past generations, since prophet Moses until today, is
from God. God says ''There is no help except from God: and God is exalted in
power, wise.'' (Chapter 8, Verse 10) and ''If God helps you, none can overcome
you. (Chapter 3, Verse 160).

It's not from themselves or from their large number or arms. Lately,
specifically in Algeria, France left defeated in 1962 after the liberation war,
even though the day it went out it was and still is a military superpower, the
third or fourth power in the world. Meanwhile, the power of the mujahedeen in
Algeria went backward in the last few years of the revolution. They were weaker
when France went out, compared to the years that represent for the revolution
its top power and hest ascendancy. You see today many wars against Islam in many
places, and where barely a tracker finds any mentioned role of numeric
superiority for the mujahedeen. Nevertheless, we stress that we possess a huge
inventory of men. This inventory gets wider, bigger and spreads with time. We
use it according to the necessity and according to our available material. As
far as the numbers that the Interior Ministry has given, the confusion and the
contradiction that they contain make them unreliable and subject of ridicule
between people.

The New York Times:  Where do your fighters come from?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: The large proportion of our mujahedeen comes from Algeria.
And there is a considerable number of Mauritanians, Libyans, Moroccans,
Tunisians, Mali's and Nigerians brothers.

The New York Times:  How many of your fighters have returned from fighting in
Iraq?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: What the media is promoting about the existence of a large
proportion of fighters in Iraq that came back and joined us is wrong. But there
is a limited and very small number of the mujahedeen brothers who fought in Iraq
than came back and joined us.

The New York Times:  How many men have joined your group after being released
from prison through the government's amnesty program for convicted militants?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: If you mean those who came back from Iraq. As I said their
number is very limited and there is nobody among them that the government
released. But if you mean those whom the government released, within what you
call reconciliation, and then joined the jihad, they are plenty, thanks to God.
And this is proof that the reconciliation program that [Algerian President]
Bouteflika promotes has failed badly, and the matter of jihad is still alive
inside the hearts of the Muslims in Algeria.

The New York Times:  What are your goals?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: God says, ''And fight them on until there is no more
persecution, and religion becomes God's in its entirety.'' (Chapter 8, Verse 39)
Our first goal is the arbitration of the Lord of the world's law, and the
achievement of the servitude to God. Our general goals are the same goals of Al
Qaeda the mother, and you know them. As far as our goals concerning the Islamic
Maghreb, they are plenty. But most importantly is to rescue our countries from
the tentacles of these criminal regimes that betrayed their religion, and their
people. Because they are all secretions of the colonialism that invaded our
country in the last two centuries, and enabled those regimes to govern.
Therefore, they started governing for its account and on behalf of it. They
implement its programs and protect its interests and fight Islam on its behalf.
It's never going to be possible for this region to stabilize unless its people
start enjoying freedom and dignity and security under Islam. The conditions of
stability will not be available in the presence of these corrupt and harming
models that proved for decades that they are unable to achieve the least
rapprochement between their people in any of the areas. We are one nation with
one religion and one language. Our history is the same but our land is divided,
torn apart into states by colonialism.

After half a century since independence, there is a clear deliberate action from
the agents of colonialism in creating this rupture. More than that, there are
hidden intentions that enlarge and deepen the chasm between its people. The
Sahara issue is the best witness about that. What is strange is that the
Moroccan regime according to its claim seeks to annex the Western Sahara that is
ruled by Saharans. In the mean time, it is as silent as an accomplice about the
occupation of Centa and Melilla by the Spanish crusaders. The same thing applies
for Algeria, They claim that they strongly support the principle of the right of
the people to decide their self determination, while a few days ago they refused
to acknowledge the independence of Kosovo from the criminal Serbian entity. Even
though the Muslim people of Kosovo chose to be independent in the elections that
was supervised by the U.S administration and the U.N and NATO. Therefore, one of
our goals is to stop this tampering and make an end to these foolish and blind
policies, and rescue our Islamic Maghreb from the project that was designed to
destroy it. Also, we seek to liberate the Islamic Maghreb from the sons of
France and Spain and from all symbols of treason and employment for the
outsiders, and protect it from the foreign greed and the crusader's hegemony.

The New York Times:  Do you intend to attack any American interests in Algeria?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: When we carried arms we declared that we are fighting the
crusaders' agents among those rulers who came out against Islam and committed
crimes of corruption and tyranny and treason against the religion and the
nation. And we said that we want to bring back the place of Islam in the country
and the ruling of the Koran over the people, and bring to the nation its rights
that were taken. But what happened later on is the West. They provided it with
all kind of support and encouraged it and supported it in the forums. It did not
stop there, it even went further to a direct intervention. Then we found
ourselves on the black list of the U.S administration, tagged with terrorism.
Then we found America building military bases in the south of our country and
conducting military exercises, and plundering our oil and planning to get our
gas. Also, opening an F.B.I. branch in our capital city, and starting an unusual
Christian conversion campaign among our youths to change their religion in order
to create religious minorities among us.

Its embassy in Algeria began playing almost the same role as the American
Embassies in Baghdad or Kabul. It intervenes in the internal policy by planning,
instructing and controlling. All of that just to kill the spirit of jihad and
resistance among the Muslims so that it can put its hand on the energy stock
that we have. So did America leave us any choice with this flagrant aggression?
No doubt that the answer is going to be no. Therefore, it became our right and
our duty to push away with all our strength this crusade campaign and declare
clearly that the American interests are legitimate targets to us.

We will strive to strike them whenever we can. And we are sure that America is
going to loose its war against us like it lost it against Afghanistan and Iraq.
It's America that is unfair and that started evil and injustice. Injustice is
the greatest cause of the disappearance of the countries even if they were
Muslims. Why not and America has the both infidelity and injustice. ''And those
who did wrong will know what they will end-up with.

The New York Times:  Do you intend to carry out any attacks on American soil?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: If the U.S. administration sees that its war against the
Muslims is legitimate, then what makes us believe that our war on its
territories is not legitimate? Everyone must know that we will not hesitate in
targeting it whenever we can and wherever it is on this planet. We say to the
American people who are driven to more catastrophes by the Bush administration:
If you are truly looking for your security and safety then listen carefully to
the speeches of our sheik and emir, Osama bin Laden, may God protect him, who
advised you to stop supporting Bush and his policies and to unseat your
government that is invading the Muslims' homes. Otherwise, Bush and his
administration will drive you to abyss and loss.

The New York Times:  How strong is organization in the Maghreb? How much support
do you have?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: Yes, we do have a lot of support from our Islamic nation in
the Maghreb. This generous nation that gave and still giving the best of its
sons for the jihad. Without this support our fight against this puppet regime
and its masters wouldn't last for 16 years continuously despite the French and
the Americans' material and information support, and despite the alliance of the
Maghreb regimes and the coast region against us. The Maghreb region is
witnessing an awakening blessed jihad in Mauritania, Morocco, Libya, Nigeria,
after the nation and its youths discovered the size of employment for the
crusaders and the treason committed by this government against its people.

The New York Times:  What is your view on the estimated $120 billion the
Algerian government has collected from oil and gas sales, and the criticism that
the government has not spent this money on programs to help create jobs for
Algerians?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: This is the greatest kind of crime and theft against our
nation, and among the greatest methods of looting and robbery that these robber
governments are characterized with. The country is floating over a sea of oil
and gas. The size of the revenue never stopped getting larger, year after year,
and month after month. It's ironic that as the line is on the rise in oil
revenues, the line of the living standards of the population is in decline. It
is logic that this situation drags us to ask this question: Where does the oil
and gas money go? The Algerian finance minister months ago said he doesn't know
where is this money, and after a short time from this statement the supreme
authority wanted to rectify this scandal, and then announced that 60 percent of
this money is in the American banks and that 40 percent is distributed between
Britain and France and Japan.

Do you now know who is the first beneficiary of the $120 billion? It's the
American and European economy, and the way of the remaining percentage of the
money is opposed by the senior thieves deployed in all the official institutions
starting by the presidency of the republic, passing by the ministry of fuel and
trade, and the ministry of defense which its generals conquer the drug trade,
the smuggling of goods, transfer of property, looting of public money through
embezzlement, bribery and types of commissions.

How is it possible for the country to benefit from this wealth if the president
himself is considered to be a burglar with criminal records? In the 1980s he was
required by the court of suppress of economic crimes, and his story is well
known.

In short, the beneficiaries of the energy revenues in the first place are the
American and European economy, followed by the thieves that are ruling the
country. The rest is spent to fight the jihad and the mujahedeen by acquiring
weapons that are directed only towards the chests of the Muslims, and airplanes
that don't stop shelling the best children of the nation in the mountains.

As far as the conditions of the poor people, they will not change. The poverty
will remain plagued in the body of the nation. The boats of death will remain
throwing the desperate youths to the sea. All the honorable in the nation, the
intellectuals, unions, students and advocates should resist this plunder. They
should incite the nation for jihad and martyrdom in order to recover the rights
taken away. The Muslim youths must not take the policy of escape and clandestine
immigration, they have to carry the weapon to take back their rights and push
away the domination of those agents.

The New York Times:  How do you respond to critics who say the Algerian
government has weakened your operational abilities, and that the passage of
April 11 without a large attack was evidence of this?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: The Algerian government can lie to the public however it
wants and it can make its effort to field facts. But what can not be hidden is
that its soldiers are killed constantly and that the bombs of the mujahedeen
harvest dozens of them monthly. And that the western interests cannot be
protected, and that it will get its share also as we did with the U.N. and the
Interpol headquarters and the embassy of Israel in Nouakchott, and the German
hostages, then the Austrians.

Just as a reminder, this is not the first time that they repeat this talk. For
years, they described the mujahedeen as tattered and tearing. But, during the
recovery of the jihad in the last few years people discovered the size of the
government's misleading of them with the complicity of the Algerian press that
is dependent, especially in what concerns the security news that is controlled
by the intelligence agencies. Concerning the April 11th question and that we
couldn't strike this year in this date, of course we are not stupid to let our
enemy define for us the date when we should strike. But, by the strength from
God, we define the date and the place. The apostates and their masters have to
wait for the strikes that the heroes of Islam will generously do in the right
place and time.

The New York Times:  Some people have criticized the December 11 attacks in
Algiers, saying innocent people were killed. How do you justify this?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: We are not insane to target our Muslim brothers. We left
our homes and took this long and tiring road and we sacrificed ourselves and our
efforts and our time only to defend the Muslims and to preserve their lives and
their holy sites. This lie that the media is repeating about us is very untrue,
and its objective is to mangle us and to isolate us from the nation so that they
wouldn't sympathized with us.

If we really wanted to strike the civilians, we could have reaped hundreds in
one strike by targeting the markets and the transportation and the public
gatherings. Our goals in our fight are very clear, which are the military and
official targets of the government and the Western interests. We make sure as
much as we can in our attacks that no Muslim gets hurt. But, the government and
the press lie to the people and say that the people who died in the U.N
headquarters are civilians. But the truth is that more than 95 percent of the
injured are associated with the U.N. headquarters and are from the crusaders and
from the police and guards, eventually with a civilian dress. Those are not all
civilians. Also the people associated with the blasphemousness Constitutional
council are in the scale of the commencing (religion) fighters and enemies of
Islam. And those who were injured in Batna when Bouteflika was targeted, they
were police and military intelligence wearing a civilian dress. So, are those
civilians? This is lying and mangling that's all. It's the same thing that the
Americans and the apostate government are doing in Iraq. They ignore 30 killed
apostate police men and focus on one Muslim who got hurt unintentionally.

Also, most of the time they call the police civilians and this is mangling and
media war, nothing more. We assure our Muslim brothers that they will not get
hurt by their mujahedeen brothers. We sacrifice our souls and blood to defend
you and to protect you from the sons of France and the agents of America. Our
nation must know that we are in a war against the apostates and their crusader
masters. Mistakes may occur in the war but they are unintentional. We seek
pardon from God and we apology to our nation about that.

The New York Times:  Have you had to adjust your tactics in any way to deal with
the support provided to Algeria by America, such as electronic surveillance or
night vision goggles?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: Of course, we do modify our strategy according to each
stage. And we have an advice council and senate that convene each time to put
down the plans and the strategies for the phase. It also assesses the previous
phases and remedies the deficiencies and takes into account the development on
the jihad ground. The Americans entered the line and they have bases on the
Algerian territories and other places even if the government lies and claims
other than that. Then they (the Americans) provide the Algerian military with
developed materials as you mentioned and they train the security services in the
Sahara, and provide them with information and air watch. We draw our power from
God, glory to him, and we rely on him ''on God the believers shall rely.'' God
is greater than America. America or other than America willnot frighten us, but
we never underestimate the reason. We do strive to make the right plans to face
this evil alliance against Islam and the Muslims. America must know that when it
gets involved in a war with the sons of Youssouf ibn Tachfine and the grand
children of Tarik ibn Ziyad, then the region will turn on fire under America's
feet, if God permits it. We will mobilize the sons of the Islamic Maghreb in
order to soak the nose of the Americans in the mud, and put into their account
that's already filled with defeats, another defiance.

The New York Times:  What do you see as your biggest accomplishment to date, and
your biggest failure?

Abdelmalek Droukdal: We believe that our greatest achievement is that the jihad
is sill continuing in the Islamic Maghreb for 16 years. And today it is
developing and climbing. By the generosity of God we were able to transfer our
jihad from the country to regional, and we were able to expand our activity to
the Maghreb states and the African coast, and we could participate in the
regional awakening jihad. Based on their sacrifices and their blood, our
mujahedeen could keep the jihad reason and carry the flag generation after
generation, and revive the absent duty in the hearts of the Muslims. Today, we
receive a lot of requests from some Muslims who want to do martyrdom operations.
In Mauritania, Morocco and Tunisia we see Muslim youths who support our matter,
they are ready to sacrifice themselves and their money for the sake of
supporting Islam. We consider this as one of our greatest achievements. Among
our greatest achievements is that we realized unity with our brothers as an
important step towards the adult succession. Also, we did not weaken and we
remained on the road, we developed our jihad and we revived the jihad matter in
the heart of our nation after it was absent for a long time. This is a big
change in the region and we thank God that he enabled us to participate in its
achievement. We ask his glory to be like those people whom he said about ''How
many of the prophets fought (in God's way), and with them (fought) large band of
godly men? But they never lost heart in they met in disaster in God's way, nor
did they weaken (in will) nor give in. and God loves those who are firm and
steadfast. (Chapter 3, Verse 146).

Regarding failure, we don't know what failure is. The real failure is in these
agent regimes who betray their religion and their nation. The nation discovered
their betrayal, their corruption and their cooperation with the enemies of
Islam. The large percentage of non-participation in the last elections, and the
large opposition to the government's policies by the people, and the death of
hundreds of youths in the ocean because of the clandestine immigration, and the
repeated popular intifada, which the last one happened in Achlaf, and the
proportion of the poverty and unemployment indices, and the growing union
strikes, and the gap that grows day after day between the people and the
government. These are all indicators of a real failure that becomes an emerged
feature of all the governments of the Islamic Maghreb that are agents. If it is
necessary to have a failure, then surely our failure is that we are for a long
time unable to win the martyrdom and join our brothers who preceded us on the
road of sacrifice and martyrdom: ''O Lord! (they say), let not our hearts
deviate now after thou guided us, but grant us mercy from thee: from thou art
the grantor of bounties without measure.'' (Chapter 3, Verse 7).

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (79%); AFGHANISTAN (73%)

LOAD-DATE: July 1, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1621 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 3, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinian Rams Construction Vehicle Into Traffic, Killing 3

BYLINE: By ISABEL KERSHNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 913 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM


The Palestinian driver of a large construction vehicle went on a deadly rampage
along a central Jerusalem thoroughfare on Wednesday, crushing several cars and
ramming into buses and pedestrians before an off-duty soldier and a police
officer clambered up to the cabin and fatally shot him.

At least three people were killed by the lurching vehicle, and more than 40 were
wounded, Israeli officials said.

The police said that they were treating the event as a terrorist attack and that
the driver, about 30 years old, was a resident of Sur Baher, an Arab
neighborhood of East Jerusalem, which was captured by Israel in 1967 and then
annexed.

''There is no doubt at all that this was a terrorist attack,'' Micky Rosenfeld,
a police spokesman, said at the scene shortly afterward. He added that the
authorities were investigating whether the driver, identified by acquaintances
as Hussam Dweikat, had acted alone.

Two of the victims were Israeli women, Bat Sheva Unterman, 33, and Elizabeth
Goren-Friedman, 54, both residents of Jerusalem.

The identity of the third victim still had not been released by late Wednesday
night.

The fact that the driver was a Jerusalem resident, with access to all parts of
the city, was likely to raise tensions here. Less than four months ago another
East Jerusalem Palestinian, Ala Abu Dhaim, killed eight students at a Jewish
seminary in West Jerusalem. The attack led to calls for harsh action like the
demolition of the attacker's home.

Police officials said that the driver had a criminal background, but that there
had been no prior intelligence information to suggest that he would carry out an
attack.

Three Palestinian groups claimed responsibility, including Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades, a group affiliated with the mainstream Fatah movement led by the
Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas. But it was not clear if any of the claims
were credible.

The Israeli chief of police, Dudi Cohen, said Wednesday that the attacker
appeared to have been acting spontaneously and alone.

Hamas, the Islamic group that controls Gaza and which recently agreed to a
temporary cease-fire with Israel there, said it did not carry out the attack but
nevertheless praised it, according to The Associated Press.

Witnesses said they saw the vehicle, a large Caterpillar front-end loader,  set
off close to midday from a building site at one of the busiest intersections in
the predominantly Jewish, western half of the city, between the central bus
station and the popular Mahane Yehuda market. The hulking vehicle turned onto
Jaffa Road, which runs through the city's commercial downtown area, immediately
slicing through the drivers' cabin of a small white van and flipping a silver
Chevrolet on its side.

Continuing along Jaffa Road, the driver used the loader's serrated scoop to
overturn a bus from the Egged public transportation company and leave a swath of
tangled wreckage about 300 yards long, as it mowed into several other cars and
collided with a second bus.

The police said they believed the driver might have intended to plow into the
crowded market.

''It could have been a lot worse,'' Mr. Rosenfeld said.

Police officials contended that it was necessary to kill the driver to stop him.
An initial investigation indicated that at least four security personnel members
had tried to stop the driver. The off-duty soldier shot him but failed to kill
him. An officer from a special antiterrorism police unit who sped to the scene
on a motorcycle finally ended the episode.

The officer, Eli Mizrahi, told reporters that he had climbed up to the driver's
cabin ''when he was still driving like crazy and trying to harm civilians,'' and
that he fired twice.

Much of the rampage took place directly below the windows of an office block
housing several foreign television networks. The vehicle finally came to a halt
outside the Israel Broadcast Authority building, a car completely flattened
beneath it.

In the first moments, witnesses said, they thought the vehicle was involved in a
road accident, but it soon became apparent that the driver was on the attack.

''People started running for cover into stores and buildings,'' said Yuri
Gudkovich, a security guard at an apartment block on Jaffa Road.

A crowd of passers-by also began to chase the loader, desperate for a way to
stop it.

''We started to run after it, shouting to find someone with a gun,'' said Moshe
Oren, who works in a storefront transportation company along the road.

Mr. Oren, 58, said he looked into the face of the driver and saw ''an expression
of madness.''

''It's hard to define,'' Mr. Oren continued, ''but he also seemed coolheaded. He
looked crazy and calculated at the same time.''

Spare diapers, a toddler's pink jacket and a bottle of fruit juice were
scattered on the bottom of the overturned bus. There was blood on the hood of a
car whose roof had been ripped off.

Residents of the area were incensed. Sara Nagani, 48, said the driver's
neighborhood ''has to be wiped out.'' She said she had come to Jerusalem with
her family from India at the age of 3. ''I'll live and die here,'' she said,
''but not like this.''

Caterpillar equipment has a special resonance among Palestinians. Human rights
activists have lobbied the company to stop selling its heavy vehicles to the
Israeli military out of concern that they have been used to demolish Palestinian
homes, uproot orchards and construct Jewish settlements in occupied land.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: This bus was knocked over Wednesday when a man drove a
front-end loader down Jaffa Road in Jerusalem. His rampage left three people
dead and 40 wounded. (PHOTOGRAPH BY RINA CASTELNUOVO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
The Israeli police said at least four security officers tried to stop the
driver, Hussam Dweikat, before a police officer killed him. Mr. Dweikat, who was
about 30, lived in East Jerusalem. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY DANIEL BAR ON/JINIPIX, VIA
REUTERS
 DAN BALILTY/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); POLICE FORCES (89%); AL FATAH (78%); VEHICLE
TRAFFIC (78%); HAMAS (78%); MOTORCOACHES & BUSES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%);
EYEWITNESSES (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (73%);
SHOOTINGS (73%); BUS STATIONS & TERMINALS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); WAR &
CONFLICT (72%); CITY LIFE (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (68%); RELIGION (65%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (95%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%)

LOAD-DATE: July 3, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1627 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 5, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inside the Times: July 5, 2008

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 2420 words


INTERNATIONAL

IN PARIS, FREED CAPTIVE

Details Jungle Suffering

Ingrid Betancourt, returning to Paris, shared some painful details of her six
years held in captivity in the Colombian jungle. Her guerrilla captors chained
her day and night for the first three years, she said, and they fell into
''diabolical behavior'' that she said ''was so monstrous I think they themselves
were disgusted.'' She called her rescue ''a miracle of the Virgin Mary'' and
said, ''You need tremendous spirituality to stop yourself falling into the
abyss.''   PAGE A7

CLAIM OF ARMY COMPLICITY

Pakistan gave centrifuges to North Korea in a 2000 shipment supervised by the
army during the regime of President Pervez Musharraf, said Abdul Qadeer Khan,
the architect of Pakistan's nuclear program. Dr. Khan said in a telephone
interview that the uranium enrichment equipment was sent from Pakistan in a
North Korean plane loaded under the supervision of Pakistani security officials.
PAGE A6

BLAST IN BELARUS INJURES DOZENS

A bomb exploded during an outdoor concert in the Belarus capital, Minsk,
wounding dozens, and a second device was found later in the same area. The blast
occurred at about 1 a.m. as revelers were celebrating the country's Independence
Day, which commemorates the Soviet Army's liberation of Belarus from the Nazis
in 1944. A police spokesman said investigators considered the bombing ''an act
of hooliganism.''  PAGE A6

COURT APPEARANCE ON WAR CRIMES

Jean-Pierre Bemba, a former vice president and still a senator in Congo, made
his first appearance in court in The Hague, accused of war crimes and crimes
against humanity while fighting in the Central African Republic. During the
hearing, Mr. Bemba was not asked to enter a plea, but he has denied the charges.
PAGE A5

INDIA STRUGGLES ON NUCLEAR DEAL

India's governing Congress Party was on the verge of replacing its leftist
allies, led by the Communist Party, with a coalition led by a North Indian
socialist party, in an effort to push through a controversial nuclear deal with
the United States. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh hopes to firm up support for
the deal before Monday's start of the Group of 8 meeting in Japan.   PAGE A6

A PROPHET IN HIS OWN COUNTRY

The former guerilla fighter Ahmed Rashid has proved to be something of a prophet
of Afghanistan, Central Asia and his homeland, Pakistan, though mostly of the
Cassandra type, ignored by policy makers. The central argument in his latest
book is not original, but it has proven popular: The money and blood spent on
Iraq should have been invested in Afghanistan, rebuilding it to prevent the
resurgence of the Taliban.  PAGE A6

National

A WOMAN'S BODY CAUGHT

Between Segregated Cemeteries

Even after death, race remains a delicate issue. Black leaders in Waller County,
Tex., say white county authorities sabotaged their efforts to bury a white
woman's unidentified body in a black cemetery in order to break the color
barrier in the region's public cemeteries. PAGE A9

VOTE FOR SALE. SERIOUS OFFERS ONLY.

How much could a Minnesota college student earn by selling his vote this
November on the auction Web site eBay? The sale may get the student up to five
years' imprisonment and a $10,000 fine under an 1893 Minnesota law that
criminalizes the sale of votes. Or, more likely, community service, said Mike
Freeman, the Hennepin County attorney. PAGE A9

HOW CLOSE IS TOO CLOSE?

The White House and John McCain's campaign are struggling with that question in
how to choreograph President Bush's appearance at the Republican convention
eight weeks from now. If Mr. McCain appears too close to the sitting president,
centrist voters who are ready to turn the page on the last eight years may
become alienated. But, if Mr. McCain appears to disrespect Mr. Bush, the
Republican base, who are still mostly supportive of Mr. Bush, may stay home in
November. PAGE A10

A LIFE WITH CLOCKS

''Clocks are second to my wife, and I mean that,'' said Robert Coffin, who is
among a dwindling number of craftsmen who repair antique wooden clocks. The work
requires patience and painstaking skill, including an ability to replicate
wooden pieces that have not been manufactured for centuries. PAGE A11

OBAMA CELEBRATES THE FOURTH

With the Fourth of July political terrain to himself on Friday, Senator Barack
Obama urged voters at an Independence Day celebration in Butte, Mont., to
support his presidential bid if they want to end the war in Iraq. Mr. Obama was
joined by his wife and two daughters as he concluded his five-day tour of
Republican-leaning states that was part of his effort to expand the roster of
competitive states in his race with Senator John McCain. PAGE A10

BUSH WELCOMES 72 NEW CITIZENS

On his last Fourth of July in office, President Bush welcomed 72 men and women
on Friday as they prepared to take the oath of citizenship at the annual
Independence Day ceremony at Monticello, the home of Thomas Jefferson. His
remarks were interrupted at several points by protesters. As members of the
audience of about 3,000 urged the demonstrators to be quiet, Mr. Bush addressed
the disturbances, saying, ''We believe in free speech in the United States of
America.''  PAGE A10

NEW YORK REGION

PARK SERVICE GROWS CLOSER

To Full Lady Liberty Access

The National Park Service is inching closer to reopening the Statue of Liberty's
crown for the first time since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, by seeking
ways to make it safer for visitors to evacuate in the case of an emergency. For
now the crown is accessible only by a narrow, double-helix spiral staircase that
is not in compliance with federal, state or city fire and building codes.  PAGE
A15

QUESTIONS FOLLOW MODEL'S DEATH

The death last Saturday of the 20-year-old Russian model Ruslana Korshunova,
ruled a suicide, has again focused attention on an industry already riddled with
tales of young women succumbing to depression, anorexia and drugs while living
opulent and edgy lives. But many people in the industry say the image has little
to do with reality.  PAGE A15

OUTCRY OVER OBAMA

Senator Barack Obama made an effort on Tuesday to reclaim the idea of
partnerships between government and grass-roots religious groups for Democrats,
citing his own community service and initiatives supported by President Bill
Clinton and Al Gore even before President Bush's promise to ''rally the armies
of compassion.'' Peter Steinfels writes in Beliefs that ''except for six little
words he did a very smooth job.'' PAGE A15

SPORTS

ACTING LIKE A TOUR WINNER

In the Hope It Comes True

Cadel Evans has never worn the race leader's yellow jersey at the Tour de
France, but he has already adopted the trappings of a winner. His team has hired
Lance Armstrong's former bodyguard and its own chef to avoid bland hotel meals.
Most important, his teammates have been put on notice that they have but one job
during July -- getting Evans to the finish line in Paris in first place.   PAGE
B12

WINNING AND DISPELLING MYTHS

In less than 22 seconds, Cullen Jones dispelled two misconceptions. One is that
the 50-meter freestyle swim is devoid of any strategy except getting to the wall
first.  The other is that African-Americans cannot excel at swimming.   PAGE B12

AN OLYMPIC DREAM COME TRUE

Dara Torres's dream to make the 2008 Olympic swim, her fifth, culminated with a
victory over the American-record holder in the 100-meter freestyle, Natalie
Coughlin. Torres was timed in 53.78, which was 0.02-seconds slower than her best
time. Coughlin, who already made the team in the 200 individual medley, clocked
a 53.83.  PAGE B9

BUSINESS

MORTGAGE CRISIS GIVES PUSH

For Credit Card Regulation

For years, consumer advocates have been pushing for firmer federal control of
the credit card industry -- particularly regarding interest rates and fees --
and, in the wake of the mortgage crisis, some significant changes may come by
early next year. But the proposed regulations are strongly opposed by the
industry, which has long beat back any regulatory constraints.   PAGE C1

COLD COMFORT FOR DISNEY

They may not sound like the kind of business to brag about, but Disney on Ice,
the touring shows with figure skaters dressed as Disney cartoon characters, has
quietly grown into an important tool for the Walt Disney Company as it seeks to
further exploit its creative franchises and turn young children into
Disneyphiles. ''The people who roll their eyes haven't seen the shows,'' says
one company executive.   PAGE C3

THE MIDDLE GROUND ON BORROWING

When word got out about a Visa debit card that allows people to borrow money
from their 401(k) accounts, retirement experts could not contain their fury.
''An amazingly dumb idea,'' one said. At least one company does not even allow
borrowing against the accounts. But the prudent approach may lie between the two
extremes.   PAGE  C1

GIGGLE WHEN YOU SAY THAT

For those workers willing to explore job changes even in an economic slump,
there are as many flavors of career counselors or coaches as there are careers.
Among them is an ''intuitive'' named Sue Frederick -- a former career counselor
who draws upon her dreams, ancient numerology and conversations with spirits to
''see your dream job,'' the kind that makes you giggle when you talk about it.
PAGE C5

'Two for One'   C5

Putting the Focus on Russia   C2

ARTS

HOPING TO MAKE 'THE FLY'

Fly Anew as an Opera

Howard Shore, who wrote the score for the 1986 science-fiction horror film ''The
Fly,'' says that he ''always thought it to be a classical opera theme, a great
story of love and death, of true love that survives physical decay and the
ultimate sacrifice.'' And now ''The Fly'' is an opera, written by Howard Shore,
and it had its debut this week in Paris. The audience was kinder than critics.
PAGE B1

CHILDREN, ALSO SERVING

Linda Ellerbee used to spend her time presenting witty and informative news
programs and reports for grown-ups, notably with Lloyd Dobyns on NBC in the late
1970s and early 1980s. Nowadays she does it for children, as in ''Coming Home:
When Parents Return From War,'' Sunday night on Nickelodeon. Grown-ups should
still be so lucky.   PAGE B8

This Weekend

ARTS AND LEISURE

The HBO miniseries ''Generation Kill,'' about a Marine battalion in the early
days of the invasion of Iraq in 2003, is the first project by David Simon and Ed
Burns not set in the tough streets of Baltimore. But Mr. Burns, who was once a
police officer and a teacher in Baltimore, says the series won't lack for grit,
which does not always translate into mass appeal. ''It's like 'The Wire,' '' he
said. ''I think the trick is getting someone to watch it.''  PAGE 1

''The Exiles,'' a film about American Indians living on the edge of downtown Los
Angeles in th2 1950s, received plenty of buzz during its brief run on the
festival circuit before it faded from view. But there's been plenty of new
interest in the long-forgotten film -- which has a documentary feel but plenty
of staged elements -- and is being released by Milestone, a boutique distribuotr
that specializing in salvaging lost classics.  PAGE 8

BOOK REVIEW

Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn sits on the fault lines of two national
controversies: immigration and health care. The institution is the setting of
Julie Salamon's ''Hospital,'' in which the reporter was given unrestricted
access to the hospital and its personnel. This could have the makings of a dry
book, but D.T. Max says the book is anything but, at once absorbing and
unsettling. ''I was under the impression that hospitals have to treat anyone who
comes to the emergency room, but there are many definitions of 'treat,' '' he
writes.  PAGE 6

SUNDAY STYLES

A decision to rename a prominent building on the University of Pennsylvania
campus after Claudia Cohen, who is best known for being a gossip columnist and
the former wife of the billionaire (and Penn trustee) Ronald O. Perelman, has
raised eyebrows on the campus -- and a few hackles as well. PAGE 2

SUNDAY MAGAZINE

While a universal phenomenon, the incidence of suicide varies so immensely
across different population groups that any overarching theory about its root
cause is rendered useless. So is suicide the deadly result of a deep
psychological condition -- or a fleeting impulse brought on by opportunity?
PAGE 38

TRAVEL

One of Siciliy's beloved authors and sons is Guiseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, who's
''Leopard'' was published posthumously and charts the decline of a noble
Sicilian family. Siciliy, who's history has given vent to beauty and tragedy,
the book serves as a gateway to experiencing Sicily as it was intended, from the
pavement up.  Page 1

SUNDAY BUSINESS

John McCain, Barack Obama and the many presidential candidates who have bowed
out of the race, spent more than $900 million through the end of May, about $470
million more than was spent on primaries in 2000. And nearly half of the current
spending has been paid to just a few dozen companies. PAGE 1

EDITORIAL

FALSE VICTORY AT THE BORDER

Billions of dollars have gone to fencing, razor wire, electronic sensors,
vehicle barriers and a major deployment of 6,000 National Guard troops at our
border with Mexico. The results that restrictionists predict are not coming
anytime soon.  PAGE A16

SENATE STALLS ON MEDICARE

Before leaving town, Senate Republicans thwarted a vote on a sensible Medicare
bill that would benefit doctors and patients at the expense of overpaid private
health plans.  PAGE A16

NO RUSH, PLEASE

President Bush is pressing India's prime minister to win approval of
far-too-generous nuclear deal. As far as we're concerned, there is no reason to
rush.  PAGE A16

OP-ED

BOB HERBERT

Friday was a Fourth of July like many others, with beaches, barbecues and flags
as big as baseball fields. And yet, there was an undercurrent of anxiety in the
land. Anxiety more intense than the usual concern for a cyclical economic
downturn.  PAGE A17

GAIL COLLINS

It's not that we're less patriotic, just more diverted. If Grand Theft Auto IV
had been around in 1888, you can bet there would have been a sharp drop in the
number of adolescent boys waiting to see a portrait of James Blaine being toted
down Madison Avenue.  PAGE A17

THE BEST ROCKS OF THE BRONX

From the Tilting Rock at the Bronx Zoo to the Split Rock where Anne Hutchison
settled, James Stevenson makes a survey of the notable boulders of the borough
in his latest installment of ''Lost and Found New York.''  PAGE A17

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); POLITICS (88%); WAR CRIMES (86%); TALIBAN (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(70%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); CENTRIFUGES (69%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (67%); PUBLIC POLICY (67%); POLICE FORCES (67%); LIBERALISM
(66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (64%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (64%)

PERSON: MANMOHAN SINGH (54%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (54%)

CITY: MINSK, BELARUS (75%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (68%)

COUNTRY: BELARUS (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); INDIA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); KOREA,
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); FRANCE (88%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); JAPAN
(79%); IRAQ (79%); ASIA (79%); CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); NETHERLANDS (69%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1629 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 6, 2008 Sunday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Rethink the Use of Tasers

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; Editorial Desk; LETTER; Pg.

LENGTH: 261 words


To the Editor:

Re ''The Police and Tasers'' (editorial, June 24):

You are correct in calling for caution in the New York Police Department's plan
to arm officers with Tasers. Tasers are unsafe, misused and a vehicle for racial
profiling.

Troubled kids, the mentally ill and political protesters have all received their
50,000-volt shock with disastrous results.

Taser proponents rely upon the myth that these are nonlethal. Amnesty
International says more than 300 people have died from Taser injuries.

In practice, Tasers are not used as a deadly force alternative but as a
compliance tool against nonviolent persons, without the strict limitations,
supervision and accountability we require for deadly force. The United Nations
Committee Against Torture concluded that Taser use may amount to torture.

Little attention is being paid to the unfair burden Tasers will place on
communities of color. The disproportionate number of people of color stopped,
searched and interrogated by New York police will likely lead to more abuse by
this potentially lethal weapon especially as the N.Y.P.D. moves Tasers from car
trunks to the gun belts of thousands of sergeants.

Studies in five major cities have already found racial disparities in Taser
deployment. Given the questions surrounding Tasers and the life-or-death risks
Tasers carry, we strongly call on the N.Y.P.D. to rethink its use of these
lethal weapons.

King Downing National Coordinator  Campaign Against Racial Profiling Racial
Justice Program American Civil Liberties Union New York, June 26, 2008

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLICE FORCES (91%); RACIAL PROFILING (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%);
TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1634 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Pain Of the G-8's Big Shrug

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED COLUMNIST; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 784 words


Is genocide really that bad?

As President Bush and the Group of 8 leaders who are meeting in Japan again shun
their responsibilities in Darfur, there is a serious argument to be made that
genocide is overrated as an international concern. The G-8 leaders implicitly
accept that argument, which goes like this:

Genocide is regrettable, but don't lose perspective. It is simply one of many
tragedies in the world today -- and a fairly modest one in terms of lives lost.

All the genocides of the last 100 years have cost only 10 million to 12 million
lives. In contrast, every year we lose almost 10 million children under the age
of 5 from diseases and malnutrition attributable to poverty. Make that the
priority, not Darfur.

Civil conflict in Congo has claimed more than 5.4 million lives over the last
decade, according to careful mortality surveys by the International Rescue
Committee. That's at least 10 times the toll in Darfur, but because Congo
doesn't count as genocide -- just as murderous chaos -- no one has paid much
attention to it.

Does a mother whose child dies from banditry, malaria or AIDS grieve any less
than a mother whose child was killed by the janjaweed?

The world has been trying to pressure Sudan to stop slaughtering Darfuris for
nearly five years, yet the situation in some ways is worse than ever. In
contrast, we know how to combat malaria, child mortality and maternal mortality.
The same resources would save far more lives if they were used for vaccinations
and bed nets.

So instead of pushing President Bush to worry about Darfur, where it's not clear
he can make a difference, get him to focus on bed nets or deworming or iodizing
salt in poor countries or stopping mother-to-child transmission of the virus
that causes AIDS or so many other areas where his attention could have a
humanitarian impact.

Genocide is horrific, but that doesn't make it a priority.

This is a coherent and legitimate argument, and there are moments when I catch
myself sympathetic to it.

Yet in truth, genocide has always evoked a transcendent horror, and it has
little to do with the numbers of victims. The Holocaust resonates not because
six million Jews were killed but because a government picked people on the basis
of their religious heritage and tried to exterminate them. What is horrifying
about Anne Frank's diary is not so much the death of a girl as the crime of a
state.

There are also practical arguments, for genocide can create cycles of revenge
and displacement that make it far more destabilizing than any famine or
epidemic. The Darfur genocide may well lead all Sudan to fragment into civil
war, interrupting Sudanese oil exports and raising oil prices.

The Armenian genocide still festers after nearly a century; and former President
Bill Clinton has said that his greatest foreign-policy mistake was his failure
to respond in Rwanda. In the same way, the G-8's collective shrug today about
the Darfur genocide -- because the victims are black, impoverished and hidden
from television cameras -- will be a lingering stain.

After five years of genocide, President Bush still hasn't taken as simple a step
as imposing a no-fly zone or even giving a prime-time speech about it. He gave
Beijing a gift, his pledge to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympics,
without pushing hard for China to suspend military spare-parts and arms
deliveries to Sudan.

The Islamic world has been even more myopic, particularly since the victims in
Darfur are all Muslim. Do dead Muslims count only when Israel is the culprit?
Can't the Islamic world muster one-hundredth as much indignation for the
genocidal slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Muslims as it can for a few
Danish cartoons?

This coming Monday, the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court is
expected to seek an arrest warrant in connection with Darfur, and his past
statements suggest that it may be for the Sudanese president, Omar Hassan
al-Bashir, for genocide. That would be a historic step requiring follow-through.

A personal note: I have seen children dying of AIDS and hunger; I have had
malaria and been chased through the jungle by militias. I want the G-8 to
address all the aspects of global poverty, yet nothing affects me as much as
what I have seen in Darfur.

I tilt obsessively at the windmills of Darfur because, quite simply, its people
haunt me: the young woman who deliberately made a diversion of herself so the
janjaweed would gang-rape her and miss her little sister running in the opposite
direction; the man whose eyes were gouged out with a bayonet; the group of women
beaten with their own babies until the children were dead.

Yes, genocide truly is ''that bad.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); MALARIA (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (89%); DEATHS
& DEATH RATES (88%); HOLOCAUST (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); FAMINE (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (75%); AIDS & HIV (75%);
OIL & GAS PRICES (75%); EPIDEMICS (74%); CHILDREN'S HEALTH (74%); DISPLACED
PERSONS (73%); VACCINES (70%); CHILDREN (69%); VIRUSES (69%); POVERTY &
HOMELESSNESS (69%); MALNUTRITION (69%); JEWS & JUDAISM (64%); RELIGION (60%);
PETROLEUM EXPORTS & IMPORTS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (93%); INTERNATIONAL RESCUE COMMITTEE (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); BILL CLINTON (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); JAPAN (92%); ARMENIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1635 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 10, 2008 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Germany: U.N. Employee Accused of Role In Rwanda

BYLINE: By THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; WORLD BRIEFING EUROPE; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 105 words


A former United Nations employee accused of killing some of his colleagues and
others during the genocide in Rwanda in 1994 has been arrested in Frankfurt, and
the German authorities are considering his extradition to Rwanda, a prosecutor
said Wednesday. The suspect, Callixte Mbarushimana, was arrested Monday at the
Frankfurt airport as he tried to board a plane for St. Petersburg, Russia,
according to the prosecutor, Volkmar Kallenbach. Mr. Mbarushimana, a 44-year-old
Rwandan Hutu, has been accused in Rwanda of genocide and crimes against
humanity, Mr. Kallenbach said. He added that Mr. Mbarushimana disputes the
charges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Brief

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS
(90%); HOMICIDE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

CITY: SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (68%)

STATE: FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY (91%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); GERMANY (91%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (68%)

LOAD-DATE: July 10, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1641 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 12, 2008 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Soldier May Go From The Hague's Docket to Kosovo's Ballot

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo


IN 2005, just after arriving in The Hague to face charges for  war crimes,
Ramush Haradinaj found himself face to face with Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian
strongman, who was being held in a nearby cell.

For Mr. Haradinaj, a former commander of the rebel Kosovo Liberation Army and a
squat hulk of a man who fought a guerrilla war against Mr. Milosevic's forces,
the encounter was a shock.

''Milosevic asked if I was Haradinaj in English and said, 'How are you? How do
you like it here? How is it going there in Kosovo?' '' recalled Mr. Haradinaj,
who was acquitted on 37 counts of crimes against humanity and released from The
Hague in April after the court found that the evidence was too weak to tie him
directly to the killings for which he stood accused.

''I replied that Europe was going to help build a state in Kosovo with America
taking care of our security,'' he continued. ''He was very polite. But he didn't
like my answer and he left. I didn't feel like a loser in this story because I
was a member of the winning team.''

But when Kosovo's ethnic Albanian leaders finally declared independence last
February, Mr. Haradinaj's sense of triumph was tempered by his being forced to
watch from prison.

Now, Mr. Haradinaj, 40, who was prime minister of United Nations-administered
Kosovo for 100 days before surrendering to The Hague in March 2005, vows to once
again lead the newborn country.

''We have a huge mess,'' he said at his mansion on a hill overlooking Pristina,
Kosovo's capital. ''There are people with no water for their toilets; there is
no electricity. I am the one who can deliver. I want to be the next prime
minister of this country. There is no doubt about that.''

Celebrated as a freedom fighter among ethnic Albanians in Kosovo and despised by
Serbs, who nicknamed him ''Rambo'' for his indestructibility, Mr. Haradinaj
received a hero's welcome when he returned home. In northern Kosovo, Serbs
burned judges' robes to show their contempt.

''Haradinaj's release is a gross injustice and undermines the whole Hague
process,'' said Vuk Jeremic, Serbia's young and pro-European foreign minister.

AT the outset of Mr. Haradinaj's trial, Carla Del Ponte, The Hague's former
chief prosecutor, who indicted Mr. Haradinaj on charges including the murder,
torture, rape and expulsion of Serbs, Albanians and Gypsies, called him a
''gangster in uniform'' with blood on his hands. Lawyers and judges on the court
complained that witness intimidation had been widespread. Prosecutors have
indicated that they plan to appeal.

Mr. Haradinaj made little effort to conceal his contempt for Ms. Del Ponte, who
in a recent book linked the K.L.A. to an alleged organ trafficking scheme in
which Serbian and Albanian civilians were said to have been abducted in Kosovo
and taken to Albania, where their organs were extracted before they were killed.
''Del Ponte spent eight years as the chief prosecutor, and her duty was to bring
the truth,'' Mr. Haradinaj said. ''Instead, she was self-preoccupied with how
she looks and how she is perceived by the public.'' Asked about the organ
allegations, he declined to reply.

Mr. Haradinaj said that going overnight from prime minister of Kosovo to
detainee had been difficult. To pass the time, the former warriors convened a
cooking club. Mr. Milosevic cooked cevapi, little Balkan meatballs. The one-time
guerrilla, more at home with an AK-47, said he did not know how to cook.

''I was scared to have so much time just sitting, sitting,'' he recalled. ''But
the battlefield was worse than The Hague. There, you saw your brothers killed
every day.''

Mr. Haradinaj has had a life characterized by struggle, loss, violence and
bloodshed. Two of his brothers were killed during fighting with Serbian
soldiers. A third was shot dead in his car in 2005.

Mr. Haradinaj said he became convinced that armed struggle was the only way to
overcome Serbian domination as early as age 14, when he saw the Serbian police
beating up young Albanian demonstrators. ''I saw that they were beating them
because they had the guns and were the strong ones,'' he said. ''I realized then
that we needed to be even stronger.''

In 1989, the year Mr. Milosevic stripped away Kosovo's autonomy, Mr. Haradinaj
emigrated to Switzerland and spent nine years working as a nightclub bouncer and
in construction. He said he began to prepare for the physical exertion of the
battlefield by studying kung fu, reading books on guerrilla tactics and doing
60-mile runs in the Alps.

He returned to Kosovo in early 1998, as Albanian guerrillas and Serbian forces
began to clash, and established himself as commander of his home Dukagjini
region.

During his first days of battle, he saw his younger brother Luan killed while
the two were crossing to Kosovo from Albania. He said he carried his brother's
body on his back for four hours  until he could bury him.

In March 1998, Mr. Milosevic's forces tried to kill Mr. Haradinaj and his family
at their compound in Gllogjan, in west Kosovo. He was shot seven times, he
recalled, but survived thanks to a set of keys in his breast pocket, which
deflected a potentially lethal bullet.

K.L.A. soldiers who fought alongside Mr. Haradinaj said he inspired deep loyalty
through charisma, supreme-self-confidence and fearlessness. While some soldiers
sang patriotic anthems to prepare for battle, Ramush Ahmeti, a fighter in his
unit, recalled that Mr. Haradinaj would silence them and encourage them to run
laps instead.

Yet, when Mr. Haradinaj's  brother Shkelzen was killed in 1999 and his fighters
were demoralized, Mr. Ahmeti said, Mr. Haradinaj suddenly broke into a partisan
song. ''He was singing to try to prevent us from breaking down,'' Mr. Ahmeti
said. ''We would die for him because he was willing to die for us.''

AFTER NATO intervened in the war in 1999 and Serbian forces withdrew, Mr.
Haradinaj -- by then legendary in Kosovo -- earned a law degree from Pristina
University. Fellow students said they were shocked to find the former warrior
with them in the classroom. Mr. Haradinaj, who did not go to college, also
taught himself English, French and German and became a wine connoisseur.

Yet violence dogged him. On July 7, 2000, he visited the house of a group of
brothers from a rival group to the K.L.A., who had accused him of ordering the
killing of one of their brothers during the war. A battle broke out, according
to the police, and Mr. Haradinaj was wounded by a grenade. He was never
prosecuted.

After helping to disarm the K.L.A. and establish it as a civilian force -- which
Western diplomats say helped bring stability to the province -- he set up a
political party, the Alliance for the Future of Kosovo. In elections in October
2004, his party finished third and Mr. Haradinaj became prime minister of a
coalition government.

Western diplomats say he was an intelligent and energetic leader. Before he
became prime minister, in March 2004, when ethnic Albanians rioted across
Kosovo, he was credited with preventing hundreds from attacking Kosovo's
best-known Serbian Orthodox monastery.

While he was in prison last year, Mr. Haradinaj had to watch as his archrival,
Hashim Thaci, a former political leader of the K.L.A., emerged as prime
minister.

Vlora Qitaku, a spokeswoman for Mr. Thaci's party, said Mr. Haradinaj was a
political has-been, whose party had lost the last five elections. ''We are
trying to build a new democracy and we will not allow Ramush to turn Kosovo into
a jungle,'' Ms. Qitaku said.

Mr. Haradinaj lashed out at the government -- and the West -- for allowing
Belgrade to control the Serb-dominated north, and warned that Albanians would
grow impatient.

''We have to be able to deliver on Feb. 17,'' he said, referring to the date of
independence. ''I know what patience means, but if you sleep, it's not good. It
can be too late.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: Ramush Haradinaj

GRAPHIC: PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH BY VISAR KRYEZIU/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography; Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (87%); INDICTMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); LAWYERS (75%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);
WITNESSES (74%); JUDGES (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); ACQUITTAL (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(66%); MURDER (58%)

ORGANIZATION: KOSOVO LIBERATION ARMY (58%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: KOSOVO (96%); SERBIA (95%); ALBANIA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 12, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1647 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 14, 2008 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudanese Protest War Crimes Case Against President at Scripted Rally in Capital

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN; Neil MacFarquhar contributed reporting from the
United Nations, and an employee of The New York Times from Khartoum, Sudan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 982 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal


Thousands of people took to the streets of Sudan's tense capital on Sunday in a
carefully choreographed protest against the expected request by the
International Criminal Court to arrest President Omar Hassan al-Bashir on war
crimes charges.

Students and members of the ruling National Congress Party were bused to the
center of the capital, Khartoum, where they waved banners denouncing the
international court and the United Nations.

Sudanese officials said  cabinet ministers held an emergency meeting to discuss
how to respond to the request, expected on Monday, for the arrest of Mr. Bashir,
who has ruled Sudan since taking power in a military coup nearly 20 years ago.

Sudan's state-run television station broadcast a statement from the National
Congress Party saying that the court's actions would cause ''more violence and
blood'' in Darfur, The Associated Press reported.

The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court, Luis Moreno-Ocampo,
plans to ask that an arrest warrant be issued for Mr. Bashir, according to
United Nations officials who have been briefed on his plans.

There is rising alarm in diplomatic circles, though, that charges against Mr.
Bashir could jeopardize the vast aid and peacekeeping efforts in Darfur and
undermine attempts to find a political settlement to end the crisis.

After being briefed on the prosecutor's case on Friday, the African Union's
Peace and Security Council issued a statement expressing its ''strong conviction
that the search for justice should be pursued in a way that does not impede or
jeopardize efforts aimed at promoting lasting peace,'' and ''reiterated the
A.U.'s concern with the misuse of indictments against African leaders.''

Andrew S. Natsios, the former United States envoy to Sudan, bluntly condemned
the prosecutor's plans on the blog Making Sense of Darfur, which is published by
the Social Science Research Council.

''Without a political settlement, Sudan may go the way of Somalia, pre-genocide
Rwanda or the Democratic Republic of the Congo: a real potential for widespread
atrocities and bloodshed as those in power seek to keep it at any cost because
of the alternatives,'' he wrote. ''This indictment may well shut off the last
remaining hope for a peaceful settlement for the country.''

Khartoum was relatively calm on Sunday despite the protests, which were tightly
scripted and not violent. Embassies and aid organizations urged their workers to
stock up on food and water, and some evacuated workers from Darfur.

United Nations officials struggled to find ways to protect the roughly 9,000
peacekeeping troops in the Darfur region. Originally sent to protect civilians
from the cataclysmic violence -- 300,000 people have died, according to the
United Nations, and 2.5 million have fled their homes -- the peacekeepers have
found themselves increasingly in the crosshairs of the rising chaos in the
region.

''People are afraid,'' a senior peacekeeping official in Darfur said in a
telephone interview. ''Anything can happen.''

Ban Ki-moon, secretary general of the United Nations, called Mr.  Bashir on
Saturday to express concern about the safety of United Nations personnel in
Sudan and to stress that the work of the court was independent from the rest of
the United Nations, his office said in a statement.

The secretary general also said he was ''gravely concerned about the scale and
brutality'' of a brazen attack on a convoy of peacekeepers returning from a
patrol to investigate reports of atrocities committed by a government-allied
rebel group in Darfur.

The attack, which left seven peacekeepers dead, was unusual in its coordination
and sophistication, according to peacekeeping officials, involving heavy weapons
and tactics that require serious military training. That has led some officials
to suspect that Sudanese government-trained militias were behind the ambush.

Ali al-Sadig, a government spokesman, said Sudan's government condemned the
attack, adding that evidence investigators had gathered pointed to one of the
rebel factions in Darfur.

The peacekeeping force in Darfur, a joint operation of the United Nations and
the African Union, could be a prime target of violence and government anger
after the announcement by Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor. Already strained by
the deteriorating security in Darfur, the force could collapse, United Nations
officials said.

''We are a consent-based organization, and if consent is withdrawn, you are
looking at a radically different and terrifying situation for the people on the
ground,'' said one official at the Department of Peacekeeping Operations in New
York, speaking anonymously because he was not authorized to speak publicly.

Anti-genocide and human rights advocates have cheered the decision to request
charges against Mr. Bashir, calling it a victory in the battle against impunity.
They point out that similar objections, that war crimes charges would hinder
peace, were raised in other such  cases, including when international courts
charged leaders with committing war crimes in Sierra Leone and the former
Yugoslavia.

Hussein Abu Shartai, a spokesman for  displaced Darfurians living in Kalma, one
of the region's largest and most volatile camps, praised the prosecutor, calling
the request for an arrest warrant ''the moment we have all been waiting for.''

There were intense consultations at the United Nations on Friday among Security
Council members, including Russia and China, which oppose the indictment, and
others, including the United States, that  say the indictment should be allowed
to proceed.

The Sudanese ambassador, Abdalmahmood Abdalhaleem Mohamad, said Friday that
Sudan would ignore any court action because it was not a member of the court.

''It is a criminal and destabilizing move,'' he said. ''How is the U.N. going to
deal with an indicted president?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTO: President Omar Hassan al-Bashir in Khartoum, Sudan, on Sunday at
a protest against the International Criminal Court. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED
NURELDIN/REUTERS)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS
(89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); ARREST
WARRANTS (77%); MARTIAL LAW (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (73%); MILITARY RULE
(72%); COUPS (72%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (72%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (69%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (61%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); AFRICAN
UNION (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (94%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (54%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (92%); RWANDA (79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF THE (79%); SENEGAL (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOMALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1648 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Quotation of the Day

BYLINE: LUIS MORENO-OCAMPO,

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 40 words


He did not need bullets. He used other weapons: rapes, hunger and fear.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor at the International Criminal Court, accusing
Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, of genocide and crimes against
humanity. [A10]

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Quote

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (86%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (84%); GENOCIDE (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (82%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1649 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee's Lawyers Make Claim on Sleep Deprivation

BYLINE: By WILLIAM GLABERSON

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; National Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba


A week before what could be the first American war crimes trial since World War
II, defense lawyers claimed on Monday that an accused detainee might have been
subjected to a program of systematic sleep deprivation that they said would
constitute torture.

It was the latest in a series of recent accusations about the use of sleep
disruption in the past at the detention camp here. Some critics say the
assertions undermine a perception fostered by officials that the most aggressive
interrogation techniques were used only occasionally at Guantanamo.

The lawyers for the detainee facing trial, Salim Hamdan, said that on Saturday
prosecutors for the first time gave them information indicating Mr. Hamdan
''entered Operation Sandman'' on June 11, 2003, and remained in the program for
50 days.

Operation Sandman has been described as an interrogation plan devised with
military psychiatrists for systematically interrupting a detainee's sleep.
''Sleep deprivation of that nature for 50 days would constitute torture,'' said
one of Mr. Hamdan's lawyers, Joseph M. McMillan.

A Pentagon spokesman, Cmdr. Jeffrey D. Gordon, did not respond directly to the
accusations but said it was military policy ''to treat detainees humanely.''

''We typically do not respond to each and every allegation of abuse made by past
and present detainees,'' Commander Gordon added.

Jameel Jaffer, an American Civil Liberties Union lawyer who co-wrote a book on
the treatment of detainees, said several recent accounts of systematic sleep
deprivation were a challenge to what he described as a strategy by detention
officials ''to respond to allegations of abuse at Guantanamo by contending that
the abuse was aberrational and perpetrated by rogue interrogators.''

Mr. Hamdan, a former driver for Osama bin Laden, faces charges of conspiracy and
providing material support for terrorism.

The disclosure came as hearings began here Monday in preparation for Mr.
Hamdan's war crimes trial, now scheduled to open on July 21. On Thursday in
Washington, lawyers for Mr. Hamdan are to ask a federal district  judge to stop
the trial with the claim that the military commission system violates the
Constitution.

But as the military judge here, Capt. Keith J. Allred of the Navy, pressed on
with hearings this week, the defense lawyers said information about what
appeared to be the use of the sleep deprivation program was an unexplained entry
in some 600 pages of detention records provided by prosecutors after a court
order.

Mr. Hamdan's lawyers have said previously that he was beaten when he was first
in custody in Afghanistan in 2001 and that he was subsequently subjected to
sexual humiliation and severe isolation at Guantanamo, where he has been held
since 2002.

In another detainee's case, a military lawyer, Maj. David J. R. Frakt, wrote
that documents showed that his client, a teenager at the time, was moved from
cell to cell 112 times during a 14 day-period in 2004 to keep him in a state of
sleepless disorientation.

In accounts dealing with other detainees, officials have written that sleep
deprivation was used to soften up detainees before interrogations. A May report
by the Justice Department inspector general said American military interrogators
appeared to have collaborated with visiting Chinese officials at Guantanamo Bay
to disrupt the sleep of Chinese Uighur detainees, waking them every 15 minutes
the night before their interviews by the Chinese.

Mr. Hamdan's military lawyer, Lt. Cmdr. Brian L. Mizer, said the detention camp
records also included a somewhat mysterious entry by military personnel, a
reference that ''Alfred Hitchcock'' visited Mr. Hamdan and other detainees on
several occasions. Hitchcock, the director known for suspense films, died in
1980. Commander Mizer suggested that the entry appeared to be an ominous alias
at Guantanamo.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: The detention facility at Guantanamo Bay, where Mr. Hamdan, who
faces a war crimes trial next week, has been since 2002.(PHOTOGRAPH BY TODD
HEISLER/THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 Salim Hamdan

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (91%); SLEEP DISORDERS (90%); SLEEP (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
TORTURE (90%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); WORLD
WAR II (78%); JUDGES (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (70%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (70%); TERRORISM (68%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (68%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); CUBA (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1650 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Catching a War Criminal in the Act

BYLINE: By RICHARD GOLDSTONE.

Richard Goldstone is the former chief prosecutor of the International Criminal
Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Editorial Desk; OP-ED CONTRIBUTOR; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: Servian, France


THE prosecutor of the International Criminal Court has made the tough decision
to seek an arrest warrant for a leader of a country at   war -- Sudan's
president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir. He is to be charged with genocide, crimes
against humanity and war crimes during the last five years of war in Darfur.

One has to go back to the cases against Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia in 1999
and Charles Taylor of Liberia in 2003 to find the last time that international
prosecutors charged a sitting head of state. Then, as now, they were criticized
for failing to take ''politics'' into account.

These criticisms are misdirected. The 1998 Rome treaty establishing the
International Criminal Court removed head-of-state immunity for atrocity crimes.
Since 2005, when the United Nations Security Council referred the Darfur
situation to the court, the prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, has simply been
doing his job -- which is to present charges against those who bear the greatest
responsibility for the crimes.

Critics predict that an arrest warrant will harm efforts to deliver aid and to
deploy the United Nations peacekeeping force in Darfur. But both of these
efforts are already hobbled. Mr. Bashir's government has a long history of
obstructing aid -- notably during the famine in 1998,  before the International
Criminal Court even existed. And an obstructionist Sudanese government and the
countries that are supposed to contribute troops to the peacekeeping force  have
long dragged their feet. It has taken five years to deploy just 9,000 soldiers.
If Khartoum retaliates against the arrest warrant by attacking refugees, aid
workers or peacekeepers, the responsibility will lie solely with the leaders who
issue the orders.

Some critics  also worry that the indictments may harm the Darfur peace process
by removing a key negotiating point -- an offer of amnesty to President Bashir
along with the possibility of quiet retirement in a third country. But sometimes
ambiguity over accountability can help peace negotiations along, as it did in
South Africa in 1991, when amnesty was also a bargaining chip. Arrest warrants
from The Hague also assisted the Bosnian peace process by removing hard-liners
from the negotiating table.

It is too early to tell what effects the indictment will have on peace efforts.
So far, there has been no Darfur peace process to speak of. Part-time United
Nations and African Union mediators recently resigned in frustration, calling
for a new approach.

In the meantime, the indictments may delegitimize the government in the eyes of
the Sudanese people, especially the elites in Khartoum. In 1999, after the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslovia issued its arrest
warrant for President Milosevic, an opposition group called Otpor turned it into
a political weapon with the slogan, ''He is finished.'' Mr. Milosevic lost the
elections in 2000. Although other factors contributed to his fall, including
lost wars and corruption, the indictments played their part by demonstrating his
isolation.

In Sudan's 2009 elections, some citizens may rally behind their president.
Others may not.

In the story of the emperor's new clothes, a little boy is the only one who has
the innocence to point out that the emperor is naked. The arrest warrants for
President Bashir reveal to the world what type of regime holds power in
Khartoum. They should also push the Security Council to apply real pressure on
the Sudanese government. The council and its member states should make President
Bashir's government an international pariah,  imposing   sanctions against its
leaders  and, most important,  Sudan's oil exports, which have so effectively
insulated the regime.

The prosecutor's message might make some people uncomfortable, but that does not
mean we should shoot the messenger. This crisis should galvanize the Security
Council to take serious action.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); AMNESTY (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); POLITICS (77%); REFUGEES (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); IMMUNITY (73%); FOOD
CHARITIES (71%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (69%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (56%); UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); LIBERIA (92%); AFRICA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);
SOUTH AFRICA (79%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1651 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             July 15, 2008 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ARREST IS SOUGHT OF SUDAN LEADER IN GENOCIDE CASE

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS, LYDIA POLGREEN and JEFFREY GETTLEMAN; Marlise Simons
reported from Paris; Lydia Polgreen from Dakar, Senegal; and Jeffrey Gettleman
from Nairobi, Kenya.

SECTION: Section A; Column 0; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1464 words


PARIS -- The prosecutor at the International Criminal Court formally requested
an arrest warrant on Monday for Sudan's president, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, on
charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity committed during the
past five years of bloodshed in the Darfur region of his country.

The prosecutor's pursuit of Mr. Bashir introduced new volatility to the already
chaotic situation in Darfur. While some diplomats and analysts worried that the
move would undermine efforts to negotiate peace and provide aid to the millions
displaced by violence, others said it offered new leverage to pressure the
Sudanese government to end the conflict in Darfur.

Bracing for reprisals, United Nations peacekeepers and aid workers stepped up
security in Darfur and pulled out all but the most essential civilians. Sudan
promised not to vent its outrage on them, but said it would unleash a
''diplomatic war'' to try to scuttle the case.

It  was the first time the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court had
brought genocide charges against anyone. It  was  also the first time the
prosecutor had brought charges against a sitting head of state since the court
opened its doors in 2002. Two other presidents, Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and
Charles Taylor of Liberia, were charged by other international war crimes
courts, also while they were in office.

Darfur has been a shifting, many-sided conflict, with rebels fighting rebels,
government-backed Arab militias killing civilians and one another, freelance
bandits attacking aid workers and atrocities committed by all the armed groups.

In announcing the request, the prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said Mr. Bashir
had ''masterminded and implemented'' a plan to destroy three main ethnic groups
in Darfur, the Fur, the Masalit and the Zaghawa. Using government soldiers and
Arab militias, the president ''purposefully targeted civilians'' belonging to
these groups, killing 35,000 people ''outright'' in attacks on towns and
villages, he said.

''His motives were largely political,'' the prosecutor said. ''His alibi was a
'counterinsurgency.' His intent was genocide.''

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo, of Argentina, said that the Sudanese president had turned
against civilians after failing to defeat a rebellion, and that the genocide
consisted of more than direct killing. ''Al-Bashir organized the destitution,
insecurity and harassment of the survivors,'' he said. ''He did not need
bullets. He used other weapons: rapes, hunger and fear.''

At a news conference at the court in The Hague, Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said he had
handed his evidence to the three judges who will decide whether to issue the
arrest warrant. An answer is expected in the fall, lawyers at the court said.

If the past is any guide, the judges may well sign the warrant. They have signed
all 11 warrants the prosecutor has requested since he took office five years
ago.

Genocide charges are the gravest any court can bring, and the prosecutor is
expected to implicate others at the top of the Sudanese government.

But the request for a warrant against Mr. Bashir seemed unlikely to lead to his
arrest soon. Mr. Bashir has scoffed at two arrest warrants the court has already
issued against two other Sudanese figures, even promoting one of them to
minister of humanitarian affairs.

''We will resist this,'' said Rabie A. Atti, a Sudanese government spokesman.
''Everybody in Sudan -- the government, the people, even the opposition parties
-- are against this.''

He contended that Mr. Bashir was innocent and that the international court was
''a stooge'' for Sudan's enemies. But he made it clear that the government would
not retaliate against the thousands of United Nations and African Union
peacekeepers in Sudan or against aid workers.

''Nothing will happen to the U.N. because of this,'' he said.

An important question is whether the United Nations Security Council will
intervene in the case. The Council asked the court in 2005 to investigate the
Darfur crisis, but it has the authority to suspend an investigation or
prosecution for at least a year. Since the prosecutor notified the United
Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, last week of his plan, Council members
have met privately, with China and Russia warning that a direct move against the
Sudanese president would jeopardize any future peace talks.

The joint African Union-United Nations peacekeeping mission in Darfur said
Monday that it would continue operating in the region, but other aid
organizations have temporarily evacuated some of their workers from Darfur to
the capital, Khartoum.

Senior diplomats in Washington and London, along with United Nations officials,
were working Monday to decide how to respond to the announcement. But in Darfur,
the Justice and Equality Movement, the most formidable rebel group in the
region, ruled out negotiations with the government in light of the genocide
charges.

''We will not negotiate with a war criminal,'' Tahir el-Faki, the movement's
legislative commander, said in a satellite telephone interview from Darfur,
where the group's commanders have gathered to plan a new assault. If Mr. Bashir
does not turn himself in, he said, ''all the commanders and young fighters here
with me are willing to go to Khartoum and remove him by force.''

Still, several analysts contended that the prosecutor's action would provide a
new opening to restart blocked peace talks.

''The peace process is dead,'' said John Prendergast, a former Clinton
administration official who is a co-founder of Enough, a group that seeks to end
genocide. ''Suddenly, a new variable has entered the equation in the form of the
request for an arrest warrant. While the I.C.C. judges consider this request
over the next two months, there is a new point of major leverage over Bashir.''

Nick Grono, deputy president of the International Crisis Group, a nonprofit
organization, said that with an arrest warrant looming, Mr. Bashir might feel
compelled to show ''credible moves towards peace'' in the hope of persuading the
Security Council to suspend court action.

''It may force the regime to realize that its options are diminishing,'' Mr.
Grono said.

Before making his announcement, the prosecutor said he knew that some diplomats
wanted him to delay, contending  peace was more important than justice. But he
seemed undeterred.

''Some people have said that for me to intervene at this point is shocking,'' he
said in a recent interview. ''I say what is going on now is shocking. Genocide
is going on now, and it is endangering the lives of many more people.''

At first, the prosecutor said, the government attacked from the air, and used
Arab militia, called the janjaweed, on the ground to destroy villages. ''They
kill men, children, elderly, women; they subject women and girls to massive
rapes,'' the prosecution's summary says. ''They burn and loot the villages.''

Such violence has displaced ''almost the entire population'' of the ethnic
groups under attack, the prosecution contends. ''Now the attacks are on the
refugee camps,'' Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said in the interview. ''And the government
is hindering humanitarian aid as part of its plan.''

In the 10-page summary provided Monday, the prosecution drew a tough portrait of
Mr. Bashir's actions, saying it had tracked all the known attacks from  2003  to
2008 and shown the government's genocidal strategy to attack civilian towns and
villages.

The prosecutor's charges include three counts of genocide in the killings of
people in the Fur, Masalit and Zaghawa ethnic groups; five counts of crimes
against humanity involving murder, extermination, forcible transfer, torture and
rape; and two counts of war crimes involving attacks on civilian populations in
Darfur and the pillaging of towns and villages. The United Nations estimates
that 300,000 people have died and 2.7 million have been displaced in the
conflict.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said he had ''very strong evidence that al-Bashir controlled
everything: the generals, the intelligence, the ministers, the media.''

''The janjaweed militia called him directly for instructions,'' the prosecutor
said.

Lawyers close to the court said Western governments may have assisted with the
investigation, providing intelligence like aerial surveys and electronic
eavesdropping. ''It is obvious that something must be done,'' a European
diplomat said. ''The peace process has stalled and the humanitarian disaster
only keeps growing.''

Peacekeepers in the region, part of a hybrid United Nations and African Union
force, are particularly vulnerable to government retaliation, diplomats and
analysts say. Seven peacekeepers were killed in an ambush last week, and the
force has been struggling just to protect itself.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: Sudanese women awaited aid in February in West Darfur State.
The conflict has displaced an estimated 2.7 million people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY
LYNSEY ADDARIO FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)
 The government of President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of Sudan has said he is
innocent. (PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED NURELDIN ABDALLA/REUTERS) (pg.A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); FOOD CHARITIES (89%); ALIBI (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT
(69%); PRESS CONFERENCES (64%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (60%); ETHNICITY (50%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (50%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); LIBERIA
(79%); SERBIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: July 15, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company


                             1658 of 1661 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              July 20, 2008 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Wanted: July 13-19

SECTION: Section WK; Column 0; Week in Review Desk; GENOCIDE; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 554 words


THE NEWS The prosecutor at the International Criminal Court in The Hague
formally sought an arrest warrant for Omar Hassan al-Bashir, the president of
Sudan.

BEHIND THE NEWS The charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity
are the court's first against a sitting president. They stem from the five years
of bloodshed in the Darfur region of Sudan, where Mr. Bashir's government is
accused of trying to wipe out three ethnic minorities as it scoffed at
international efforts to hold it accountable. While the warrant is unlikely to
ever be executed, some diplomats hoped it would give them new leverage in
seeking peace in Darfur.

THE NEWS Canadian officials, apparently for the first time, deported an American
Army deserter who had sought refuge from the war in Iraq.

BEHIND THE NEWS Changes both in immigration laws and in public attitudes in
Canada have made it more difficult for American deserters to gain sanctuary
there now than during the Vietnam War, when draft dodgers also fled north. The
deported deserter, Robin Long, was seeking refugee status, the only legal avenue
for most deserters to stay in Canada, but he was arrested twice for violating
immigration laws. Supporters called the violations technicalities and expressed
surprise that the government insisted on expelling him.

THE NEWS What seemed to be the voice of Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri, a former Iraqi
vice president under Saddam Hussein, was heard in a new audiotape telling
President Bush that 2008 would be the ''decisive year'' in Iraq and vowing that
the Baathist insurgents he leads would go on attacking Americans.

BEHIND THE NEWS The United States offers a $10 million bounty for the capture of
Mr. Douri, said to be the highest-ranking member of Saddam Hussein's inner
circle still at large. Iraqi officials have several times reported his death or
capture, only to have the claims quickly fall apart. Lately he has struggled
with a Syrian-backed rival for supremacy among Baathist militants.

THE NEWS A man wanted in Liechtenstein for stealing secret bank records told a
Senate committee that a bank owned by the country's royal family helped clients,
including Americans, conceal assets and evade taxes.

BEHIND THE NEWS Heinrich Kieber, a former bank employee who is now in a witness
protection program, touched off a global scandal in February when he sold
confidential bank records identifying millionaire tax cheats to German
authorities. He testified that the bank, LGT, shuffled money through offshore
shell accounts to obscure its origin. Liechtenstein, anxious to repair its
reputation as an uncooperative tax haven, said it would investigate.

THE NEWS Lawyers for the film director Roman Polanski, who fled the United
States in 1978 as he was about to be sentenced for the statutory rape of a
13-year-old girl, asked authorities to review a documentary in which a former
prosecutor claims he coached the judge in Mr. Polanski's case.

BEHIND THE NEWS Mr. Polanski's lawyer said the self-described contacts by David
Wells with the judge (who died in 1993) appeared to violate legal ethics and
state law. As a fugitive, Mr. Polanski has little standing to appeal his
conviction, but if he can persuade a prosecutor or judge in Los Angeles to take
up the matter, a court could overturn the 30-year-old conviction.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: PHOTOS: GENOCIDE(PHOTOGRAPH BY MOHAMED NURELDIN ABDALLA/REUTERS)
DESERTION (PHOTOGRAPH BY DARRYL DYCK/THE CANADIAN PRESS, VIA ASSOCIATED PRESS)
INSURGENCY(PHOTOGRAPH BY U.S. DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE, VIA EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO
AGENCY)
TAX EVASION (PHOTOGRAPH BY SHAWN THEW/EUROPEAN PRESSPHOTO AGENCY)
 STAUTORY RAPE (PHOTOGRAPH BY JULIAN WASSER/TIME & LIFE PICTURES -- GETTY
IMAGES)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(90%); ARREST WARRANTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); TAX FRAUD (89%); SEX
OFFENSES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); SCANDALS (78%); TAX ENFORCEMENT (78%);
US PRESIDENTS (78%); NEWS BRIEFS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); REFUGEES (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); LAWYERS (75%); SENTENCING
(73%); VIETNAM WAR (72%); ETHNICITY (71%); ETHNIC GROUPS (71%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (69%); TAXES & TAXATION (64%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (63%); CHILD SEXUAL
ABUSE (60%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (60%); FILM DIRECTORS (60%)

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); CANADA (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); LIECHTENSTEIN (92%); SYRIA (79%); GERMANY (76%); CENTRAL EUROPE (52%)

LOAD-DATE: July 20, 2008


                   Copyright 2008 The New York Times Company
