
                              1 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Campaigning for Human Rights, and Fishing for Souls

BYLINE: By Norimitsu Onishi

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; LETTER FROM SOUTH KOREA; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1119 words

DATELINE: SEOUL, South Korea


After spending 18 months illegally in China in the mid-1980's and converting to
Christianity, Kim Tae Jin was locked up for four years in North Korea's infamous
prison camp No. 15 at Yodok.

He fled North Korea a few years after his release and in 2001 found his way to
South Korea, where he is a co-chairman of NK Gulag, a private group focusing on
human rights in North Korea. For Mr. Kim, while securing those rights is an
important goal, it comes second to a far more consequential one: evangelizing in
North Korea.

''God never ordered us to fight for human rights, but he ordered us to spread
the word to the end of the earth,'' Mr. Kim, 50, said, adding that the group's
leaders were North Korean converts to Christianity. Their faith, he said,
buttressed their political work. ''Because we are North Koreans and Christians,
we feel responsible for leading the fight for better conditions in North
Korea.''

In South Korea, the issue of human rights in the North has been spearheaded by
conservative Christians whose aim is to take their faith to the northern half of
the divided peninsula. Although the movement's most visible spokesmen are North
Korean defectors, its core is made up of South Korean Christians who in the past
decade have grown into the world's second-largest overseas missionary force
after the United States'.

The Korean Christians, along with evangelical American Christians, have formed a
sometimes uneasy alliance with conservative American politicians. All share a
distaste for negotiating with North Korea over any issue, from human rights to
nuclear arms, and a desire for a change of government in the North. They
fiercely criticize the South Korean government's engagement of North Korea,
which they say has led to an immoral silence over abuses in the North.

Few here would argue with the assessment of organizations like Human Rights
Watch that the North Korean government is ''among the world's most repressive,''
engaging in arbitrary arrests and the pervasive use of torture. North Korea is a
place, Human Rights Watch points out, with no fair trials, no political
opposition, no independent civil society and no freedom of information or
religion.

But the North Korean human rights issue has become so politicized that the
actual plight of North Koreans is often emphasized or de-emphasized for other
ends.

''Right now, both Koreans and Americans have ulterior motives in focusing on
North Korean human rights,'' said the Rev. Benjamin H. Yoon, who ran Amnesty
International's South Korea office for many years before founding the Citizens'
Alliance for North Korean Human Rights in 1996. It is the oldest private group
concerned with abuses in the North.

Mr. Yoon's group is critical of the Christian groups for linking human rights
with evangelizing and the South Korean government for failing to speak out on
the subject.

The South Korean government contends that it is putting a priority on peace on
the Korean peninsula by refraining from spotlighting human rights violations by
the North Korean government, which regards such criticism as a threat to its
hold on power. South Korea says it is promoting human rights in the North by
increasing economic ties and nudging it toward more openness.

To South Korea, harsh talk on human rights is a cover for hard-liners here and
in the Bush administration to scuttle six-nation talks over the nuclear crisis.
Just as the Bush administration's recent focus on the North's counterfeiting
after more than a decade of silence has outraged the North Koreans, the
continuing focus on human rights has handed North Korea another excuse not to
resume talks.

By contrast, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said recently that she planned
to focus more attention on North Korean rights abuses. ''We've talked about this
issue with South Korea, which is not always an easy conversation,'' Ms. Rice
told the House International Relations Committee.

The politicization of human rights is reflected in South Korea's recent history,
Mr. Yoon said. During South Korea's military rule, proponents of
democratization, including Roh Moo Hyun, now the president and a former human
rights lawyer, fought for human rights and ''were considered progressive and
leftist,'' Mr. Yoon, 76, said.

''Now, because of the government's engagement policy toward the North, speaking
out against human rights abuses in the North is regarded as reactionary and
rightist,'' he said.

Until the start of its ''sunshine policy'' of engagement in the late 1990's, the
South Korean government highlighted the North's human rights violations. The
Korean Central Intelligence Agency debriefed North Korean defectors and urged
some to transform their statements into books.

One such account became ''The Aquariums of Pyongyang: Ten Years in the North
Korean Gulag,'' a memoir by Kang Chol Hwan, a defector who was invited to meet
President Bush in the White House last year. Mr. Kang, who has said that
intermediaries connected with the intelligence agency helped him publish his
memoir after he arrived here in 1992, is a co-chairman of NK Gulag, which is
supported by the National Endowment for Democracy.

Against this political backdrop, it is an open secret that some North Korean
defectors, and their backers, exaggerate their experiences in North Korea.

''They exaggerate their stories for money and fame,'' said the Rev. Joseph Park,
the Christian Council of Korea's mission director. ''They say that they were
political prisoners when they were ordinary prisoners, or that they saw
something they only heard about.''

Critics also say that some Christians, while professing their commitment to
human rights in the North, are actually endangering the lives of North Koreans
through their evangelizing.

The Rev. Kim Tae Hyun, an official with the National Council of Churches in
Korea, which supports the South Korean government's low-key approach on human
rights in North Korea, criticizes missionaries who send North Koreans living in
China back into the North to proselytize secretly. ''They are putting the
defectors at great risk,'' Mr. Kim said.

Durihana, a South Korean missionary group that is also increasing its lobbying
in the United States, engages in the practice.

''We don't force them to go back,'' said Chun Ki Won, 50, Durihana's director.
''We send only volunteers.''

Mr. Chun did not deny that he and others might have other goals in emphasizing
human rights in the North.

''The U.S. may be using human rights to have leverage in the nuclear
negotiations,'' he said. ''But whether it's political or not, there is the
reality that there are executions and human rights violations in North Korea,
and we can't forget that.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kim Tae Jin, right, is a co-chairman of NK Gulag, a human
rights organization in Seoul.
 Posters on human rights abuses in North Korea on display at the Full Gospel
Inchon Church in Inchon, South Korea. (Photographs by Seokyong Lee for The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (97%); RELIGION (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); PRISONS (78%); TORTURE (76%);
POLITICS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (50%)
Freedom and Human Rights; Christians and Christianity  ; Missionaries

ORGANIZATION: NK Gulag (Orgn)

PERSON: Norimitsu Onishi; Kim Tae Jin

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (88%); INCHON, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (72%)

COUNTRY: KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (99%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (98%);
UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (92%)

REGION: North Korea; South Korea; North Korea

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

OFFICIALS AT U.N. SEEK FAST ACTION ON RIGHTS PANEL

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1454 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 31


Officials of the United Nations, which has struggled through a period of scandal
and mismanagement, have decided they must act within weeks to produce an
alternative to its widely discredited Human Rights Commission to maintain hope
of redeeming the United Nations' credibility in 2006.

The commission, which is based in Geneva, has been a persistent embarrassment to
the United Nations because participation has been open to countries like Cuba,
Sudan and Zimbabwe, current members who are themselves accused of gross rights
abuses. Libya held the panel's chairmanship in 2003.

''The reason highly abusive governments flock to the commission is to prevent
condemnation of themselves and their kind, and most of the time they succeed,''
said Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch. ''If you're a thug,
you want to be on the committee that tries to condemn thugs.''

Mark Malloch Brown, chief of staff to Secretary General Kofi Annan, noted that
with two other crucial steps toward reform in place -- a new Peacebuilding
Commission to help countries emerging from war, and a biennial budget under an
arrangement laying the groundwork for major management change by June -- the
rights commission had taken center stage.

''For the great global public, the performance or nonperformance of the Human
Rights Commission has become the litmus test of U.N. renewal,'' he said. ''We
can't overestimate getting a clear win on this in January.''

Mr. Annan begins his last year in office with a mandate to bring fundamental and
lasting change to the beleaguered institution. Negotiators have been struggling
for months over the terms of a new Human Rights Council that he proposed in the
spring to replace the commission. A hoped-for agreement in December did not
materialize.

Negotiators resume talks on Jan. 11 and must settle on a resolution for the new
council soon after to have it in place by March, when the commission reconvenes
in Geneva. ''The commission should hold that meeting with the understanding that
it is going to be its last meeting,'' said Ricardo Arias, the ambassador of
Panama, who is one of the leaders of the working group drawing up the new Human
Rights Council.

The current commission has 53 members serving staggered three-year terms and
elected from closed slates put forward by regional groups. It meets each year in
Geneva for six weeks.

The proposed council would exist year-round, be free to act when rights
violations are discovered, conduct periodic reviews of every country's human
rights performance and meet more frequently throughout the year.

Still in dispute are the council's size, the procedures for citing individual
countries, how often the panel would meet, a possible two-term limit for
membership and whether members would be chosen based on agreed criteria of human
rights performance or by a two-thirds vote of the General Assembly as a way of
weeding out notorious rights violators.

The proposal envisions votes on each candidate for membership rather than on
regional slates. As with most of the changes being proposed at the United
Nations, the rights council has drawn suspicion from the poorer and less
developed nations of the 191-member General Assembly. They say they fear the new
council may be yet another way for wealthier and more powerful nations to
intrude in their affairs.

Abdallah Baali, the ambassador of Algeria, said the main concern of objecting
nations was ''whether or not this council will impose both its measures and its
views on a member state or will it seek their cooperation in order to improve
their human rights records. '' He said Algeria supported the proposed council.

Diplomats at the United Nations singled out Egypt and Pakistan as countries that
were leading the resistance to the proposed council.

In introducing his recommendation for a new council in March, Mr. Annan cited
the flaws in the current commission and the consequences for the United Nations
of not reforming it. The commission had been undermined, he argued, by allowing
participation of countries whose purpose was ''not to strengthen human rights
but to protect themselves against criticism or to criticize others.''

''As a result,'' he said, ''a credibility deficit has developed, which casts a
shadow on the reputation of the United Nations system as a whole.''

Mr. Roth of Human Rights Watch was blunter. ''If the governments of the world
cannot get together on human rights at the U.N., then it is a shameful act for
the entire organization,'' he said.

Peggy Hicks, the global advocacy director of Human Rights Watch, said that
having rights abusers on the panel had a broadly debilitating effect on its
work. ''In the case of Sudan, the Sudanese government's presence on the
commission meant that African states and others watered down language that human
rights groups around the world thought appropriate to address crimes against
humanity,'' she said.

She said Zimbabwe's presence on the commission was an important factor in the
panel's decision to take no action this year against the government of Robert
Mugabe despite widespread accusations of abuse against Zimbabwe's own citizens.

''In general,'' Ms. Hicks said, ''what the presence of abusive countries on the
commission means is that much of its energy is taken up with the blocking
actions and delaying tactics that end up weakening action on human rights abuses
worldwide. Yes, they delay action on their own internal situations, but they
have a vested interest in seeing that the overall ability is as weak as
possible.''

Kristen Silverberg, assistant secretary of state for international
organizations, said the United States' priorities were ''to improve the
membership so that countries like Zimbabwe and Sudan were not eligible'' and
''to make sure the council can act.''

''We don't need more theatrics and discussion in Geneva,'' she said. ''We need
concerted action.''

''Some countries have argued that it's better for the council to stay away from
anything that would embarrass a country, but we think the council needs to be
prepared to take action in serious cases like Darfur and Burma,'' she said in an
interview, referring to the country that now calls itself Myanmar.

Mr. Arias said that ''a lot of emphasis has been placed on the matter of
cooperation to improve human rights, not just passing resolutions against a
country which is in violation but on making an effort to increase the capacity
to improve human rights in the long term.''

Mr. Roth said the United States and the European Union were strong supporters of
the proposed council but needed to become more aggressive in building the case
for it with reluctant countries.

Ms. Silverberg said that she and the State Department's adviser on United
Nations reform, Ambassador Sharin Tahir-Kheli, had pressed the case for the
human rights council and management reform on trips to capitals in Latin America
and South Asia and that she was going to the Middle East for the same purpose
next month. She noted that Ms. Tahir-Kheli had visited Cairo and Islamabad,
among other capitals.

Prince Zeid Raad al-Hussein, the ambassador of Jordan, said that while his
country supported the proposed council, it was concerned that condemning the
current commission outright would be to ignore that it had sometimes proved
effective.

''What we are concerned about is about 20 percent of its work, while the rest
seems to be working quite well,'' said the prince, a former United Nations
peacekeeper in Bosnia. ''Look at all the rapporteurs in the field putting
together their reports, often with good cooperation with governments. This must
be encouraged and continued.''

This year the commission established a special rapporteur, or investigator, on
human rights and counterterrorism that drew the support of 80 United Nations
members, including Russia and the United States. It also passed a resolution
establishing a human rights monitoring operation in Nepal where both the
government and Maoist insurgents have been accused of abuses.

In November, Mr. Arias and the other leader of the working group, Dumisani
Kumalo, the South African ambassador, accompanied Jan Eliasson, the Swedish
diplomat who is the General Assembly president, to Geneva on a mission to calm
concerns there over plans for the council.

''There was a good deal of suspicion, and it's important that you don't develop
an antagonistic relationship between Geneva and New York,'' Mr. Eliasson said in
a telephone interview from Stockholm.

''It was important to pick up the best practices and good things the Human
Rights Commission has been doing,'' he said, ''and many people in Geneva felt
that aspect was being disregarded.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Secretary General Kofi Annan (Photo by Mario Tama/Getty
Images)(pg. 10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SCANDALS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EXECUTIVES (69%); TERM LIMITS
(63%) Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%) United Nations
Commission On Human Rights; United Nations Commission On Human Rights

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); PAKISTAN (79%);
EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Cuba; Sudan; Zimbabwe; European Union; Egypt; Pakistan; Europe

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              3 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Long Interrogaton

BYLINE: By Andrew Rice.

Andrew Rice is writing a book about Uganda. His last article for the magazine
was about low-income housing.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 50

LENGTH: 6401 words


On Aug. 3, 1987, Kelbessa Negewo debarked from a T.W.A. flight in New York. He
cleared customs and entered the United States. A strong, thickset man, just a
few weeks shy of his 37th birthday, he was traveling alone. In his suitcase, he
carried the remnants of his old life: a few sets of clothes, an Ethiopian
passport, a student visa issued at the United States Embassy in Addis Ababa and
a reference letter from a former employer, the Mugher Cement Factory. His
pockets contained $200. Kelbessa spent that first night in a cheap motel room.
The next morning, after a meandering tour of the outer boroughs with an
unscrupulous cabdriver, he arrived back at the airport, exasperated and
financially drained. America was suffering through a broiling heat wave;

Kelbessa sweated through his shirt as he struggled with his luggage. Living
here, he realized, was going to be difficult. But Kelbessa had experienced far
worse. The soles of his feet bore scars from a whipping.

He boarded a plane bound for his new home, Atlanta. An old friend, Ayalew Berou,
met Kelbessa when he landed. (Ethiopians formally address one another by their
first names.) Ayalew took Kelbessa home, made him a meal and offered to put him
up. He found Kelbessa a night job cleaning grocery stores. Kelbessa gradually
settled into an immigrant's existence. He worked hard and went unnoticed,
renting tiny apartments in disfavored suburbs, toiling in the dismal reaches of
the service economy. He didn't socialize much, not even with other Ethiopians.
Kelbessa tried going to one of their Bible study groups for a while, but he got
the feeling that people were whispering things behind his back, so he quit.

Six months after he arrived in America, Kelbessa applied for political asylum,
saying he had been persecuted and imprisoned by Ethiopia's military
dictatorship. It was the Reagan era, and Ethiopia was Communist; the application
was quickly approved. Kelbessa then set about achieving his next goal: saving
enough money to send for his three children, who were still stuck in Ethiopia.
(He and his wife were divorced.) He worked the graveyard shift at a convenience
store and took a second job, washing dishes at the Colony Square Hotel. Later,
he was promoted to bellhop.

One afternoon, Kelbessa was outside the employee locker room, waiting for the
service elevator. The elevator doors opened, and another Ethiopian walked out, a
young woman in a waitress's uniform. She worked at the restaurant upstairs.
Kelbessa hailed her as a compatriot and introduced himself. He let the elevator
go, and they had a brief conversation. Then the woman, whose shift was ending,
hurried off to clock out. Kelbessa went on with his day.

Kelbessa started hearing rumors after that. The waitress was asking questions
about him. One day, she brought a couple of Ethiopian friends into the hotel.
The three women didn't say anything to Kelbessa; they just stood in the lobby
and stared.

Not long afterward, in September 1990, someone else visited Kelbessa at work: a
process server. He handed Kelbessa some papers, which informed him that he was
being sued in federal court on charges of violating international human rights
laws. The lawsuit said he was far from a mere victim of Ethiopia's brutal
regime. It claimed Kelbessa had once been its servant, a notorious torturer and
killer, during a period known as the Red Terror a dozen years before. His chief
accuser was a woman named Edgegayehu Taye -- the waitress. Though neither she
nor Kelbessa knew it then, the two immigrants were preparing to embark on a
15-year passage through the formative reaches of human rights law. Justice, and
eventually even Kelbessa's freedom, would turn on a single question, decided by
American judges, in American courts: What happened so long ago, in the country
they both left behind?

Lately, Kelbessa has had a lot of time to contemplate the vicissitudes of life.
For the past 17 months, he has been imprisoned in Atlanta. He sits alone inside
a stuffy jail cell for 23 hours of most days, breaking the solitude by teaching
himself the basics of immigration law and by writing a jailhouse memoir,
scrawled out on several notepads. The book begins with a discussion of peasant
agriculture and Marxism and concludes with a description of prison life: the
cold food, the constant racket. He vehemently denies the accusations against him
and says that before the glancing encounter at the Colony Square, he never met
the woman who accused him. ''Every day I wake up in the morning in American
prison,'' Kelbessa writes. ''I think for a while, why am I in here?''

He is there because the federal Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement is
holding him in detention while it tries to deport him back to Ethiopia, where he
has been accused of committing many atrocities. Kelbessa's case, one of the
first of its kind under a new law, is a product of many chance occurrences. If
Edgegayehu Taye hadn't taken the waitress job, if their shifts hadn't overlapped
that day, if she'd just kept quiet, if she'd never moved to Atlanta in the first
place, then maybe Kelbessa could have lived in peace. But that is not the same
as saying his story was unlikely. In a nation with a proud heritage as a haven
for refugees, no conflict is too far removed. Immigrant communities may seem
undifferentiated to native-born Americans, sealed off as they are by their
foreign languages and customs. But in this time of impassioned argument over
immigration, it is important to remember that the talk of human tides and
huddled masses is just rhetorical shorthand. Each immigrant has his own reasons
for making the journey; each brings to America his own history, and sometimes,
his own secrets.

United States government officials estimate that as many as 1,000 foreign
residents may have once committed serious human rights abuses. Three years ago,
a United Nations tribunal convicted a Rwandan pastor of genocide; he had been
apprehended in Laredo, Tex. In Phoenix, more recently, agents from the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and the Department of Homeland Security, which now
oversees immigration, arrested 24 Bosnian Serbs on suspicion that they committed
atrocities during their homeland's civil war. In 1997, angry Haitian emigres
unmasked a former leader of a vicious paramilitary unit. He had been working as
a real estate agent in Queens. Another Haitian, a key member of an ousted
military regime, blew his cover when he won $3.2 million in the Florida lottery.

Of course, unsavory exiles have been washing up on foreign shores for as long as
there have been wars and tyrants. But where once a czarist general or a
Venezuelan caudillo could expect to live out his days without disturbance, the
world has changed in the 60 years since the Nuremburg trials. As far-flung
societies have drawn closer together, they have gradually developed
international standards of human rights and a patchwork legal system to judge
crimes against them. The case of Kelbessa Negewo took place at the confluence of
these two historic trends. An airplane brought Kelbessa to a place where no one
knew his name. In a courtroom, his past was laid bare.

Kelbessa was born in rural western Ethiopia in 1950, midway through the long
reign of Emperor Haile Selassie. His family raised goats and grew onions.
''Through my whole life, I observed and learnt power is very seductive,''
Kelbessa writes in his jailhouse memoir. The corrupt governor of his province,
he recalled, collected taxes from his parents but never built a road for his
village, as promised. Kelbessa had to trudge to school on foot.

There was no one to complain to. In those days, you couldn't fight the emperor.
They called Selassie ''the King of Kings.'' A slight, crafty political survivor,
he held court in Addis Ababa surrounded by fawning, plotting nobles. The
aristocrats were often members of Selassie's Amhara ethnic group. They were
allotted huge estates in the African hinterland, which the local peasants worked
like serfs.

This hierarchy was breaking down by the time Kelbessa came of age. Ethiopia was
one of the few corners of the continent that had not been colonized in the 19th
century. But the forbidding mountains that had repelled invaders could not keep
out the convulsive spirit of Africa's independence era. University students were
on the streets, calling for land reform, and the country was awash in pamphlets
attacking the emperor. Kelbessa, who by this time had earned a diploma in public
health and had a government job, would read these missives furtively, in the
bathroom. The turning point for him came when he won a government scholarship to
attend college in the United States, and a government official, an Amhara like
Selassie, pulled a string to send his nephew instead. After that, Kelbessa says,
he hated the regime.

Kelbessa moved to Addis Ababa, where revolution was gaining momentum. In 1973,
famine gripped Ethiopia. Selassie sat in his palace, increasingly isolated,
tossing scraps of meat to his beloved dogs. In September 1974, army tanks
surrounded the palace and the emperor was bundled into the back of a Volkswagen
Beetle and taken to prison.

Kelbessa, like many Ethiopians, embraced the revolution. The military
established a 120-member Derg, or committee, to rule the country. It promised
land reform and a prompt transition to representative rule. Kelbessa was
thrilled. A month after Selassie's overthrow, the Derg closed down the
university and ordered its students to disperse across the countryside and
''educate the people.'' Kelbessa volunteered to teach the basics of farming.
Shortly after that, the Derg announced plans to establish a socialist one-party
state, began confiscating property from the ''feudalists'' of the old elite and
established a system of elected neighborhood councils that were to administer
changes on a local level. Kelbessa took up a position on his council.

These initial moves were popular with many of the country's Marxist
intellectuals and young people, even some children of the elite. But
disenchantment set in quickly. The military shocked the country by executing a
group of 59 royals and other leaders of the imperial regime. Paranoia settled
over the capital. Members of the Derg assassinated one another in a struggle for
control, and eventually, an obscure army major named Mengistu Haile Mariam
emerged. Mengistu secretly ordered Selassie's murder and had him buried in an
unmarked grave. The Marxists split: one group supported Mengistu's methods; the
other decided to fight him. The opponents joined the clandestine Ethiopian
People's Revolutionary Party (E.P.R.P.), which began its own campaign of
bombings and assassinations.

In April 1977, at a public rally, Mengistu smashed glass bottles filled with
blood, or some red liquid, and vowed to conquer the ''enemies of the
revolution.'' All over the city, corpses appeared on the streets, pinned with
signs bearing slogans referring to the government's Red Terror campaign. It
would prove to be, according to a Human Rights Watch report, ''one of the most
systematic uses of mass murder by the state ever witnessed in Africa.''

Kelbessa was never more than a midlevel figure in Ethiopia's government. At the
time of the Red Terror, he was chairman of Higher Zone 9, a district of Addis
Ababa. In this administrative post, he oversaw several neighborhood councils.
Mengistu's proclamation of war, however, strengthened positions like Kelbessa's.
The government instructed the local councils to recruit new ''revolutionary
defense squads,'' which were armed and given orders to root out any threat.
Kelbessa took to strutting around his neighborhood with a machine gun slung
across his chest, leading an entourage of militiamen. He cut a distinctive
figure with his large afro and his bellicose oratory, and he was often in the
newspaper or on television. Others were higher-ranking, but few were louder in
proclaiming their ruthless devotion to the struggle. A series of memos,
unearthed in the course of Kelbessa's legal travails, reveal that he was
tireless in begging his higher-ups for more guns, more ammunition and more press
coverage. He told them of great strides in ''the process of weeding out
antirevolutionary elements.''

Late one afternoon in February 1978, according to sworn testimony, a squad of
revolutionary guards arrived at the home of Edgegayehu Taye, a 22-year-old civil
servant. They told her she was wanted for questioning. She went without protest.
The guards pushed her into the back seat of a Volkswagen and drove her some
distance, until the car reached a corrugated metal gate marked by a sign that
read: ''Higher Zone 9.'' The guards took her into the main office. Edgegayehu
was ordered to strip naked and was bound with rope at her wrists and knees. Then
the guards ran a pole through the loops in the rope and hung her between two
desks, like a pig on a spit. They lashed her with plastic cables.

Over and over again, the man behind the desk, the one with the afro, asked her,
''Are you a member of the E.P.R.P.?''

Years later, when she saw the man standing by the elevator at the Colony Square
Hotel, Edgegayehu wasn't sure it was Kelbessa at first. He'd gotten older,
gained some weight, lost his swagger. He certainly didn't seem to recognize her.
Then Kelbessa smiled widely and greeted her, and she knew for sure. ''The
voice,'' she told me. ''You don't forget the voice.''

Edgegayehu is an old Amharic name. Americans find it difficult to pronounce (it
is pronounced ed-JIH-GAH-yu), so these days she goes by a nickname, Edge. She is
middle-aged now and lives in Ohio, in a home she has decorated with reminders of
Ethiopia. Even after so many years, the very mention of Kelbessa's name causes
her voice to crack.

Edge told me the first thing she felt that day, as Kelbessa stepped into the
elevator and she hurried out of the hotel, was a stab of nausea. Then
incomprehension set in. ''Seeing him here, I couldn't swallow that,'' she says,
still sounding a bit disbelieving. ''Kelbessa, that man, that big man, the
person who acts like a god during his time, the person who makes you or breaks
you, the person who decided whether you live or you die. That person, to see
that person here, wearing that dishwasher's uniform? I don't think so.''

After that first encounter with Kelbessa, Edge spent several months wondering
what to do. She had never been able to talk about her torture, not even to her
closest friends and relatives. Finally, she mentioned her run-in to a few
friends. Word got around. An acquaintance, an Ethiopian who worked in the office
of Andrew Young, then Atlanta's mayor, made some calls and got in contact with
the Center for Constitutional Rights, a nonprofit legal organization based in
New York. Someone from the center contacted Miles Alexander, a partner at the
Atlanta law firm Kilpatrick & Cody. He agreed to look into the case pro bono.

Edge set up an appointment with her new lawyers. She was led into a wood-paneled
corner office, where she met Alexander and Laurel Lucey, the associate assigned
to the case. They told Edge there might be something they could do. There was a
law, a very old law, called the Alien Tort Claims Act. Passed as part of the
first Judiciary Act in 1789, it said American federal courts had jurisdiction in
cases in which injuries had occurred ''in violation of the law of nations,''
regardless of where those violations occurred. No one was really sure what the
First Congress meant by ''the law of nations'' -- it may have had something to
do with pirates -- but in the early 1980's, a group of human rights lawyers had
dusted off the dormant phrase, using it to go after the likes of Imelda Marcos.

To get started, though, the lawyers needed Edge to give them a detailed
description of what happened back in Ethiopia. She really didn't know what to
say. She had never put words to her memories before. She opened her mouth and
started talking. But the story came out muddled. It was so hard to explain.
Finally, flustered, Edge twisted around in her chair and pulled off her shirt.
Alexander and Lucey, dumbfounded, stared at her back. It was crisscrossed by
long, ridged scars.

Edge has been required to describe her ordeal on many occasions since then. But
it is painful every time, she says. When she told me about it, she adopted a
hunched-over posture, and her voice sank to almost a whisper. She says she has
never been sure why she was arrested. That first night, between whippings, the
guards dragged in a young man she knew. ''He gave my name,'' she says, dabbing
her eyes with one of the paper napkins she had left out in a stack on the coffee
table. ''Probably he did that out of fear, out of pain. I don't blame him. I saw
him. He was tortured very badly.''

There really didn't need to be a reason. In a study of the Mengistu regime, Rene
Lefort writes that ''simply knowing how to read and write and being aged about
20'' was enough to get a person branded a counterrevolutionary. But Edge fitted
the profile of a rebel in some specific ways. Her father had been a member of
the old elite. She worked in a government ministry, as an architectural
draftswoman, and she had told some co-workers that she was worried about the
course the revolution was taking. Edge told me she was never involved in the
clandestine attacks against the government. But she adds, ''I sympathized, of
course.''

Kelbessa's men tried to beat a confession out of her for two days, Edge says.
When that didn't work, she was transferred to another detention center, where
she was tortured further. For 10 months, she lived in a small cell filled with
as many as 30 other women. At night, guards would come in and call out names,
and those they summoned would be shot. Edge heard more about Kelbessa from her
cellmates. One of them, a woman named Sosena, was the daughter of a former
supreme court justice. The story went that Kelbessa had ordered her father
executed, and his body dumped by the roadside.

Eventually Edge was transferred to a regular prison, where she served a
three-year sentence. When she was released, in 1981, she made a daring escape
from Ethiopia, paying a band of Somali nomads to smuggle her across the desert
to Djibouti. From there, via a refugee program, she immigrated to Canada. She
married an Ethiopian and moved to Detroit. Shivering through one winter, Edge
read the novel ''Gone With the Wind,'' and something in it captured her
imagination. She decided to move to Atlanta. She loved it there: loved the big
Ethiopian community, loved the warm weather, loved the red clay, which reminded
her of the soil in Sidamo, the province where she was born.

Then she saw Kelbessa. ''He made my life so miserable,'' Edge says. ''He's the
person who snatched away my happiness, my youth, my laugh at that age. I didn't
want to leave him alone. I didn't want to let it go. Knowing that he is living
here, after he did so many crimes.'' She added: ''I had to do something, even if
it was a small thing. I hadn't any idea about the magnitude of this case. For me
it is a simple case.''

Her lawyers knew better. At the time, using the Alien Tort statute to pursue
human rights violators was a fringe idea, the project of a small group of
left-leaning legal activists. No one was even certain whether the approach was
constitutional. A judge in Atlanta might easily decide that the sorrows of
Ethiopia were not of his court's concern. At the very least, the lawyers told
Edge, it would help to have some additional plaintiffs, a few more victims to
corroborate her story.

Edge went home and started working the Ethiopian immigrant network. She
remembered that her old cellmate, Sosena, had a sister in Los Angeles named
Elizabeth, who had been in prison. (For reasons of privacy Elizabeth has asked
that her last name not be used.) She agreed to participate in the lawsuit and
called a close friend in Ottawa, Hirut Abebe-Jiri. The two women flew down to
Atlanta. Edge took them to the Colony Square, and from a distance they watched
Kelbessa, standing in the sky-lighted lobby in his gray bellhop's uniform. ''It
was unbelievable,'' recalls Hirut, who claims Kelbessa tortured and imprisoned
her for three months. ''The guy who was leading all these people with his Uzi on
his chest now becoming just a guy who was carrying a suitcase.''

When the trial convened at the Atlanta federal courthouse, in May 1993, the
gallery was filled with Ethiopians. Paul Hoffman, a prominent Los Angeles human
rights lawyer, led a team of attorneys for the plaintiffs. Kelbessa, who
couldn't afford a lawyer, defended himself. He wore a suit and a thick mustache
and spoke with a heavy accent. ''I have never tortured,'' Kelbessa said in his
opening statement. ''I'm not responsible for what Derg has done. Fifty-two
million people are participating in the revolution. I'm an individual. I was
working for the people.''

Then the women testified, in gruesome detail, and Kelbessa cross-examined them.
He assumed the manner of an interrogator, repeatedly accusing the women of
having once been members of the underground resistance.

''You don't feel shame when you lie?'' he asked Edge. ''What did you do?''

''I didn't do nothing,'' she replied, her anger getting the best of her English.
''I don't have to.'' She added: ''You people are killing people, tortured
people, detained people every day. You are the nightmare of Addis Ababa.''

Three months later, the judge issued his decision, siding with the women and
awarding them $1.5 million in damages. Kelbessa filed an appeal, declared
bankruptcy and moved on. The verdict hardly troubled his daily existence; if
anything, things improved. The Colony Square fired him, but he collected
unemployment checks and used the free time to earn a degree in accounting from
DeVry University. He later found a new job at the Westin. He married again, an
Ethiopian 15 years his junior. When they had a son, in 1996, Kelbessa insisted
on naming him Justice. The boy was born with a rare vitamin deficiency, however,
and after nine months he died. They tried again and had a daughter, who is now a
healthy and rambunctious 6-year-old. The year after the verdict, as he was
pursuing his ultimately unsuccessful appeal, Kelbessa filed a naturalization
application with the Immigration and Naturalization Service. On July 28, 1995,
Kelbessa took an oath of allegiance and became a citizen of the United States.

The women who accused Kelbessa never thought their lawsuit would bring them
financial gain. (Over the years, they have managed to collect $798 in damages,
which they have donated to charity.) They had, however, expected that all the
trial publicity would prod the United States government to deport Kelbessa back
to Ethiopia, where he would have to face real consequences. Mengistu's
dictatorship had fallen, and Ethiopia's new government had appointed a special
prosecutor to try those responsible for the Red Terror. Days after the verdict
in Kelbessa's civil trial, the Ethiopian prosecutor formally asked the United
States to turn him over. But the government never acted, and once Kelbessa
became an American citizen, deportation was out of the question. Around the time
Kelbessa won his citizenship, Edge moved back to Detroit. If he was going to be
staying in Atlanta, she had to leave.

For the women, it was a wrenching turn of events. But the hard truth was,
Kelbessa couldn't be kicked out of America simply on the basis of charges --
however substantiated -- that he had tortured and killed people back home.
American law, for complex reasons of history and politics, made it
extraordinarily difficult to convey Kelbessa from his apartment in Atlanta to a
courtroom in Ethiopia, however much he belonged there.

The immigration law on the books, like the modern human rights movement itself,
was a product of the Holocaust. In the 1950's and 60's, there were a number of
cases in which fugitive war criminals were found to be living comfortable lives
in America. Once they were discovered, it proved almost impossible to deport
these people without evidence of recent crimes or fraud in the application
process. So in the mid-70's, Elizabeth Holtzman, a New York congresswoman,
proposed a law to bar Nazi criminals from the United States and a new Office of
Special Investigations within the Justice Department to track them down. Yet the
law was written narrowly, so that it would essentially apply only to Nazis. It
was the cold war era; some of America's best friends were dictators.

With the end of the cold war, international human rights law evolved, coming to
focus increasingly on conflicts in the developing world. The United Nations set
up special courts to try those responsible for the carnage in the Balkans,
Rwanda and Sierra Leone. The International Criminal Court, established in 1998,
began investigating crimes committed in Congo, Uganda and the Darfur region of
Sudan. In the United States, the use of the Alien Tort statute to pursue
violators of human rights became an accepted legal practice, upheld (though
somewhat narrowed) by a 2004 Supreme Court decision. But this international
legal system -- if you could even call it that yet -- was still a jerry-built
creation, with many hitches and flaws. For all the talk of universal rights, the
world was still made up of sovereign nations with borders and rules. Kelbessa
Negewo managed to find a haven in the wide gap between the aspirations of global
justice and the reality of these earthbound things called laws. But only for a
time.

When the women who accused Kelbessa heard that the government had awarded him
citizenship, they were astonished and furious. Two of them flew down to Atlanta
to tape a CNN segment, which was shown while President Bill Clinton was touring
Africa. ''This is a huge mistake they made,'' one of the women told the network.
In 1999, Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, inspired by many similar
stories -- including a Boston Globe account of a Bosnian baker in his home state
who had been identified as a former paramilitary gunman -- sponsored a bill to
make past acts of torture or extrajudicial killing grounds for deportation, and
to expand the mission of the Office of Special Investigations beyond
Nazi-hunting.

Immigration and Naturalization Service officials, who apparently knew about the
torture charges against Kelbessa when they awarded him citizenship, ordered a
new investigation, the first step in the arduous process necessary to revoke it.
The agency sent investigators to Ethiopia twice to gather evidence and interview
witnesses. ''It was offensive that he was here as a citizen,'' says Kimberly
Schroeder, the investigator who handled the case, ''and that bothered me
terribly after meeting the women.'' Schroeder collaborated with the Ethiopian
special prosecutor, who was preparing a case against Kelbessa. Under Mengistu
the secret police had Soviet and East German advisers, and they had encouraged
meticulous record-keeping. The prosecutors unearthed many archival documents
that incriminated Kelbessa, like signed memos in which he described taking
''revolutionary actions'' -- the favored euphemism for extrajudicial murder --
on suspected resistance fighters.

''He is one of the most savage of all our cases,'' Yoseph Kiros, the prosecutor
who handled Kelbessa's case, said in a telephone interview from Addis Ababa.
Eventually, tired of waiting for Kelbessa's return, the Ethiopian prosecutors
decided to try him in absentia before a three-judge tribunal, along with dozens
of co-defendants from the neighborhood. Because Kelbessa wasn't there, no
defense attorney represented him. More than 100 witnesses came to testify. They
accused Kelbessa of ordering many executions. One man was killed, according to
testimony and written evidence, simply so Kelbessa could confiscate his Peugeot.
In May 2002, the tribunal convicted Kelbessa of several murders and sentenced
him to life in prison.

Meanwhile, back in the United States, the legal barriers to Kelbessa's return
home were finally falling. In 2004, after years of delays, Leahy's bill finally
became law as part of the Intelligence Reform Act. The same autumn, as Kelbessa
prepared to face a federal judge, he abruptly, and perhaps unwisely, decided to
give up his citizenship without a fight. Kelbessa had just bought a
three-bedroom house in a subdivision south of Atlanta. He did not have the money
for years of appeals, and his wife as well as an attorney he consulted were
urging him to get his legal battles finished. He signed a settlement agreement
reluctantly, hoping his gesture of submission might persuade the government to
leave him alone.

Three months later, on the morning of Jan. 4, 2005, armed federal agents knocked
at the door of Kelbessa's new suburban home. He was sound asleep; the night
before, he worked a late shift at his hotel job. Kelbessa came downstairs in his
nightclothes, groggy, asking what was going on. The agents cuffed Kelbessa's
hands behind his back. Then they put him in a car and drove him to a detention
center.

I first met Kelbessa last December, a few days before Christmas, in a
fluorescent-lighted room inside the Atlanta City Detention Center, a 14-story
municipal jail where the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement leases
space. He shuffled in, led by a beefy prison guard, his legs shackled, his arms
cuffed before him and affixed to a chain around his waist. He was wearing a
bright orange prison uniform. His hair was thin, and his mustache was flecked
with gray. Though only 55, he looked very frail. Kelbessa contorted his wrists
within the cuffs in order to offer a handshake. Then he sat down on a hard
wooden bench.

''I didn't expect from America this kind of stuff, because this is a very highly
civilized country,'' he told me. ''I was trying to improve myself. I bought a
house. I was working hard. And all of a sudden, they accused me, the government
accused me.'' Kelbessa lowered his voice for emphasis and said, ''I am not a
torturer.''

Kelbessa will be kept in detention for as long as his deportation case is
pending, which is mandated by law, because his 2002 conviction in Ethiopia means
that he is classified as a violent felon. ''Because he's facing life when he
returns to Ethiopia, he's also considered a very high flight risk,'' Schroeder
says. Kelbessa says that that sentence was a product of a ''sham trial.'' The
damning memos that prosecutors uncovered have been taken out of context, he
claims. When I asked him what he meant when he wrote his superiors about
''weeding out'' resistance fighters, he laughed. ''That is revolutionary
language,'' he said.

Kelbessa is terrified of what will happen to him if he is deported. He has seen
the inside of an Ethiopian prison before. In 1979, as the Red Terror was winding
down, the forces of the revolution turned against him, and he was purged.
Kelbessa was jailed, and only released when the military regime pardoned him
several years later. Eventually it granted Kelbessa permission to emigrate to
the United States, where he claimed asylum, saying, truthfully, that he had been
a prisoner. ''I was tortured for five years,'' Kelbessa said. He claimed he had
never lied to immigration officials and said he believed that the United States
had merely been duped by his home country's present government, which is led by
Prime Minister Meles Zenawi, a former anti-Mengistu rebel. ''I am just a
victim,'' Kelbessa said. ''I am a victim of the Ethiopian government. Before, I
was a victim of the Derg military government. I can't tolerate torture now. I am
old now for torture.''

Kelbessa's fears may not be entirely unfounded. Prime Minister Meles's regime
has gone to great pains to give the perpetrators of the Red Terror fair trials.
It's a poor country, however, and the special tribunals have had to deal with
more than 2,000 defendants. Human rights groups have documented numerous
irregularities. ''Ethiopia has violated the rights of the defendants in its
pursuit of justice,'' concluded a law review article by one American lawyer who
consulted the tribunal. Prison conditions are uniformly awful. In the last year,
Kelbessa is quick to note, Ethiopia's political situation has taken a drastic
turn for the worse, as Meles has jailed journalists and opposition politicians.
Human Rights Watch says political prisoners are sometimes abused.

Since the United States enacted its new, tough law aimed at immigrants with a
history of committing atrocities, some have questioned it, wondering whether the
United States should be sending anyone, however loathsome, to places where their
own rights might in turn be violated. ''There has been a great deal of debate
within the human rights community about the immigration option,'' says William
Aceves, a law professor and the principal author of a 2002 Amnesty International
report titled ''United States of America: A Safe Haven for Torturers,'' which
highlighted Kelbessa's case. ''It's frustrating, because the human rights
community is in favor of accountability, but we want to make sure that it's
legitimate accountability.'' Aceves and others point out that the United States
has a federal torture statute, passed in 1994, which applies to acts committed
anywhere in the world. But no one has ever been charged under the law. For now,
the United States government is putting its energies into deportation cases
instead. In less than two years, the immigration bureau has prosecuted or
investigated more than 1,000 cases related to human rights abuses. Legal
advocates for immigrants, however, caution that many of those caught thus far
appear to be marginal figures, not masterminds.

Deportation cases are handled in a special nationwide system of immigration
courts. As a result of the federal government's new vigilance about human rights
abusers, these courts are increasingly playing a new role, as a way station
between exile and, presumably, a trial back home. Even the best-run court
system, however, would struggle with such distant events as the crimes of the
Red Terror, with their complex political and ethnic overtones, and human rights
advocates question whether the immigration court system, which is overburdened,
underfinanced and opaque, is up to the task. ''It's a really shocking system,''
says Carolyn Patty Blum, a Columbia University law professor who specializes in
asylum and human rights cases. The standard of proof for deportation is lower
than it is for criminal trials. There are usually few witnesses called. The
proceedings are often closed to the public. There is no public defender.

Normally, an Ethiopian facing deportation and certain life imprisonment at home
could hope to find free legal representation within the network of lawyers
affiliated with immigrant rights organizations. As a general principle, human
rights groups like Amnesty International oppose trials in absentia like
Kelbessa's. But after Kelbessa was arrested, his wife talked to every
immigration lawyer she could find in Atlanta, and none would take his case. A
few were sympathetic until they heard the details of his past. So for now,
Kelbessa is fighting deportation on his own. In his cell, he keeps a large stack
of well-thumbed trial transcripts, plaintive letters to Attorney General Alberto
Gonzales and legal briefs, which he writes by hand on notebook paper.

Kelbessa's deportation hearing took place over two days last July. The judge in
the case, William Cassidy, has a reputation as one of the nation's toughest. In
a reprise of the last trial, 12 years before, Edge, Elizabeth and Hirut told
their stories, and Kelbessa, in his orange prison garb, cross-examined them. He
threw around a few unfounded accusations. But he just wasn't the same ferocious
questioner. Kelbessa called just two character witnesses in his defense. When
his wife took the stand, their fidgety daughter sat on her lap, and she swore
she had never heard Kelbessa raise his voice in anger. Even the women testifying
against him felt a twinge of pity for the family. But then again, none of them
had ever had any children. ''I couldn't bring any child in this world,'' Hirut
told me. ''It's not safe.''

Kelbessa has never expressed sympathy for the women who say they endured so much
suffering. ''These are the feudal children,'' he told me when I visited him a
second time, in March. ''Their fathers used to have big land, and so many
tenants.'' Edge's father was a senator. Elizabeth's was a supreme court justice.
Hirut's was a lawyer and a confidant of Haile Selassie's son. As children of
privilege, he said, ''they didn't accept the change -- they didn't like the
change.'' They were in their teens or just barely beyond, but to Kelbessa, fired
as he was by fear, ambition and resentment, their parentage was enough to
identify them as threats. ''They are not innocent,'' he said. ''There are no
innocents. In Ethiopia, you can't say, 'innocent.'''

When he looks back on the whole saga now, the 17 years since that chance meeting
at the Colony Square Hotel, all Kelbessa sees is one large, many-faced
conspiracy, orchestrated by his enemies back in Ethiopia. ''I think you know
about third world politics,'' he told me. ''They want revenge.'' The idea that
there might be motivations other than vengeance, that there might be no dark
political force at work, that this might simply be a story of happenstance and
justice, seems genuinely never to have occurred to him. He can see the world
only as a struggle between two ruthless forces. For him, the Red Terror has
never ended.

Last July, Judge Cassidy ruled that Kelbessa should be deported and dismissed
his claims that he would be tortured in Ethiopia. The case is now making its way
through a long, lurching appeals process, which could take anywhere from a few
more months to a few years. If no court overturns the deportation order, then
one day, federal agents will come to Kelbessa's cell. He will be allowed to
change into civilian clothes. He will be handcuffed and escorted onto a flight
to Addis Ababa. At the airport, the agent will hand Kelbessa over to Ethiopian
officials. Then he will most likely be taken to Kaliti Prison, on the outskirts
of the capital. There he will begin his new life.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kelbessa Negewo, in detention in Atlanta, is facing deportation
for torturing people under a military regime in Ethiopia in the 1970's.
(Photograph by Edward Keating)
Kelbessa Negewo, when he was a midlevel administrator during Ethiopia's Red
Terror. (Photograph by Ethiopian Press Agency)
Edgegayehu Taye, scarred from torture she says was supervised by Kelbessa
Negewo.
 Hirut Abebe-Jiri, who charged that Kelbessa Negewo imprisoned and tortured her.
(Photographs by Antonin Kratochvil/VII, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (79%); CRIMINAL LAW (79%); IMMIGRATION (78%);
AIRPORTS (78%); NIGHT & SHIFT WORK (75%); HOTEL STAFF (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); GENOCIDE (74%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%);
RESTAURANTS (71%); CONVENIENCE STORES (70%); WOMEN (69%); GROCERY STORES &
SUPERMARKETS (68%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (68%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (67%);
TORTURE (67%); DEPORTATION (65%); CEMENT MFG (55%); MILITARY RULE (50%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; Deportation; Sentences
(Criminal); Law and Legislation  ; Asylum (Political)

COMPANY: MUGHER CEMENT FACTORY (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS327310 CEMENT MANUFACTURING (57%); SIC3241 CEMENT, HYDRAULIC
(57%)

PERSON: Kelbessa Negewo; Andrew Rice; Mengistu Haile Mariam

CITY: ADIS ABEBA, ETHIOPIA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); ETHIOPIA (96%)

REGION: Ethiopia; United States; Ethiopia

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Principles Defeat Politics at the U.N.

BYLINE: By Jimmy Carter, Oscar Arias, Kim Dae Jung, Shirin Ebadi and Desmond
Tutu.

Jimmy Carter, Oscar Arias, Kim Dae Jung, Shirin Ebadi and Desmond Tutu are Nobel
Peace Prize laureates.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 617 words


IN the global struggle for the advancement of human rights, the United Nations
has reached a defining moment. The president of the General Assembly, Jan
Eliasson of Sweden, has led five months of negotiations to develop a proposal to
reform the United Nations Commission on Human Rights. Although the commission
has accomplished many things, including the adoption of human rights standards,
treaties and fact-finding mechanisms that measure the performance of
governments, it has become more of a political battleground than a meaningful
force for protecting victims of human rights violations, and it must be
reformed.

Last year, Secretary General Kofi Annan boldly proposed that the United Nations
replace the commission with a new more elevated and effective body. His
visionary proposal started a very creative process through which governments
have thoroughly examined and debated the features of a new body that a large
majority could embrace. Mr. Eliasson has now produced a draft resolution with
many positive elements that has gained the support of the vast majority of the
membership of the United Nations.

Some have asserted that the proposal is just a weak compromise. We challenge
this claim.

The new council creates new expectations that members will uphold the highest
standards in the promotion and protection of human rights, fully cooperate with
the council, and undergo additional scrutiny through a peer review. Most
significantly, a member that commits gross and systematic violations of human
rights can be suspended from the body.

The council includes a new requirement that members be approved by a majority of
the General Assembly -- or 96 countries -- rather than simply being appointed by
their regional groups. With these new procedures and the articulation for the
first time of standards for membership, we believe the new body will be led by
countries with a greater commitment to human rights.

Instead of having one highly politicized meeting per year, the council will meet
throughout the year so that it can address urgent human rights issues in a
timely way. This will create a more regularized, constructive and professional
process. The politics and double standards of the existing commission will be
redressed by providing for periodic review of the human rights records of all
191 members, including the most powerful.

In addition, the proposal ensures robust participation by human rights
organizations and activists in the deliberations and secures the system of
special rapporteurs and other fact-finding mechanisms -- the best feature of the
commission.

The draft before United Nations members represents a very significant and
meaningful improvement over the existing commission, and to reopen negotiations
would put at risk these gains and give those who would prefer a weaker system
another opportunity to do mischief. This risks reintroducing very damaging
proposals, like giving politically motivated member states control and oversight
of the high commissioner for human rights, now an independent office and
important voice for victims; new restrictions on special rapporteurs,
nongovernmental organizations and news media; elimination or new high thresholds
for passing country resolutions, and so forth.

Our aim must be to build a solid foundation for protecting human rights and
coming to the aid of victims within the only truly global organization of
governments on the planet. Mr. Eliasson has found a way forward that can bring
everyone on board. Nearly 60 years after the adoption of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, he has finally brought us to where we can begin to
put principles over politics for the betterment of all.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(87%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RELIGION (74%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (73%); APPROVALS (72%) Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (91%) United Nations Commission on Human Rights; United Nations Council
on Human Rights; United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: JIMMY CARTER (58%) Jimmy Carter; Oscar Arias; Kim Dae Jung; Shirin
(Judge) Ebadi; Desmond M (Archbishop) Tutu; Jan Eliasson; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Shame of the United Nations

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 334 words


When it comes to reforming the disgraceful United Nations Human Rights
Commission, America's ambassador, John Bolton, is right; Secretary General Kofi
Annan is wrong; and leading international human rights groups have unwisely put
their preference for multilateral consensus ahead of their duty to fight for the
strongest possible human rights protection. A once-promising reform proposal has
been so watered down that it has become an ugly sham, offering cover to an
unacceptable status quo. It should be renegotiated or rejected.

Some of the world's most abusive regimes have won seats on the Human Rights
Commission and used them to insulate themselves from criticism. Current members
include Sudan, which is carrying out genocide; Nepal, whose absolute monarch has
suspended basic liberties; and Saudi Arabia, where women have few rights. All
are gross violators of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the
commission's founding document.

Ideally, violators of the declaration should be barred from the new Human Rights
Council, which would succeed the commission. Mr. Annan's original proposal did
not go that far. But it significantly raised the bar by requiring a two-thirds
majority in the General Assembly to win a seat. This essential change has been
eliminated and replaced by a technical adjustment barely visible to the naked
eye. Slates will still be nominated by regional blocs without regard to human
rights performance. A few other incremental improvements are not enough to
redeem this pathetic draft. Approving it, as groups like Human Rights Watch and
Amnesty International wrongly urge, would take off the heat for meaningful
change.

Mr. Bolton, representing an administration whose record is stained by Guantanamo
and Abu Ghraib, is awkwardly placed to defend basic human rights principles. But
he also represents the United States, with its long and proud human rights
tradition. We hope that his refusal to go along with this shameful charade can
produce something better.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (97%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%) Editorials; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%) United
Nations Commission on Human Rights; United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: John R (Amb) Bolton; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              6 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Response, China Attacks U.S. Record On Rights

BYLINE: By JOSEPH KAHN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 9


China criticized the human rights record of the United States on Thursday,
arguing that racial discrimination remained pervasive and that the American
military abused prisoners held at detention centers abroad.

In a sharply worded response to the annual State Department report on human
rights conditions globally, which was released in Washington on Wednesday,
China's cabinet said the American government should concentrate on improving its
own rights record.

''As in previous years, the State Department pointed the finger at human rights
situations in more than 190 countries and regions, including China, but kept
silent on the serious violations of human rights in the United States,'' the
Chinese report said.

The State Department's survey, which assesses human rights conditions in all
foreign countries, ''fully exposes its hypocrisy and double standard on human
rights issues,'' the Chinese study said.

The section of the State Department's report dealing with China said the
situation worsened there in 2005, reversing a modest trend toward improved
respect for rights that the department had observed earlier.

It cited ''increased harassment, detention and imprisonment'' of people who were
viewed as threats to the government.

The report also criticized tighter controls on the Chinese press and more
assertive censorship of all kinds of media, including the Internet.

Chinese diplomats pay close attention to the tone of the State Department report
because it often indicates how aggressively the United States will work to
censure China at the annual United Nations human rights convention in Geneva,
which takes place in April.

Though Beijing publicly dismisses the value of the State Department's report,
Chinese diplomats often lobby Washington privately to soften criticism and avoid
pushing motions for sanctions on Beijing, Chinese and American diplomats say.

Human rights discussions between American and Chinese officials have been
especially tense this year because China has detained and arrested a number of
well-known journalists, lawyers, religious leaders and human rights activists,
people involved in the talks said.

Police officers and thugs hired by the authorities also have used force to
suppress social unrest in the countryside.

To ease condemnation of its record, China recently released several people from
prison before the formal expiration of their terms.

On Wednesday, the same day the State Department report was issued, the Dui Hua
Foundation, a San Francisco-based human rights group, said it had been notified
by Chinese authorities that Tong Shidong, 72, a physics professor convicted of
helping found an opposition political party in 1999, would probably be released
three years before his sentence was up.

President Hu Jintao is scheduled to make his first visit to the United States as
China's top leader in April. Early releases of prisoners and other concessions
on delicate human rights cases often precede such trips as good-will gestures.

But human rights groups argue that treating political prisoners as bargaining
chips has not often heralded lasting improvement in China's human rights record.

China defends its progress on rights issues. Qin Gang, a Foreign Ministry
spokesman, said Thursday that the government's respect for rights ''not only
satisfied the Chinese people but also has been affirmed by the international
community.''

The Chinese rebuttal to the State Department report, much of which appeared to
be compiled from American newspaper clippings, devoted special attention to what
it described as the ''chronic malady'' of racism.

It said blacks and other minorities had lower living standards and less reliable
access to health care and faced discrimination in the workplace. Blacks also
received the death penalty more often than whites convicted of the same crimes,
it said.

The Chinese report also noted a deterioration in conditions for Muslims in
America since the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and mentioned the use of
''various kinds of torture'' at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and other overseas
detention centers where suspected terrorists were held.

The unchecked spread of guns in private hands and secret wiretaps authorized by
the White House were among the other rights problems in the United States that
China cited.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Army soldier stands guard at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, one of the
places cited by China in accusing America of human rights violations. (Photo by
Joe Skipper/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); PRISONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
JOURNALISM (77%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); TRENDS
(77%); TERRORISM (74%); NAVIES (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%);
CENSORSHIP (70%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (64%); RELIGION (50%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; Blacks;
Discrimination; United States International Relations; Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay
Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: HU JINTAO (59%) Joseph Kahn

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (94%); IRAQ (79%); SWITZERLAND
(79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New U.N. Rights Group Includes Six Nations With Poor Records

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 9


Six nations with poor human rights records were among those elected to the new
Human Rights Council on Tuesday, although notorious violators that had belonged
to the predecessor Human Rights Commission did not succeed in winning places in
the new group.

China, Cuba, Pakistan, Russia, Saudi Arabia and Azerbaijan, countries cited by
human rights groups as not deserving membership, were among the 47 nations
elected to the council. But in a move hailed by the same groups, both Iran and
Venezuela failed to attract the needed votes.

Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, said: ''The good
news is that we did better than expected in the voting because Iran and
Venezuela both lost. Venezuela's losing shows that bluster and anti-Americanism
isn't enough to get elected.''

Nations running for the council had to meet more demanding standards than in the
past.

The previous commission was long a public embarrassment to the United Nations
because countries like Sudan, Libya and Zimbabwe became members and thereby
thwarted the investigation of their own human rights records.

The United States did not run for a seat on the council, saying that the new
body did not go far enough to correct the deficiencies of the old one. The
council was created on March 15, in a 170 to 4 vote, that the United States,
Israel, Palau and the Marshall Islands opposed.

Commenting on the outcome of the vote, Kristen Silverberg, assistant secretary
of state for international organization affairs, said, ''On the whole, we think
it is an improvement over the commission.''

She added, ''There were some members elected who, in our view, don't share a
genuine commitment to human rights, the kind of high standard we would have
hoped would have been met on the selection.''

Mr. Roth said the council had proved its ability to attract more suitable
members even before the vote because countries with poor rights records that had
been part of the commission were scared away from running this year by new
demands to demonstrate a commitment to rights standards.

As examples he cited Sudan, Zimbabwe, Libya, Democratic Republic of Congo,
Syria, Vietnam, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Eritrea and Ethiopia. ''The pool of candidates
for the council was significantly improved over the typical pool for the
commission,'' he said.

Hillel Neuer, executive director of the Geneva-based UN Watch, said, however,
that he was not convinced that the vote signaled much change. ''The council
offers a membership with certain improvements, but the election of Cuba, Saudi
Arabia, China and other egregious violators suggests that, come June 19, when
the council opens, we're likely to see business as usual in Geneva.''

The all-day vote was conducted under more stringent rules than in the past. The
principal innovation was that countries needed a minimum of 96 votes -- an
absolute majority of the 191 members -- and that the election was for individual
candidates rather than for closed regional slates.

The 63 nations that declared themselves candidates have been promoting
themselves vigorously in recent weeks during meetings with other states and in
documents on the United Nations Web site that outline their past records and
future commitments to human rights.

When the delegates arrived in the General Assembly chamber, their desks were
covered with stacks of campaign fliers marked with the colors of the nations'
flags and the statement, ''Your support will be highly appreciated.''

All 63 candidates voluntarily agreed to a series of pledges that will form the
basis for public reviews of their human rights records. Under the rules of the
new council, all members of the United Nations must submit to such reviews, and
the members of the council will be the first to be scrutinized.

Yvonne Terlingen, the United Nations representative for Amnesty International,
said: ''The countries that have weak human rights records and are elected to the
council must now start re-examining their own records and improve them and
implement the pledges they have made to the General Assembly. We will closely
watch to see if they do so.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (98%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%) Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) United Nations
Human Rights Council; United Nations Human Rights Council; UN Watch (Orgn)  ;
Human Rights Watch (Orgn)

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kenneth Roth; Hillel Neuer

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (94%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (94%); PAKISTAN
(93%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); CHINA (90%);
AZERBAIJAN (90%); ERITREA (79%); MARSHALL ISLANDS (79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); PALAU
(79%); ISRAEL (79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (76%); SWITZERLAND
(70%); SYRIA (54%)

REGION: Iran; Venezuela; China; Cuba; Pakistan; Russia; Saudi Arabia; Azerbaijan

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              9 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Iran, the Man Is the Message

BYLINE: By Hadi Ghaemi.

Hadi Ghaemi is the Iran researcher for Human Rights Watch.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: Beirut, Lebanon


LAST week Iranians woke up to a startling piece of news: their government had
dispatched Tehran's notorious prosecutor general, Saeed Mortazavi, to Geneva as
a member of Iran's delegation to the opening session of the new United Nations
Human Rights Council.

Iranians weren't sure whether to laugh or cry. Mr. Mortazavi is one of the
country's highest profile rights violators. Human Rights Watch urged Iran to
remove him at once and asked other governments not to meet the Iranian
delegation while Mr. Mortazavi remained a part of it.

Well-known and widely despised in Iran, Mr. Mortazavi personifies most of the
ills affecting Iran's judicial system: lack of accountability, rampant impunity,
disregard for fundamental constitutional rights, manipulation of the law to
promote a political agenda, systematic use of torture, and above all, abuse of
judicial powers to repress peaceful expressions of dissent and criticism.

Iranians refer to Mr. Mortazavi as ''the butcher of the press.'' In 2000, Mr.
Mortazavi, then a judge, closed more than a dozen newspapers in one month alone,
invoking an obscure law from the 1950's on ''ensuring public safety.'' The law
was originally enacted to keep criminal gangs from intimidating members of the
public. Since then he has shut more than 100 newspapers and journals.

Mr. Mortazavi was promoted to prosecutor general of Tehran in 2003. As such, he
has prosecuted scores of Iranian human rights defenders, journalists,
dissidents, students and activists, and he is alleged to be implicated directly
in acts of murder, torture, arbitrary detention and coercing false confessions.

In June 2003, Iranian authorities arrested Zahra Kazemi, a Canadian-Iranian
photojournalist, as she photographed Evin prison in Tehran. According to an
investigation by the Iranian Parliament, Mr. Mortazavi personally took custody
of her, accusing her of being a spy. Lawyers for Ms. Kazemi's family say that
her body showed signs of torture, and that Mr. Mortazavi took part in an
interrogation session where she received a severe blow to the head. A few days
later, Ms. Kazemi fell into a coma and died. The Iranian authorities have not
held anyone responsible for her murder.

In another case documented by Human Rights Watch, Mr. Mortazavi ordered the
arbitrary detention of more than 20 bloggers and Internet journalists in 2004.
The detainees were taken to a secret prison, held in solitary confinement and
interrogated by Mr. Mortazavi's underlings. The interrogators tortured the
detainees so that they would falsely implicate their colleagues in immoral acts
and confess that they were foreign agents.

As a condition for their release, the interrogators coerced four of them to
write false confession letters. The bloggers report that by threatening to harm
their families, Mr. Mortazavi personally coerced them to appear on Iran's
state-controlled television saying that their jailors treated them as ''gently
as flowers.'' One former detainee told me that Mr. Mortazavi's voice still rings
in his ears, and that he fears for his young children.

So what was the Iranian government thinking? Perhaps it was still stung by its
failure to be elected to the council, which aimed to exclude the most blatant
abusers. Or maybe this was the regime's shock and awe strategy: shock the
Iranian people with how little their government cares about human rights, and
awe them with its utter impunity.

If Mr. Mortazavi were removed from office and prosecuted, as he should be, there
would be no shortage of witnesses to testify. But because this is unlikely, many
Iranians hope the new council will develop international mechanisms to bring men
like him to justice, rather than facing him as a delegate at its sessions.

As a first step, the council should support the appointment of a United Nations
special rapporteur on Iran to monitor and report publicly on human rights abuses
and to see that the government's present lack of accountability does not
translate into an even more extensive crackdown on political dissent and social
freedoms.

Further, the members of the Security Council and Germany, which are engaged in
nuclear negotiations with Iran, should include human rights concerns on their
agenda. As a confidence-building measure, they should demand that Iran improve
its human rights record -- and that it cease protecting violators like Mr.
Morta-zavi.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); JOURNALISM (89%); TORTURE (89%); BLOGS & MESSAGE
BOARDS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); PHOTOJOURNALISM
(78%); LAWYERS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); WRITERS (72%);
INTERNET JOURNALISM (69%); PHOTOGRAPHY SERVICES (69%); FAMILY (67%) Freedom and
Human Rights; Freedom of the Press; News and News Media

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (59%) Human Rights Watch; United Nations; Security Council
(Un); United Nations Human Rights Council

PERSON: Hadi Ghaemi; Saeed (Judge) Mortazavi; Zahra Kazemi

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); IRAN (94%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iran; Tehran (Iran); Iran

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              10 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cambodian Leader Cracks Down in Bid to Solidify Power

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1091 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, Jan. 8


The harshest political crackdown in years is under way here in what some
analysts are calling the final stage in Prime Minister Hun Sen's drive to
consolidate unchallenged power.

Over the past year, he has choked off the last effective political opposition
while continuing to marginalize the monarchy, manipulate the courts and
intimidate labor unions and other civic groups. In December, the leader of the
only significant opposition party, Sam Rainsy, who had already fled the country,
was sentenced in absentia to 18 months in prison for criminal defamation.

Now, with a series of arrests and lawsuits on defamation and related charges,
Mr. Hun Sen is for the first time directly attacking the human rights groups
that, by default, serve as a de facto democratic opposition.

''Cambodia right now is at a crossroads: It must decide whether it's going to be
a real democracy or whether it's going to move inexorably toward a one-party
state,'' said the American ambassador, Joseph Mussomeli.

The special United Nations envoy for human rights in Cambodia, Yash Ghai, said
only strong action from the countries that support Cambodia's economy could stop
the slide.

''It has all the hallmarks of the beginning of a totalitarian regime,'' he said.

The human rights groups are the most substantial and lasting legacy of a major
international effort by the United Nations in the early 1990's to implant
democracy in Cambodia, a nation wrecked by war, repression and mass killings.

From 1975 to 1979, the Communist Khmer Rouge caused the deaths of 1.7 million
people, nearly one-fourth of the nation's population. In the decade that
followed, Cambodia was ruled by a Vietnamese-backed Communist government in
which Mr. Hun Sen rose to leadership.

By staging a coup in 1997, intimidating opponents, manipulating elections and
cutting constitutional corners, Mr. Hun Sen has moved steadily to reclaim the
full powers he held before the United Nations intervention.

The forms of democracy remain. A parliamentary election is to be held in 2008.
And Mr. Hun Sen noted that he had not taken action against Mr. Sam Rainsy's
party, just against Mr. Sam Rainsy.

Those forms, however, do not compensate for a policy of intimidation, the
American ambassador said. ''They have scared the hell out of the opposition, and
it becomes more difficult to take these trappings of democracy as the real thing
each time another voice is silenced,'' Mr. Mussomeli said.

He spoke after witnessing the arrest on Dec. 31 of the country's most prominent
and outspoken human rights figure, Kem Sokha, on a charge of criminal
defamation.

Mr. Kem Sokha was nonpartisan, but his town meetings on democratic rights and
his unfettered radio call-in shows challenged the government's control of public
opinion.

A second human rights campaigner, Yeng Virak, was arrested the same day. A
third, Pa Nguon Teang, was arrested Wednesday. In October, a popular and acerbic
radio journalist, Mom Sonando, and the president of an independent teachers
union, Rong Chhum, were arrested on defamation charges.

At least seven other critics face criminal lawsuits by Mr. Hun Sen and at least
five critics have fled the country, said Human Rights Watch, the New York-based
monitoring group.

Mr. Sam Rainsy, the leader of the opposition party that bears his name, fled to
France after being stripped of his parliamentary immunity early last year. A
second top party official also fled, but a third, Cheam Channy, stayed behind,
was arrested and is serving a seven-year prison sentence for his opposition
activities.

Many analysts say they are puzzled by Mr. Hun Sen's crackdown when his
leadership already seems unassailable. But in a country where political life is
an endless struggle for power, Mr. Hun Sen seems never to rest.

This time he is using a tactic that has worked well for Singapore's leaders and
is being tried by Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra of Thailand -- eliminating
opposition through lawsuits.

The government spokesman, Khieu Kanharith, offered one rationale, telling the
Voice of America radio station that the arrests on defamation charges were part
of the country's democratic system.

''We have to sue them,'' he said. ''The most important thing is the general
election. And in a general election in Cambodia and everywhere in the world,
your prestige would be a great asset.''

Mr. Hun Sen said he was filing his lawsuits to protect his own reputation. ''I
am a human being, not an animal, and deserve to have my honor and dignity,'' he
said.

Mr. Hun Sen could contend that he had mellowed. No tanks have been in the
streets and no wave of killings has occurred as was the case during the coup in
1997 when he seized sole leadership from Norodom Ranarridh, the co-prime
minister installed during the United Nations intervention.

But even during the coup, civil society and human rights groups, with their
strong backing from donor nations, were, for the most part, not targets.

''This has been the first breach of the human rights community's wall of
safety,'' said Brad Adams, the Asia director of Human Rights Watch. ''And so for
the human rights community this is the darkest moment.''

Over the years, these groups have embedded themselves in Cambodian life, where,
particularly in isolated communities, they often represent people who distrust
the police and fear powerful officials.

''Look at the grass roots, what can people do?'' said a Cambodian reporter who,
in the current atmosphere of uncertainty, spoke on the condition that his name
not be used.

''If there is a land grab, they don't go to the police first,'' he said. ''They
go to Adhoc or Licadho'' -- two prominent human rights groups.

''In the village, if a husband beats his wife, she runs to Adhoc, not to the
police,'' he said. ''So the government does not enjoy the way these two groups
help people fight for their rights, for freedom and justice.''

And as he traveled around the country holding seminars with local people, the
reporter said, ''Kem Sokha was telling people about their rights.''

At the time of his arrest, Mr. Kem Sokha said he had expected eventually to be
arrested, exiled or killed. The determination of people like this is inspiring,
said Naly Pilorge, a Licadho leader.

''It's funny with a country like Cambodia, with the history of the Khmer Rouge,
you just go, 'Boo!' and people are afraid,'' she said. ''And now you see these
great displays of courage. And they knew something was going to happen to them
sooner or later, and they just kept going.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Kem Sokha held hands with his wife before his arrest on Dec. 31
in Phnom Penh on a charge of defamation. (Photo by Bunna Chor/Reuters)
 Prime Minister Hun Sen has silenced the political opposition. (Photo by Chor
Sokunthea/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
PRIME MINISTERS (90%); LIBEL & SLANDER (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); ARRESTS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (87%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); SENTENCING (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (77%); COUPS (77%); POPULATION SIZE (76%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (75%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (74%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);
JAIL SENTENCING (72%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (68%); LABOR UNIONS (57%) Freedom and
Human Rights; Freedom of Speech and Expression; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Hun Sen (Prime Min); Joseph (Amb) Mussomeli

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (90%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Cambodia; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Wrong on Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 499 words


For months, we have been arguing that the Bush administration has generally the
right substantive agenda for badly needed changes at the United Nations, but
that Ambassador John Bolton's scorched-earth alternative to diplomacy is
undermining the prospects for successfully achieving these reforms. Now it turns
out that our criticism has been only half-right in at least one crucial area --
in restoring the United Nations' moral authority on human rights by excluding
egregious violators from a new human rights monitoring council. Mr. Bolton's
latest proposal on this gets the substance wrong as well.

The problem with the current discredited Human Rights Commission is that its
members are chosen by a system of regional rotation that fails to take into
account the actual human rights performance of prospective members. The reform
was originally intended to change that, by requiring the approval of at least
two-thirds of the 191 member countries to win a seat on the new council.

Mr. Bolton wants to defeat the whole purpose of that reform by automatically
assuring seats for all five permanent members of the United Nations Security
Council -- regardless of their own human rights records.

That would, of course, guarantee a seat every year for the United States,
despite what other countries may think of Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib, the
death penalty, or Washington's practice of secretly flying suspects to be
interrogated in countries that countenance torture. It would also guarantee a
seat every year to China, one of the world's most notorious human rights
violators, and to Russia, whose own human rights record is less than stellar and
which has never hesitated to gloss over the human rights abuses of dictatorships
it considers friendly, like Cuba, for example.

There are plenty of areas where special weight is, and should be, given to the
Security Council's big five powers, which also happen to be world's five legally
recognized nuclear weapons states. Most of these areas, appropriately, are in
the Security Council's special domain of war, peace and sanctions.

But the issue of human rights is very different. It is not about recognizing the
interests of the powerful. It is about protecting the interests of the
powerless. It would be nice if all of the big five could be trusted to do this.
But not all of them can, either at home or internationally. Some of the people
most in need of a strong U.N. voice on human rights live under tyrannies that
have carefully cultivated Chinese or Russian favor: Cuba, Iran, Myanmar,
Uzbekistan and Zimbabwe, to name a few.

Although Ambassador Bolton has repeatedly made it clear that he has little use
or respect for the United Nations and would be happy to see the United States
walk away from it, we have never questioned his commitment to reform its most
dysfunctional institutions. But his behavior on this issue leaves us questioning
his judgment, and that of his bosses in the State Department and the White
House.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TORTURE
(76%); APPROVALS (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (50%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (50%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (50%) Editorials; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%) United Nations Commission on
Human Rights

PERSON: John R (Amb) Bolton; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (93%); CHINA (79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Syria Imposing Stronger Curbs On Opposition

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1311 words

DATELINE: DAMASCUS, Syria, April 4


Just months ago, under intense international pressure to ease its stranglehold
on neighboring Lebanon, the Syrian government was talking about ending the
ruling Baath Party's grip on Syrian power and paving the way for a multiparty
system.

But things have moved in the opposite direction. Syrian officials are
aggressively silencing domestic political opposition while accommodating
religious conservatives to shore up support across the country.

Security forces have detained human rights workers and political leaders, and in
some cases their family members as well. They have barred travel abroad for
political conferences and shut down a human rights center financed by the
European Union. And the government has delivered a stern message to the national
news media demanding that they promote -- not challenge -- the official agenda.

The leadership's actions were described in interviews with top officials as well
as dissidents and human rights activists. They reflect at least in part a
growing sense of confidence because of shifts in the Middle East in recent
months, especially the Hamas victory in Palestinian elections, political
paralysis in Lebanon and the intense difficulties facing the United States in
trying to stabilize Iraq and stymie Iran's drive toward nuclear power.

The detentions, the press crackdown, the restrictions on travel and the overall
effort to crush dissent are also a response to a fragile domestic political
climate and concern over a growing opposition movement abroad.

''I may not be keen on early morning arrests, but this regime was being
threatened,'' Deputy Prime Minister Abdullah Dardari, a Londoneducated
technocrat charged with steering Syria's economic overhaul, said in an
interview. ''The survival of this regime and the stability of this country was
threatened out loud and openly. There were invitations for foreign armies to
come and invade Syria. So you could expect sometimes an overreaction, or a
reaction, to something that is really happening.''

On Tuesday, Amnesty International condemned the Syrian crackdown and called on
Damascus to release ''all of those arrested due to their beliefs.'' Human Rights
Watch said it was sending a letter to the government protesting the arrests.

The government has also sought to fortify its position with a nod to a reality
sweeping not just Syria, but the region: a surge in religious identification and
a growing desire to empower religious political movements like Hamas and the
Muslim Brotherhood. The latter group recently won 88 seats in the Egyptian
Parliament in spite of government efforts to block its supporters from voting.

The Syrian government has gone further to accommodate religious conservatives
than in the past, officials and religious scholars said.

It has appointed a sheik, as opposed to a secular Baathist, to head the
Religious Affairs Ministry; allowed, for the first time, religious activities in
the stadium at Damascus University; and permitted a speech emphasizing religious
practices and identity to be given to a military audience. President Bashar
al-Assad has increasingly inserted references to religious identity and culture
into his speeches.

Most striking was the government's recent decision to reverse itself one month
after trying to limit activities taking place in mosques. The Religious Affairs
Ministry effectively ordered mosques closed for all activities but prayers, but
a few weeks later the decision was deemed a greater threat to a government
controlled by the Alawites, a minority religious sect, than the potential for
political organizing among the majority Sunni Muslims.

''Before, religion for the regime was like a ball of fire, '' said Abdul Qader
al-Kittani, a professor of Islamic studies at Fattah Islamic University here.
''Now they deal with it like it could be a ball of light.''

He added: ''Two factors pushed the regime toward this direction. The first is
the beat of the street. The second is external pressures on the regime.''

Damascus has a very different feel from that of a few months ago, when
investigators for the United Nations Security Council issued a report suggesting
that the Syrian state -- not just individuals -- was behind the assassination of
Rafik Hariri, the former Lebanese prime minister, in February 2005 and that the
authorities here had defied the United Nations Security Council by refusing to
cooperate with its investigation.

The new investigator heading the inquiry, Serge Brammertz of Belgium, has kept a
far lower profile and taken a less confrontational approach than his
predecessor, Detlev Mehlis of Germany. Syrian officials have responded by
agreeing to allow President Assad to be interviewed.

With the pressure off, the arrests have been stacking up since January,
according to local human rights groups and individuals who say they were picked
up by the authorities.

In Damascus, Ammar Qurabi, the former spokesman for the Arab Organization for
Human Rights-Syria, was held for four days after returning from political
conferences in Washington and Paris. In Aleppo, Samir Nashar, a businessman and
opposition leader, was detained for three days after returning from attending
political conferences abroad.

The goal was to deliver a message, some of those arrested said: the government
will not tolerate any contact between internal opposition figures and a growing
opposition movement abroad that is being encouraged by former Vice President
Abdel Halim Khaddam, who recently forged an alliance with the Muslim
Brotherhood, which is outlawed here.

''This time they wanted to relay a message or a warning: the Muslim Brotherhood,
Khaddam and street protests are prohibited,'' said Hussein al-Odat, an
opposition leader in Damascus who said he was detained last week by security
forces for two hours. ''They said, 'It is clear, and we will not be merciful.'
''

Ibrahim Hamidi, the Damascus bureau chief for the pan-Arab newspaper Al Hayat,
and the first to report on the new prohibitions, said the government was
operating this way because of the changing regional situation. ''Now they
believe they can get away with it,'' he said.

Ayman Abdel Nour, a Baath Party member who promoted the idea of reforming the
party from inside, said he had grown so disillusioned that he planned to move
his business -- a Web site that gives voice to calls for reform -- from Damascus
to the United Arab Emirates.

He said he had been told that the party planned to purge all those with reform
agendas from its ranks. ''They say they have a fixed time period to crack down
and finish off the opposition,'' Mr. Abdel Nour said.

Human Rights Watch and several Syrian-based human rights organizations say that
at least 30 people involved in politics or human rights work have been detained
since January, and that several have not been heard from since. Human rights
leaders in Damascus say the numbers are likely to be higher because most
families are too afraid to report the arrests to their organizations.

Sami al-Abbas, a novelist, and Farouk Hamad, a poet, were arrested Monday for
meeting with opposition leaders, said Razan Zaytouneh of the Syrian Human Rights
Information Link, a local organization.

Muhammad al-Habash, a member of Parliament and general manager of the Islamic
Studies Center in Damascus, says that in spite of the restrictions, Syria is far
more relaxed than it was five years ago when, he said, he would not have been
allowed to meet with a foreign reporter.

He also praised the government's recent accommodations to religion, saying,
''They realize we need Islamic power, especially at thistime,'' and he endorsed
the ban on allowing travel to attend political conferences abroad.

''It is not a suitable time to allow people to travel abroad to participate in
opposition conferences,'' he said. ''We have to be real.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The glorification of President Bashar al-Assad is alive and
well in Aleppo, while on a Damascus street, a shop had religious garb on
display. The government has been taking a more favorable view of conservative
Islam. (Photographs by Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); RELIGION (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); INTERVIEWS
(88%); HAMAS (87%); ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL
TOURISM (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ARMIES
(77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); POLITICS
(76%); CENSORSHIP (75%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (72%); FREEDOM OF
PRESS (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (60%) Politics and
Government; Political Prisoners; Censorship; Travel Restrictions; Freedom and
Human Rights; Islam

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (59%); HAMAS (55%) European Union; Human Rights Watch; Amnesty
International

PERSON: BASHAR AL-ASSAD (58%) Michael Slackman; Abdullah (Deputy Prime Min)
Dardari

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (93%); ALEPPO, SYRIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SYRIA (97%); LEBANON (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (88%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); IRAQ (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EGYPT (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Syria; Syria; Syria

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Reports Some Reforms by Libya, but Not Enough

BYLINE: By ABEER ALLAM

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 590 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Jan. 25


Libya is taking positive steps toward political reform, but its efforts fall
short of international standards, says a Human Rights Watch report on Libya
released Wednesday in Cairo.

The group compiled the 84-page report after its first visit to Libya in May
2005. The visit was facilitated by a Libyan development organization led by Saif
el-Islam Qaddafi, the eldest son of the longtime Libyan leader, Col. Muammar
el-Qaddafi.

The Libyan government granted the group access to police stations and to
detention centers to interview people being held there.

The report said 15 of the 32 prisoners interviewed said they had been tortured
to extract their confessions. It also said that while the government released 14
political prisoners in October, it still detained critics, conducted unfair
trials and imposed severe restrictions on freedom of expression and association.

''For a country that was so closed, engaging in a dialogue is very positive,''
the main Human Rights Watch researcher involved in the study, Fred Abrahams,
said at a news conference here on Wednesday. ''But please do not misunderstand
me; there are very serious human rights problems in Libya today.''

The New York-based rights group said in its report that Libya had abolished its
''people's court,'' infamous for trying political cases against government
critics; promised to review its penal code to reduce use of the death penalty;
and said it had investigated complaints against 48 security officers accused of
torture, though it made no information available on the outcome of those cases.

Opening itself to scrutiny by watchdog groups like Human Rights Watch is part of
Libya's efforts in recent years to rebuild its image and attract Western oil
investments. But Libya remains on the State Department's list of countries that
sponsor terrorism.

Human Rights Watch representatives say reformers are clashing with an old guard
that seeks to retain its power.

''It is a combination of image and real intent,'' Mr. Abrahams said of Libya's
policies. ''They realize that in order to be part of the international
community, protection of human rights is part of that, but others in the
government believe all they need is a show with no substance.''

''But people are increasingly demanding their rights,'' he added. ''We heard
critical views of the system. People took the opportunity to push within the
limits.''

The group called upon Western governments, and the United States in particular,
to be more critical of Libya's human rights record and not to ignore problems
because of recent cooperation by Libya in the American effort to reduce the
threat of terrorism.

Mr. Abrahams has just returned from a visit to Libya, where his group presented
government officials in Tripoli with an extensive report on the status of human
rights in Libya and recommendations to improve it.

He emphasized, however, that many political prisoners -- ''perhaps hundreds'' --
remained behind bars, and he urged the Libyan authorities to deliver on the
promises regarding human rights that they have made in recent years.

Libyan dissidents attending the news conference voiced concern over the warming
American-Libyan ties, contending that Colonel Qaddafi had cracked down again
after allowing small gains in political freedoms in the last few years.

''Qaddafi does not care about the opposition,'' said Mujahid El Boussifi, editor
of Haqiqa.com, a London-based opposition Web site, who fled Libya in 1996.
''Only the West and Washington can pressure Qaddafi.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); POLICE MISCONDUCT
(76%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (75%); POLICE FORCES (75%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY &
ASSOCIATION (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS
(70%); CRIMINAL LAW (70%); TERRORISM (62%); RELIGION (56%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(52%) Freedom and Human Rights; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Torture;
Political Prisoners

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Abeer Allam

CITY: TRIPOLI, LIBYA (59%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: LIBYA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Libya; Libya

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

With Its Human Rights Oversight Under Fire, U.N. Submits a Plan for a
Strengthened Agency

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 547 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 2


United Nations negotiators circulated a draft resolution on Thursday for a Human
Rights Council that would have standards for membership, means for timely
interventions in crises and a year-round existence.

The proposed 45-member council is meant to replace the widely discredited
53-member Human Rights Commission, and its creation this month is seen as a
critical test of whether the United Nations can adopt meaningful reform and
redeem its scandal-tarnished reputation.

The commission is scheduled to begin its annual six weeks of sessions in Geneva
on March 13, and diplomats believe the new council must gain General Assembly
approval by Feb. 15 to be able to replace the existing body on time.

The commission has been a persistent embarrassment to the United Nations because
membership has been open to countries like Cuba, Sudan and Zimbabwe, current
members who are themselves accused of gross rights abuses.

In introducing his recommendation for the new council last March, Secretary
General Kofi Annan said such countries sought participation on the panel to
block examination of their own records, a practice he said ''casts a shadow on
the reputation of the United Nations as a whole.''

Thursday's proposal, a refinement of a draft circulated in December, leaves open
for further negotiation a critical element of Mr. Annan's recommended plan -- a
requirement that new members be elected by a two-thirds vote of the 191-member
General Assembly.

Put forward as a way of weeding out notorious rights violators, the requirement
is a step backed by the United States, European countries and human rights
groups.

''The new text substantially advances the discussion and gives a good basis to
achieve a stronger human rights council, assuming there is a decision to have
members of the council elected by a two-thirds majority,'' said Peggy Hicks, the
global advocacy director of Human Rights Watch.

The proposal maintains the right of regional groups to put forward a slate of
candidates, but adds the requirement that there be individual secret ballot
votes in the General Assembly on each country. Every country on the council will
also be subject to a review of its rights records at least once during its
three-year term.

Nations would not be eligible for immediate re-election after two consecutive
terms, meaning they would have to step aside for a year before reapplying.

The proposal also says that the General Assembly should ''take into account''
whether applicant countries have been cited by the United Nations or ''whether
there are situations that constitute systematic and gross violations of human
rights.''

The new text strengthens the council's ability to respond promptly to human
rights crises but weakens the language on preventing crises by stressing the
need for ''dialogue and cooperation'' with offending countries. Late last year,
human rights groups faulted the United States for scrimping on its support for
the council, but Ms. Hicks said Thursday that the American engagement had
''intensified substantially.''

Benjamin Chang, a spokesman for John R. Bolton, the American ambassador, said
the United States had no immediate comment on the revised resolution. ''We have
just received the text and we are studying it closely,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); VOTERS & VOTING (86%); SCANDALS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
APPROVALS (73%); ELECTIONS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%) United Nations Commission on Human Rights; United Nations
Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan and Bolton Disagree On Draft for New Rights Group

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 457 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 23


Secretary General Kofi Annan and human rights groups said Thursday that a
resolution on a new Human Rights Council for the United Nations fell short of
their expectations but still provided the best option for replacing the
discredited Human Rights Commission.

Mr. Annan said he hoped the draft, a product of committee talks and at least
three revisions, would be approved by the General Assembly next week.

But John R. Bolton, the United States ambassador, said the proposal had too many
''deficiencies'' and should be renegotiated. ''Based on conversations we've had
with other governments, the strongest argument in favor of this draft is that it
is not as bad as it could be,'' he said.

The proposal, made public on Thursday, calls for a council with 47 member
nations instead of the commission's 53. It would have new restrictions on
membership, the means for timely interventions in crises and a year-round
presence, with three meetings a year lasting a total of at least 10 weeks. The
Geneva-based commission meets once a year for six weeks.

The commission has been a public embarrassment to the United Nations because
participation has been open to countries like Cuba, Sudan and Zimbabwe, current
members that are themselves accused of gross rights abuses. Replacing it has
been seen as a test of whether the United Nations can meet demands for
fundamental change in the organization.

But the current proposal drops a crucial element of Mr. Annan's original
proposal intended to address this membership problem: a requirement that new
members be elected by two-thirds of those voting.

Developing nations objected to that, and Jan Eliasson, the president of the
191-member General Assembly and author of the final draft, negotiated a
compromise agreement for a majority of all Assembly members -- meaning 96 votes
-- in place of the current simple majority of those voting.

The resolution maintains the right of regional groups to put forward a slate of
candidates, which has enabled rights violators to join the panel, but it adds a
requirement for individual secret balloting in the General Assembly on each
member nation. Every nation will also be subject to a review of its rights
records at least once during its three-year term.

''Obviously the proposal isn't everything I asked for,'' said Mr. Annan, who
first proposed the council last March. ''There are enough good elements on this
to build on.''

Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, said, ''This is less
than we hoped for, but it is clearly better than the Human Rights Commission,
and we are supporting it.''

Yvonne Terlingen, United Nations representative for Amnesty International,
called on governments to adopt the resolution without delay.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (86%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); APPROVALS
(73%); EXECUTIVES (63%) United States International Relations; Freedom and Human
Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%) United
Nations Commission on Human Rights; United Nations Council on Human Rights
(Proposed); Amnesty International; Human Rights Watch; United Nations Commission
on Human Rights

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Kofi (Sec Gen) Annan; John R (Amb) Bolton

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              17 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Assails U.S. Over Its Handling of Terror Suspects

BYLINE: By BRIAN KNOWLTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 18


Human Rights Watch asserted Wednesday that the Bush administration had
undertaken a deliberate strategy of abusing terror suspects during
interrogations, in ways, the group said, that undercut broader American
interests. The criticism drew an unusually direct rebuff from the White House.

''In the course of 2005, it became indisputable that U.S. mistreatment of
detainees reflected not a failure of training, discipline or oversight, but a
deliberate policy choice,'' the rights group said in a sweeping critique in its
annual report. ''The problem could not be reduced to a few bad apples at the
bottom of the barrel.''

The group said the United States' detainee practices, along with the accusations
that torture has possibly taken place at secret camps, had, together with what
it said was a tendency of some Europeans to put business ahead of rights
concerns, produced a ''global leadership void'' in defending human rights.

But Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, said he was ''rejecting the
description of the United States.''

''When a group like this makes some of these assertions, it diminishes the
effectiveness of that organization,'' he said. ''It appears to be based more on
a political agenda than facts.''

''The United States,'' Mr. McClellan added, ''does more than any country in the
world to advance freedom and promote human rights.''

Human Rights Watch suggests that a special prosecutor be named to investigate
abuses, and that Congress establish an independent inquiry panel.

The group has long focused its reports on countries considered the world's most
repressive, and its latest report lists abuses in countries like Nepal,
Uzbekistan and Sudan.

But the report takes the United States to task because of its predominant role
and its history of championing human rights abroad. ''Any discussion of detainee
abuse in 2005 must begin with the United States, not because it is the worst
violator but because it is the most influential,'' the report said.

The prisoner abuse scandals of recent years have harmed American efforts to
advocate democracy and to promote respect for rights abroad, the group said.
''The willingness to flout human rights to fight terrorism is not only illegal
and wrong; it is counterproductive,'' the report said. ''These human rights
violations generate indignation and outrage that spur terrorist recruitment.''

In the past, American officials often cited the group's reports to make points
about abuses abroad.

But lately the focus has shifted. When The Washington Post last year reported
accusations that there were secret C.I.A. camps in Europe but, at the
administration's request, did not identify the countries involved, Human Rights
Watch angered American officials by identifying towns where it said prisoners
had been held.

In arguing that detainee abuse has been part of deliberate policy, the group
cited President Bush's vow, later rescinded, to veto a bill opposing ''cruel,
inhuman, and degrading treatment,'' and Vice President Dick Cheney's efforts to
exempt the C.I.A. from the same bill.

In arguing that American actions have been counterproductive, the report notes
that even when American authorities in November ''helped uncover and shut down
an Iraqi Interior Ministry secret detention and torture center in Baghdad, the
administration's actions won it little praise in light of its own practices in
Iraq and elsewhere.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); TORTURE (79%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); SCANDALS
(74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; United
States International Relations

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (50%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%) Human Rights Watch (Orgn)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (50%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (50%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (50%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (50%)

PERSON: Brian Knowlton; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPE (92%); UZBEKISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Isolated in Opposing Plan for a New U.N. Rights Council

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 835 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 3


The United States has found itself isolated in its opposition to a proposal to
replace the discredited Human Rights Commission, and its pledge to vote against
adoption of the plan has thrown the United Nations into turmoil.

Many delegations say they share the American misgivings about the proposal but
fear that postponing or renegotiating it -- the two options put forward by John
R. Bolton, the United States ambassador -- would doom the effort to produce a
more credible rights body.

''If we reopen it to negotiations, there will be chaos, and if we postpone it,
it will be a negative signal for the priority that human rights should have at
the U.N.,'' Heraldo Munoz, the Chilean ambassador, said Friday.

Mr. Munoz, a promoter of democracy who was held as a political prisoner under
the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, said, ''This is clearly a compromise
and not what some countries would like, but we perceive that aside from the
U.S., there are very few countries who oppose the text.''

Human rights groups are lobbying actively for adoption, galvanized by the
prospect of American rejection and by suspicion of Mr. Bolton's motives in
objecting to the proposal.

''It's an open question whether Bolton's throwing all the cards up in the air is
meant to improve the council or to prove that the U.N. can't reform itself and
therefore should be abandoned,'' said Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human
Rights Watch.

Yvonne Terlingen, the United Nations representative for Amnesty International,
warned, ''If the U.S. insists on revising the text, it will be aiding and
abetting those whose purpose is to wreck the council, not to make it stronger.''

In an interview on Friday, Jan Eliasson of Sweden, the General Assembly
president, who wrote the final text, said: ''I definitely don't want to have an
isolation process vis-a-vis the U.S. This is the country of Eleanor Roosevelt
and the Bill of Rights. The U.S. belongs on this council, and I want the U.S. on
board.''

The current rights commission has been faulted for allowing notorious rights
abusers like Sudan and Zimbabwe to become members, and producing an effective
substitute for it has been seen as a test of whether the United Nations can meet
widespread demands for fundamental change.

Mr. Eliasson said he had set a goal of resolving the matter by next week because
the existing commission is scheduled to begin its annual meeting in Geneva on
March 13.

This week, Mr. Bolton dismissed the importance of that deadline, saying, ''It
might be worthwhile having the commission meet again to remind everybody it is
so bad that we can get on the track of real reform.''

Asked for comment on the impasse, Benjamin Chang, a spokesman for Mr. Bolton,
said there was nothing to add to what the ambassador had already said.

Mr. Eliasson put the proposal forward on Feb. 23 for a new Human Rights Council,
after months of negotiations and revisions. Mr. Bolton said the same day that it
had too many ''deficiencies'' and should be renegotiated, and on Monday he
announced that the United States would oppose it if it were put to a vote.

Though the United States has no veto power in the 191-member General Assembly, a
negative vote could critically undermine the new panel.

''A Human Rights Council without the United States would lack credibility,''
Emyr Jones Parry, the British ambassador, said Thursday. Noting that the
European Union had formally endorsed the text, Mr. Jones Parry said, ''The job
now is to get clarity on what the U.S. wants.''

Those working for acceptance argue that provisions in the plan for direct
election of members, formal review of member nations' rights records and
suspension of gross violators would make it less likely that abusers could join.

They also claim that a requirement that new members be approved by a majority --
a minimum of 96 votes -- would eliminate violators from membership. The formula
weakens the requirement in the original proposal, made by Secretary General Kofi
Annan, for a two-thirds vote for new members of a Human Rights Council.

''There's no way that a Sudan or Zimbabwe is going to be able to get on this
council,'' said Mr. Roth, of Human Rights Watch.

Mr. Roth also contended that Mr. Bolton's absence last fall and winter from some
30 meetings of the group drawing up the proposal led other countries to conclude
that the United States was not fully committed to it.

In a crucial meeting with Mr. Eliasson last month, in which countries laid down
their demands, Mr. Bolton did not mention the importance to the Bush
administration of the two-thirds vote. He has since cited its omission as one of
the reasons for the United States objection.

''The State Department was trying to communicate to the U.N. that the two-thirds
vote was an important part of the U.S. position,'' said Tom Malinowski, the
Washington director of Human Rights Watch, ''and there was quite a bit of
surprise in the department that Bolton didn't bother to mention this to
Eliasson.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); LOBBYING (73%); EXECUTIVES (64%) United
States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (59%) United Nations Commission on Human Rights

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CHILE (79%); SWITZERLAND (78%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 20, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Annan Cautions Rights Council To Avoid Rifts

BYLINE: By TOM WRIGHT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, June 19


The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, spoke Monday at the first
meeting of the organization's new Human Rights Council, urging member nations
not to engage in the political bickering that paralyzed its predecessor, the
Human Rights Commission.

The council, whose 47 members are meeting through June 30 in Geneva, largely to
establish operational procedures, was created by the United Nations in an effort
to strengthen its mechanism for defending human rights and punishing nations
that transgress.

The commission, which had 53 members, drew criticism for allowing countries with
poor human rights records like Zimbabwe, Sudan and Libya the right to sit in
judgment over other nations and for allowing political considerations to block
effective action against abuses.

''This council represents a great new chance for the United Nations, and for
humanity, to renew the struggle for human rights,'' Mr. Annan said in his
speech. ''I implore you, do not let the opportunity be squandered.''

He added, ''It is hardly an exaggeration to say that the eyes of the world --
especially the eyes of those whose human rights are denied, threatened or
infringed -- are turned toward this chamber and this council.''

But from the start the council has been weakened by the opposition of the United
States, among only four countries that voted against the creation of the body at
a General Assembly session in March. The United States, which wanted a smaller
body with fewer members, also declined to seek a seat on the council. While many
countries have sent foreign ministers to Geneva for the opening sessions of the
new body, the American delegation will be led by Warren W. Tichenor, the new
United States representative to the United Nations in Geneva.

''This sends the wrong signal,'' said Mariette Grange, the advocacy director in
Geneva for Human Rights Watch. ''One of our regrets is the United States has not
registered any high-level representatives.''

The council is widely regarded as an improvement over the commission. Nations
seeking election to the council in May had to meet more demanding standards than
in the past, and several candidate countries accused of rights abuses, including
Iran and Venezuela, were excluded.

The council will meet three times a year for a total of 10 weeks, almost double
the time for the commission, and members can convene special sessions to respond
quickly to crisis situations. Countries that do not abide by rights standards
can be ejected from the council with a two-thirds vote in the General Assembly.

But critics say that the new body also includes countries with poor human rights
records -- like China, Russia, Saudi Arabia and Cuba -- and that their presence
could undermine its effectiveness.

Hillel Neuer, executive director of the Geneva-based United Nations Watch, a
private watchdog group, said Western democracies would have to fight over the
next two weeks to ensure that the council was given power to police its own
rules. ''There is some potential to be optimistic,'' he said. ''But my concern
is we are not seeing the political will.''

The United Nations resolution that created the council allows for periodic
investigations into whether countries are abiding by their commitments to uphold
human rights, which human rights groups say will be crucial to giving the
council teeth.

The meeting here is likely to focus largely on operational issues like ways in
which credible investigations of countries' rights records can be conducted.

The body is also expected to approve two draft human rights treaties, on
enforced disappearances, in which governments secretly detain people without
officially recording the arrest, and the rights of indigenous people.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); EXECUTIVES
(62%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SWITZERLAND (91%); CHINA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2006 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Police Are Tied to Abuses And Deaths, U.S. Review Finds

BYLINE: By BRIAN KNOWLTON; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 8


Iraqi police units, often infiltrated and even dominated by members of sectarian
militias, continue to be linked to arbitrary arrests and to the torture, rape
and sometimes death of detainees, the State Department reported Wednesday.

''The vast majority of human rights abuses reportedly carried out by government
agents were attributed to the police,'' the department said of the situation in
Iraq in a report that is part of its annual global human rights review.

The report says North Korea, Myanmar, Iran, Zimbabwe, China and Cuba are among
the worst rights violators.

It also describes serious problems in countries with close ties to the United
States, citing flawed elections in Egypt, beatings and arbitrary arrests in
Saudi Arabia and floggings in the United Arab Emirates.

The report asserts that rights conditions are worsening in Iran, a conclusion
that comes as the Bush administration is pressing Iran in increasingly forceful
terms to curb its nuclear ambitions and not to meddle in Iraq or support
terrorists.

The report says repression in China has worsened, with ''increased harassment,
detention and imprisonment'' of government critics, heightened media censorship,
and violent suppression of some protests. Overall, it said, China's record
''remained poor.''

President Hu Jintao of China is scheduled to visit the White House next month.

The department is not mandated to review rights abuses in the United States, and
the report makes no direct mention of rendition, the practice of sending terror
detainees to third countries for questioning.

Amnesty International assailed the report for what it called this ''glaring
omission.'' It noted that the report criticized detainee treatment in Egypt and
Jordan, countries where the United States reportedly has sent detainees for
interrogation.

For example, in Jordan, the report said, ''The most frequently reported methods
of torture included beating, sleep deprivation, extended solitary confinement,
and physical suspension.''

The annual review credited Poland and Romania, which some reports have said have
secret Central Intelligence Agency detention centers, with having tried to
address human rights issues. But it said the Romanian police had mistreated
detainees.

Barry F. Lowenkron, assistant secretary of state for democracy, human rights and
labor, was asked about rendition a briefing. ''Let me be clear,'' he replied,
''we do not send detainees to countries if we believe that they will be
subjected to torture. That has been our policy.''

''In some countries that do not have full democratic practices, if we get solid
assurances, and if there is precedent and we have precedented examples that have
occurred, then we feel confident and we do it,'' he said. ''If we do not, we do
not do it.''

The report discussed in detail reports of wide abuses by the Iraqi police and,
to a lesser extent, by Iraq's army. Police abuses, the report said, ''included
threats, intimidation, beatings, and suspension by the arms or legs, as well as
the reported use of electric drills and cords and the application of electric
shocks.''

In a climate of extreme violence, ''reports increased of killings by the
government or its agents that may have been politically motivated,'' the report
said.

It said that police units were often dominated by members of sectarian militias,
which have sometimes abused their powers in pursuit of personal, party or
sectarian goals.

Much in the review had been previously reported, but it added details and some
follow-up.

It listed four serious incidents in which a total of more than 60 Iraqis had
been detained by the police -- or by others wearing police uniforms -- and were
found dead. Investigations promised by the Interior Ministry had not produced
results, it said.

The report quoted a former Iraqi human rights minister, Bakhtiar Amin, as saying
last month that Interior Ministry detention centers were ''a theater of
violations of human rights,'' including systematic torture.

An Interior Ministry detention center in the Jadriya neighborhood of Baghdad was
shut after it was discovered last November containing 169 detainees, mostly
Sunnis, many of whom showed signs of torture.

An interagency inspection team subsequently established by the government found
on Dec. 8 that a police building in Baghdad held 625 detainees ''in conditions
so crowded that detainees were unable to lie down at the same time.'' News
reports said several showed signs of severe torture.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 13, 2006



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the State
Department's criticism of Iraq in its annual report on human rights abuses
misstated the timing of comments by Baktiar Amin, a former Iraqi human rights
minister, who said that some violations in his country included systematic
torture. He made the observation on Feb. 6, 2005 -- not last month.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); TORTURE (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT
(89%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SEX OFFENSES (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); ELECTION FRAUD (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (74%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%);
MISCONDUCT (69%); CENSORSHIP (67%) Freedom and Human Rights; Police; Police
Brutality and Misconduct  ; Torture; Sex Crimes; Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (82%) State Department; Amnesty
International

PERSON: HU JINTAO (55%) Brian Knowlton

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(94%); JORDAN (93%); EGYPT (93%); ROMANIA (92%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (92%);
SAUDI ARABIA (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq; North Korea; Myanmar; Iran; Zimbabwe; China; Cuba; Jordan; Saudi
Arabia; United Arab Emirates; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europe, Too, Takes Harder Line In Handling Terrorism Suspects

BYLINE: By KATRIN BENNHOLD; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1760 words

DATELINE: PARIS, April 16


As his wristwatch edges toward 3:26 p.m., the 32-year-old Algerian moves his
wooden chair closer to the back door. At 3:30 sharp, his leg needs to be inside
his North London house. The man, whose name, by court order, cannot be divulged,
wears an electronic tag around his left ankle and is allowed to leave his home
just four hours a day.

He was arrested in London four years ago on suspicion of links to the Armed
Islamic Group, an Algerian terrorist organization, and spent more than three
years in high-security prisons before being put under partial house arrest in
October. Now the British government wants to send him back to Algeria.

But no formal charges have been brought, and, he and his lawyer said, he has not
been interrogated once, or informed of evidence against him. ''Since the day
they arrested me, I have never been asked any questions or told what the case
is,'' the man said. ''How can you defend yourself in a situation like that?''

Four and a half years after the Sept. 11 attacks, and after deadly bombings in
Madrid and London since then, the troubled debate within Western democracies
over how to weigh security against basic freedoms has only grown and spread, as
the legal tools for dealing with terrorism suspects multiply.

The clashing of priorities has been clear in the United States, in the domestic
debates preceding the renewal of the Patriot Act, and in the international
uproar over prisoner abuses at Abu Ghraib and the treatment of detainees at
Guantanamo Bay.

But many European governments, including some that had criticized the United
States for its antiterrorism measures, have been extending their own
surveillance and prosecution powers. Officials, lawyers and human rights experts
say that Europe, too, is experiencing a slow erosion of civil liberties as
governments increasingly put the prevention of possible terrorist actions ahead
of concerns to protect the rights of people suspected, but not convicted, of a
crime.

Most of Britain's new counterterrorism legislation, which outlaws the vaguely
worded ''glorification'' of terrorism, came into force on Thursday. Italy and
the Netherlands have relaxed the conditions under which intelligence services
may eavesdrop. French legislation recently gave investigators broader access to
telephone and Internet data. German legislation being drawn up seeks to allow
intelligence services easier access to bank and car registration records.

''We are fiddling with rights that only a few years ago seemed untouchable,''
said Alvaro Gil-Robles, human rights commissioner at the Council of Europe, an
intergovernmental group that monitors human rights.

The most contentious areas concern treatment of terror suspects, he said.
Several European countries are extending the length of time suspects who have
not been charged may be held or restricted in their freedom.

Some nations have been seeking ways to deport suspects even if torture is
practiced in the suspects' home countries. That brushes uncomfortably against
major United Nations and European treaties that forbid deportations if the
suspect faces a risk of torture.

''Something pretty fundamental is going on,'' said Gareth Peirce, a lawyer at
Birnberg and Peirce in London who represents the Algerian man under surveillance
in North London and nine other Middle Eastern and North African men arrested
without formal charges within months of Sept. 11.

''A number of countries have been trying to avoid their treaty obligations in
relation to arbitrary detention and torture,'' she said.

As in the United States, defenders of tighter security say that international
terrorism demands new approaches and that criminal law is ill-equipped to handle
the threat.

''We always think about the rights of the terrorists,'' said August Hanning,
Germany's deputy interior minister and a former intelligence chief. ''But if
there is an attack that you could have prevented, you also have to be able to
look into the eyes of the relatives.''

One broad trend has been the extension of police custody and restriction of
legal representation.

In December, France increased its period of detention without charge for terror
suspects to six days from four; it retained rules that have allowed uncharged
suspects to be denied access to a lawyer during the first three days.

Italy last year extended custody to 24 hours from 12 and authorized the police
to interrogate detainees in the absence of their lawyers. In 2003, Spain
extended the period in which suspected terrorists can be held effectively
incommunicado to a maximum 13 days, according to the advocacy group Human Rights
Watch.

Britain has gone furthest. The latest law doubles the period during which a
terror suspect can be held in custody without charge to 28 days. It was just 48
hours in 2001, and Prime Minister Tony Blair fought for an extension to three
months.

The new law followed one filed soon after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, that
allowed foreign terror suspects to be held indefinitely without charge. The
House of Lords declared that measure unlawful in late 2004.

The government, scrambling to find a new way to deal with 10 men held under the
provision at Belmarsh Prison in London, introduced a form of partial house
arrest known as a ontrol order, which severely restricted their freedom of
movement. Since last summer, Britain has also been seeking ways to deport eight
of the men back to home countries that are known to practice torture.

One of them is the unidentified Algerian, who is allowed to leave his house only
between 11:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. and may not venture more than a mile away.

He is not allowed to use cellphones or the Internet, and any visitor to his
house has to be cleared by the Home Office.

Last week a British High Court judge, Jeremy Sullivan, sharply condemned a
control order on another terrorism suspect, identified as M.B., as
''conspicuously unfair,'' saying that suspects' rights are being determined by
''executive decision untrammeled by any prospect of effective judicial
supervision.''

The government said after the ruling that it would appeal, and the Home Office
issued a statement, defending its counterterrorism legislation as striking ''the
right balance between safeguarding society and safeguarding the rights of the
individual.''

In the Netherlands, a bill likely to pass in coming weeks would introduce
something like the British control orders for terrorism suspects the authorities
have been ''unable to convict.''

For a maximum of two years, such suspects can be restricted in their freedom of
movement, be obliged to report to the police regularly and prohibited from
contacting certain individuals.

In some countries, restrictive tools predate the Sept. 11 attacks, but their use
has increased. In France, where a combination of Basque, Corsican and Islamic
terrorism prompted the government to lay the groundwork for its antiterrorist
legal arsenal as early as 1986, suspects can be held for four years on vague
charges.

As of November 2005, some 80 suspects were being held under this provision, more
than in any other European country, according to Alain Marsaud, who was France's
chief counterterrorism coordinator in the 1980's and is now a lawmaker.

''We're not going to wait until the bomb goes off,'' said Mr. Marsaud, who wrote
a recent parliamentary report on counterterrorism efforts. ''That's why we give
more power to the judicial system: to arrest people before they act.''

The number of Muslim men arrested for ''association with wrongdoers involved in
a terrorist enterprise'' has soared since Sept. 11. According to the French
Interior Ministry, it increased from 58 people in 2002, to 77 in 2003, 101 in
2004 and 170 last year.

Lawyers say the British, Dutch and French practices are milder forms of the
detention of ''enemy combatants'' in the United States.

''There is a clear parallel with what is going on in the United States,'' said
Jacques Debray, a Lyon-based lawyer specializing in immigration and penal law,
who has represented several terrorism suspects. ''They detain people on
administrative grounds, while we create a legal framework first. But the logic
is the same: preventive detention.''

The United Nations Convention Against Torture and the European Convention on
Human Rights, ratified by all European Union member countries and the United
States, ban torture and other cruel or degrading treatment.

They forbid the deportation of people to countries where they risk torture, and
the admission in court of evidence possibly obtained under torture.

But several European countries have sought diplomatic assurances from countries
with poorly regarded human rights records that if they deport suspects there,
the suspects would not be ill-treated.

Sweden allowed two Egyptian terror suspects to be repatriated on a C.I.A. plane
in December 2001 after Cairo gave such assurances. The United Nations Committee
Against Torture subsequently said that Sweden had violated its obligations under
the United Nations Convention.

Germany, the Netherlands and Austria have also sought to return suspects to
Turkey and Egypt by obtaining such pledges.

In Britain, the government has received diplomatic assurances from Libya, Jordan
and Lebanon, and was working on similar accords with Egypt and Algeria. Human
rights activists say that such assurances are not reliable.

''Why should a country that fails to respect major international conventions
against torture respect a mere bilateral agreement?'' asked Kenneth Roth, the
executive director of Human Rights Watch in New York. ''It's a legal fig leaf.''

The British government is also trying to make deportations possible without such
assurances, seeking to intervene in a case before the European Court of Human
Rights that involves the Netherlands. In that case, an Algerian terror suspect,
Mohammed Ramzy, who was acquitted on charges of links to a terrorist group, has
appealed to the court to prevent his deportation by the Netherlands to Algeria
on the grounds that he might face torture.

Britain is asking the court to set a precedent by ruling that the risk of
torture faced by the suspect has to be weighed against the security risk faced
by the host country.

A spokeswoman for the British Home Office called the European Convention on
Human Rights a ''cornerstone'' of the European Union, but added, ''There is a
valid question about how rights and freedoms are balanced and interpreted in a
phase of the current heightened security threat that Europe faces.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); TORTURE (86%);
DEPORTATION (86%); LAWYERS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); ELECTRONIC MONITOR
SENTENCING (77%); HOUSE ARREST (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (75%); PRISONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); US PATRIOT ACT
(75%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (71%); RELIGION (70%); BOMBINGS (70%); INTERNET & WWW
(61%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (55%) Terrorism;
Freedom and Human Rights; Deportation; Torture; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); ARMED ISLAMIC GROUP (57%) United Nations

PERSON: Katrin Bennhold

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (93%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (52%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); NETHERLANDS
(79%); SPAIN (79%); CUBA (79%); GERMANY (68%); FRANCE (52%)

REGION: Europe; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 6, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Defends Rights Record Before U.N. Panel in Geneva

BYLINE: By TOM WRIGHT; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 5


American officials appeared before an international legal panel on Friday to
argue that in its fight against terrorism, the United States had not violated
its treaty obligations to prevent the torture of prisoners.

It was the first time since Sept. 11, 2001, that a United States delegation had
answered questions from an international body about abuses by soldiers and
intelligence officers.

The delegation's report to the United Nations panel, meeting in Geneva, did not
break new ground. The officials contended that despite instances of abuse in
Afghanistan, Iraq and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the United States has not
systematically mistreated prisoners and remained committed to a global ban on
torture.

''The timing of our report comes at a difficult time for the United States,''
said the State Department's legal adviser, John B. Bellinger III, who led the
delegation. ''But we did not shy away from coming.''

In fact, the delegation's appearance was perhaps most significant for its size
-- it included more than two dozen officials -- and its attitude of respect
after years in which Bush administration officials have argued that
international human rights laws should not constrain the conduct of United
States forces.

Under the Convention Against Torture, a 1987 treaty that is a centerpiece of
international human rights law, the United States was supposed to have reported
to the United Nations panel on its compliance by 1999.

The panel, known as the Committee Against Torture, will review the American
report and issue findings later this month, but it has no power to enforce its
conclusions.

Members of the panel appeared skeptical about some aspects of the American
presentation. One, Fernando Marino Menendez of Spain, cited data from human
rights groups saying that of 600 American service members or intelligence
officers accused of having been involved in the torture or murder of detainees,
only 10 have received prison terms of a year or more.

The committee raised a number of other concerns, which the delegation is to
answer in detail on Monday. These include Washington's reported policy of
sending prisoners to countries with poor human rights records for questioning,
C.I.A.-run prisons and the role of controversial interrogation techniques like
waterboarding, in which prisoners are led to believe that they are going to
drown.

By sending its delegation here, the Bush administration sought to restore
credibility to its record on prisoner treatment by affirming support for the
Convention Against Torture. Under the treaty, the 140 signatories must
periodically submit reports and appear before the United Nations to show that
they are following the rules.

Gabor Rona, international legal director for Human Rights First, a
nongovernmental group that followed the Geneva meeting, said the Americans
''failed to resolve serious questions about the U.S. commitment to fully
implement Congress's recently enacted ban on cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment.''

Investigators for the European Parliament said last month that they had evidence
that the C.I.A. had flown 1,000 undeclared flights over Europe since 2001, in
some cases transporting terrorist suspects abducted within the European Union to
countries known to use torture.

Mr. Bellinger said the allegation that all of those planes carried terror
suspects was an ''absurd insinuation.'' In cases where the government has sent
prisoners to countries with poor human rights records -- a policy the
administration defends, saying it helps to get dangerous individuals out of the
United States -- it has sought assurances that they will not be tortured, Mr.
Bellinger added.

The panel was dubious. ''The very fact that you are asking for diplomatic
assurances means you are in doubt,'' said Andreas Mavrommatis, chairman of the
committee. He said the United States must be above reproach in promoting human
rights and should lead by example.

Mr. Bellinger also responded to questions raised in a committee report late last
year by defending the United States' decision not to grant prisoners held in
Guantanamo Bay, Afghanistan and Iraq rights under the Geneva Conventions.

Terrorist suspects could pose a threat to security if allowed to meet with
representatives of the International Committee of the Red Cross, as stipulated
by the Geneva Conventions, Mr. Bellinger said.

The delegation included representatives from the State, Defense, Justice and
Homeland Security Departments, but not from the C.I.A.

Mr. Bellinger said he was not authorized to talk about any intelligence
activities that the committee questioned in its report. The committee said it
had evidence that the United States had established secret prisons where
detainees are given no access to their families or human rights organizations,
and in most cases would not even acknowledge that the prisoners were being held.

Guibril Camara, a committee member from Senegal, said it was the committee's
interpretation -- not that of the United States -- that would set the global
definition of torture. ''One of the parties is going to have to give way,'' Mr.
Camara said. ''And I think it's probably going to have to be you.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (92%); TERRORISM (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (90%); PRISONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL
PUNISHMENT (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture;
Prisoners of War; United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (59%);
PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%) United Nations; United
Nations Committee Against Torture; State Department; Justice Department;
Homeland Security Department; Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Tom Wright; John B III Bellinger

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SWITZERLAND (94%); CUBA (92%); SPAIN (79%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2006 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Europe's C.I.A. Inquiry Finds No Evidence of Secret Prisons

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH; Doreen Carvajal contributed reporting from Paris for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 733 words

DATELINE: STRASBOURG, France, Jan. 24


An inquiry by the Council of Europe into allegations that the C.I.A. has
operated secret detention centers in Eastern Europe has turned up no evidence
that such centers ever existed, though the leader of the inquiry, Dick Marty,
said there are enough ''indications'' to justify continuing the investigation.

The report added, however, that it was ''highly unlikely'' that European
governments were unaware of the American program of renditions, in which
terrorism suspects were either seized in or transferred through Europe to third
countries where they may have been tortured. Drawing from news reports, Mr.
Marty contended that ''more than a hundred'' detainees have been moved
anonymously and illegally through Europe under the program.

The findings, delivered to the Council on Tuesday, drew scornful reactions from
some representatives of the Council's 46 member states, particularly from the
British, who called the interim report ''as full of holes as Swiss cheese'' and
''clouded in myth and motivated by a desire to kick America.''

Mr. Marty, a Swiss senator and chairman of Council's Committee on Legal Affairs
and Human Rights, was charged with the inquiry after an article in The
Washington Post in November cited unidentified intelligence officials as saying
that the C.I.A. had maintained detention centers in eight countries, including
some in Eastern European democracies.

A subsequent report by Human Rights Watch cited Poland and Romania as two of
those countries. Both countries, as well as others in Europe, have denied the
allegations.

Mr. Marty's findings to date amount to little more than a compendium of press
clippings.

''It would seem from confidential contacts that the information revealed by The
Washington Post, Human Rights Watch and ABC came from different sources,
probably all well-informed official sources,'' a passage in the report reads.
''This is clearly a factor that adds to the credibility of the allegations,
since the media concerned have not simply taken information from one another.''

Part of the reason Mr. Marty finds the allegations credible are other
well-documented cases of America's rendition of terrorism suspects on European
soil, including the 2003 C.I.A. abduction of an Egyptian cleric, Hassan Mustafa
Osama Nasr, who was sent to Egypt.

Mr. Marty said he was equally wary of Romanian and Polish denials of the
detention center allegations, noting that both countries are part of the
American-led coalition fighting in Iraq and ''escaped long dictatorships thanks
largely to the American intelligence services.''

He has requested data on aircraft movements from the Eurocontrol, the European
air traffic control agency, and satellite images from the European Union's
Satellite Center. It is not clear what he hopes to find in the data or
photographs. His assertion that more than a hundred detainees have been moved
through Europe -- a number he took from an article in the German newspaper Die
Zeit -- is not of a scale that would show in satellite images.

The debate over renditions and secret prisons reflects the deep mistrust that
has developed in Europe toward the Bush administration and its Eastern European
coalition partners since the invasion of Iraq.

Both Mr. Marty and the Council of Europe's secretary general, Terry Davies, are
convinced that the American press knows more about the alleged detention
centers, but are under government pressure to keep the information secret.

''I know of a television company that has information that they are not willing
to broadcast out of concern for their employees,'' Mr. Davies said. He declined
to identify the broadcaster or the source of the allegation.

Mr. Davies is scheduled to issue a report in February on what the Council's
member states have done to ensure that such breaches of the Council's European
Convention on Human Rights do not occur. Mr. Marty is expected to issue a final
report on his inquiry in March or April.

''This is no easy task,'' said John Swift, terrorism researcher for Human Rights
Watch. ''The information doesn't fall out of the sky.''

For now, though, there is nothing concrete to the allegations of secret prisons
beneath the chatter.

''At this stage of the investigations, there is no formal, irrefutable evidence
of the existence of secret C.I.A. detention centers in Romania, Poland or any
other country,'' Mr. Marty's report said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 26, 2006



CORRECTION: An article yesterday about the outcome of a European inquiry into
accusations that the C.I.A. had operated secret detention centers in Eastern
Europe misstated the surname of the terrorism researcher from Human Rights Watch
who was quoted discussing the difficulty of the inquiry. He is John Sifton, not
John Swift.

An article yesterday about the outcome of a European inquiry into accusations
that the C.I.A. had operated secret detention centers in Eastern Europe
misstated the surname of the terrorism researcher from Human Rights Watch who
was quoted discussing the difficulty of the inquiry. He is John Sifton, not John
Swift.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (76%); AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL (60%)
Terrorism; Prisons and Prisoners; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture; Terrorism

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (55%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (92%); COUNCIL OF EUROPE (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (54%) Council of Europe; Central Intelligence Agency

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%)

PERSON: Craig S Smith; Dick Marty

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); ROMANIA (92%); EGYPT (90%); EASTERN
EUROPE (88%); FRANCE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); IRAQ (79%);
POLAND (79%)

REGION: Europe

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              25 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights at the U.N.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 230 words



To the Editor:

Re ''The Shame of the United Nations'' (editorial, Feb. 26):

If the United States accepts your and Ambassador John R. Bolton's misguided
advice to reopen negotiations on the text for the new Human Rights Council, it
would do a disservice to the proud human rights tradition of the United States.

The current text has the essential foundations for a more effective council,
with better tools to react swiftly to grave or chronic human rights violations.
It allows for the election of better members than those now in the discredited
Human Rights Commission.

Unfortunately, we have seen little evidence that Ambassador Bolton and his team
did much to ensure genuine and transparent elections for future members by
supporting efforts to end regional bloc voting or supporting a 30-day candidacy
period.

His approach seems nothing more than an effort to use council negotiations for
larger political objectives.

Reopening the negotiations will only undercut the creation of a better human
rights body, and thousands of victims of human rights abuses will pay the price.
That is not in the interest of the United States. If Ambassador Bolton is
successful in reopening the negotiations, he and the United States government
must be held accountable for the results.

Yvonne Terlingen
New York, Feb. 26, 2006

The writer represents Amnesty International at the United Nations.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%) United Nations
Human Rights Council

PERSON: Yvonne Terlingen; John R (Amb) Bolton

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Criticizes U.S. Over 'Outsourcing' in Iraq

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: CONTRACTORS; Pg.
16

LENGTH: 639 words

DATELINE: LONDON, May 23


Amnesty International on Tuesday assailed the use of military contractors by the
United States to detain prisoners, provide security and gather intelligence in
Iraq as ''war outsourcing,'' and said the behavior of some contractors had
diminished America's moral standing.

''War outsourcing is creating the corporate equivalent of Guantanamo Bay -- a
virtual rules-free zone in which perpetrators are not likely to be held
accountable for breaking the law,'' Larry Cox, executive director of Amnesty
International USA, said in Washington after the group presented its annual
report in London.

In both cities, senior figures of Amnesty International -- a private human
rights group that has commonly focused on false imprisonment and torture -- used
the annual report to highlight what they called pressing concerns about the
campaign against terrorism.

''It is difficult to believe,'' Mr. Cox said, ''that the United States
government, which once considered itself as an exemplar of human rights, has
sacrificed its most fundamental principle by abusing prisoners as a matter of
policy, by 'disappearing' detainees into a network of secret prisons, and by
abducting and sending people for interrogation to countries that practice
torture, such as Egypt, Syria and Morocco.''

Responding to the report, Sean McCormack, a State Department spokesman, told
reporters in Washington: ''When we do return people to their home countries, we
always go through a very, very careful and detailed process. And they have to be
able to assure American officials and policy makers that they believe that these
individuals will not be maltreated, will not be tortured.''

Also in Washington, Lt. Col. Mark Ballesteros, a Pentagon spokesman, said:
''Humane treatment of detainees in Department of Defense custody is, and always
has been, the department standard. The standard of humane treatment applies to
D.O.D. personnel, as well as civilian contractors.

''There is a process in place to hold civilian contractors accountable under the
law for any wrongdoing,'' he said. ''The Department of Justice would deal with
such cases.''

In London, Amnesty International seemed to send mixed signals. In an
introduction to the annual report, Irene Khan, the group's director general,
said there were ''signs for optimism'' in the global human rights picture,
including in the campaign against terrorism.

''There were some clear signs that a turning point may be in sight after five
years of backlash against human rights in the name of counterterrorism,'' she
said. ''In the past year, some of the world's most powerful governments have
received an uncomfortable wake-up call about the dangers of undervaluing the
human rights dimension of their actions at home and abroad.''

But in a statement as she unveiled the report, Ms. Khan said: ''Governments
collectively and individually paralyzed international institutions and
squandered public resources in pursuit of narrow security interests, sacrificed
principles in the name of the 'war on terror' and turned a blind eye to massive
human rights violations.''

Of the estimated 25,000 military contractors in Iraq, Mr. Cox said, some ''stand
accused of engaging in or supporting human rights violations such as sexual
abuse and torture.

''Some have been implicated in the Abu Ghraib scandal,'' he added, ''and
numerous news reports have highlighted how contractors fired at civilians in
Iraq with devastating consequences.'' There had been no prosecutions of
contractors, he said.

''Illegal behavior of contractors and of those who designed and carried out U.S.
torture policies and the reluctance of the government to bring perpetrators to
justice are tarnishing the reputation of the United States, hurting the image of
American troops and contributing to anti-American sentiment,'' Mr. Cox said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (90%);
FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); ANNUAL REPORTS (89%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); OUTSOURCING
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%);
TERRORISM (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); PRISONS (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
EXECUTIVES (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (67%) United States International Relations; United States Armament
and Defense; Freedom and Human Rights; Prisoners of War; Defense Contracts;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Amnesty
International

PERSON: Larry Cox; Alan Cowell; Irene Khan

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); CUBA (92%); MOROCCO (79%); EGYPT
(79%); SYRIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2006 Thursday
                         The New York Times on the Web

Video Advocacy From the Desk of David Pogue

SECTION: Section ; Column 0; WEB; Pg. 0

LENGTH: 877 words


A couple of weeks ago, I attended an amazing conference called TED (for
Technology, Entertainment and Design). You can read the complete description
here in my Pogue's Posts entry, but here's a summary:

This Week's Pogue Video

"It's four days of talks, each no longer than 18 minutes. The speakers are
either famous, pioneers in their industries or just fascinating people--and
often all three...They addressed climate crisis, the depletion of fossil fuels,
African AIDS, third-world poverty, human-rights violations, the spiral of
West-Islamic global hatred, lethal viruses, and other cheery subjects...The
organizer of TED makes no bones about the fact that he wants this astonishing
network of speakers and audience members to throw their expertise, brainpower
and connections behind efforts to address the world's problems."

I wanted to share some of what I learned in this e-column, but I'm aware that
some of this column's readers get cranky when the topic strays from consumer
technology.

But one memorable talk involved BOTH consumer tech AND doing good in the world,
which I thought I'd share with you. (I'll be back with gadget reviews next
week.)

It was a talk by Peter Gabriel, the pop star. He didn't play or even mention
music; instead, he described the progress of an outfit called Witness
(witness.org), which he co-founded in 1992 for the purposes of what he calls
"video advocacy."

What he means is helping native citizens film human-rights violations as they
happen, so that the world can see what's really going on. It's much harder for
wealthy countries to ignore the violence and oppression, Gabriel said, when
they're watching a video of it.

So Witness sprouted up to supply camcorders and training to, so far, 200
human-rights groups ("partners") in 60 countries. It sounded like such a cool
and important project that I decided to interview Gillian Caldwell, the group's
executive director, for today's e-column.

DP: Strikes me that lots of the human-rights violations are in, well, hot, humid
places that would be the enemy of camcorders. How have the cameras and tapes
fared?

GC: Our team definitely has to keep climate in mind when they select the
equipment packages, since some fare better in humid climates than others. As for
the tapes, we try to get them shipped relatively quickly to our archivists,
where they're catalogued, duplicated and stored in climate-controlled vaults for
the production work.

DP: Isn't this technology new to, say, impoverished Africans? How do they know
how to operate the camcorder, ship the tapes back, etc.?

GC: Most of the people we're training have never held a video camera before, so
the relationship begins with an intensive, onsite training program that teaches
them how to shoot, as well as what to shoot and why.

DP: Does every camcorder "seeding" bear fruit? Do you actually capture violence
and stuff on film?

GC: Well, unlike, say, the Rodney King incident, our primary intention is not to
capture human rights abuses in action, although that has on occasion happened.
Instead, most of our footage highlights the aftermath.

For example, a reluctant Philippine government is now prosecuting the murderers
of activists who were legally pursuing ancestral land claims--after footage
taken of the attacks was broadcast nationwide in the Philippines and delivered
to the Philippine president at the World Economic Forum. While Witness's partner
did not actually capture the attack on tape (it took place early in the morning
while everyone was sleeping), they were first on the scene of the attack, and
captured irrefutable evidence.

DP: How do the people you supply with camcorders keep them from getting stolen,
broken, lost, and so on?

GC: With the exception of some problems with theft in Nigeria, we've actually
been pretty lucky. Our partners manage to maintain their equipment very well,
and when the time comes for an upgrade, we provide it.

Power is a challenge; we generally provide extra battery packs. Some partners
even have solar chargers for their equipment.

DP: At TED, Peter Gabriel mentioned a shift from camcorders to cameraphones?

GC: Staying ahead of the technology curve is a major challenge for us.
Communications media have changed dramatically in the 14 years since Witness was
founded. In the coming months, we will launch an initiative called the Witness
Video Hub (www.witness.org/technology). Our hope is to let people around the
world use cellphones and computers to upload media to a central Web site built
to promote human rights.

We're facing an unprecedented frontier, with digital technology and the
"participatory culture" it has inspired poised to explode. Witness needs to be
at the forefront of this transition.

DP: Once the hub site goes up, how can you be sure that the filmed events are
genuine?

GC: We're still thinking this through. Currently, we're committed to an open and
participatory environment, allowing anyone anywhere to contribute footage. There
may be a limited amount of material that we will be able to authenticate, but
our goal is to not play a big role in this area. We don't want to serve as
gatekeepers ourselves, but to allow for peer review to foster a sense of
community responsibility and accountability.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction; Newsletter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AUDIO & VIDEO EQUIPMENT (89%); CONSUMER ELECTRONICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CELEBRITIES (76%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
CLIMATE CHANGE (75%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(70%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (65%); POP & ROCK (65%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (63%);
RELIGION (55%) Terms not available from NYTimes

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              34 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sane Chinese Put in Asylum, Doctors Find

BYLINE: By JOSEPH KAHN

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 590 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 16


Dutch psychiatrists have determined that a prominent Chinese dissident who spent
13 years in a police-run psychiatric institution in Beijing did not have mental
problems that would justify his incarceration, two human rights groups said
Thursday.

The psychiatrists spent two days testing the dissident, Wang Wanxing, in Germany
five months after China released him and sent him abroad. They said in a
statement that their examination ''did not reveal any form of mental disorder.''

The report could add fuel to charges that the Chinese police use a network of
psychiatric prisons to silence political dissidents, often without trial or
right of appeal.

Mr. Wang, now 56, was confined to the psychiatric center after he was detained
in 1992 for unfurling a banner that criticized the Communist Party.

The authorities determined that he had ''delusions of grandeur, litigation mania
and conspicuously enhanced pathological will,'' which Western human rights
groups say are diagnoses that officials have used to lock up troublesome
dissidents who have not broken any laws.

After his release in 2005, Mr. Wang described widespread abuses in the mental
asylum, known as the Beijing Ankang. He said he had lived in cells with
psychotically disturbed inmates convicted of murder and was forced to swallow
drugs to blunt his will. He also said the staff members had used electrified
acupuncture needles to punish patients while other inmates were made to watch.

The two Dutch doctors, B. C. M. Raes, a professor of forensic psychiatry at the
Free University of Amsterdam, and B. B. van der Meer, also a forensic
psychiatrist, examined Mr. Wang in January. Their findings were released
Thursday by the Global Initiative of Psychiatry and Human Rights Watch, two
human rights groups that have been critical of China's use of psychiatric
prisons.

''There was no reason that Mr. Wang had to be locked up in a special forensic
psychiatric hospital or to be admitted to a psychiatric facility,'' Dr. Raes and
Dr. van der Meer said in a statement. ''He was not suffering from any mental
disorder that could justify his admission.''

Their diagnosis contrasts sharply with one made by doctors at the Beijing
Ankang, who said when Mr. Wang was released last August that he had not been
cured. ''His systematic delusions have shown no conspicuous improvement since he
was first admitted to the hospital,'' the Beijing examiners said, adding that
Mr. Wang should be kept under ''strict guardianship'' in Germany.

Human Rights Watch says it has documented 3,000 cases of psychiatric punishment
of political dissidents since the early 1980's. The group contends that the use
of penal mental asylums to confine dissidents has increased in recent years as
the police have sought ways to punish followers of banned religious sects,
political dissidents and persistent petitioners without channeling them through
the court system.

Robin Munro, an expert on the Chinese psychiatric system with Human Rights
Watch, said Mr. Wang's examination by the Dutch psychiatrists was the first
opportunity for Western specialists to directly test a diagnosis by doctors in
one of China's psychiatric prisons. He said the Chinese doctors ''clearly got a
failing mark.''

''The Chinese diagnosis of Mr. Wang was based on disreputable theories inherited
from the Soviet Union that claim that certain types of dissident thinking and
behavior can be attributed to severe mental pathology,'' Mr. Munro said. ''This
is completely at variance with international standards today.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%);
MENTAL HEALTH (90%); MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (90%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (90%);
MENTAL ILLNESS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PSYCHIATRY (90%); FORENSICS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (89%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); LITIGATION (75%); RIOTS
(73%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE (71%); MURDER (70%); POLITICAL PARTIES (70%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); PETITIONS (63%); RELIGION (50%) Freedom
and Human Rights; Mental Health and Disorders; Demonstrations and Riots

PERSON: Joseph Kahn; Wang Wanxing

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (91%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (95%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); NETHERLANDS (92%); GERMANY (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (88%)

REGION: China; Netherlands; Germany; China

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fate of Uzbek Refugees Worries Rights Groups

BYLINE: By ETHAN WILENSKY-LANFORD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 360 words

DATELINE: BISHKEK, Kyrgyzstan, Jan. 12


Human Rights Watch and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees voiced
concern this week over the fate of four refugees who fled violence in Uzbekistan
last summer.

The four men were granted refugee status by the United Nations after they fled
Uzbekistan for Kyrgyzstan in May following an uprising in the Uzbek city of
Andijon. Witnesses said hundreds of people fled the city after government troops
ended the uprising by shooting hundreds of unarmed protesters.

Uzbekistan is seeking the extradition of the four men, whom it accuses of
killing a regional prosecutor during the violence. Under pressure from
Uzbekistan to honor its request, Kyrgyzstan's Committee of Migration and
Employment, which is responsible for refugees, has asked Kyrgyz courts to
invalidate their refugee status and approve extradition, said lawyers for the
men, identified as Yakub Tashbayev, Rasul Pirmatov, Jakhongir Maksudov, and
Odiljan Rakhimov.

The decision by the United Nations agency to consider the men refugees ''was
made after a thorough review of all the circumstances surrounding their cases,''
including the criminal charges against them, according to a news release issued
by the agency on Monday.

Human Rights Watch issued a statement about the case on Thursday. ''The Uzbek
government's promises not to torture these men are not worth the paper they're
written on,'' Holly Cartner, the group's Europe and Central Asia director, was
quoted as saying.

Human Rights Watch says that Kyrgyzstan is bound by both the 1951 United Nations
refugee convention and other treaties against torture not to return the men to
Uzbekistan.

Under a 1993 multilateral agreement known as the Minsk Convention, however,
Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan and other former Soviet republics are obligated to
provide legal assistance and extradition to other signatory countries.

The 4 men were among about 500 refugees who fled to southern Kyrgyzstan in May.
Uzbek authorities have resisted European and American calls for an international
inquiry into the violence. They blame terrorists and say 187 people were killed.
Human rights organizations say the number of dead was much higher.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (96%); EXTRADITION (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (86%); MIDDLE EAST
PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAWYERS
(73%); TERRORISM (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%); ECONOMIC MIGRATION (69%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%) Immigration and Refugees; Extradition

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS
HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (94%) Human Rights Watch; United Nations; United
Nations High Commission for Refugees

PERSON: Ethan Wilensky-Lanford

CITY: BISHKEK, KYRGYZSTAN (77%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (96%); KYRGYZSTAN (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); BELARUS (79%);
ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Uzbekistan; Kyrgyzstan

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              37 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Russia Rejects U.S. Criticism of Its Record on Rights

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 289 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 10


Russia said Friday that criticism of its human rights record in the latest
annual report by the United States State Department was unfair and could hurt
diplomatic relations.

The 2005 report, posted Wednesday on the State Department's Web site, listed
what it called human rights failures in Russia, including abductions in the
rebel republic of Chechnya, arbitrary arrests and detentions, police corruption
and occasional harassment of nongovernmental organizations monitoring human
rights.

''Even an initial analysis of the State Department report shows that it is full
of distorted facts and appears to be a specimen of explicit double standards in
assessing human rights,'' said a statement by the Russian Foreign Ministry.

''Unfortunately, such unfair reports stand in the way of developing U.S.-Russian
relations. They create in Russian society a feeling that U.S. policy towards
Russia is biased and encourages anti-Russian sentiment in American society.''

Russia, whose human rights record is often viewed with suspicion in the West,
has become especially sensitive to criticism since President Vladimir V. Putin
assumed the rotating presidency of the Group of 8 this year.

President Bush has so far refrained from publicly raising the issue of human
rights and democracy with Mr. Putin, whom he sees as a crucial ally in fighting
terrorists. But the White House feels pressure from lawmakers and officials
concerned about what they see as the Kremlin's tightening grip on the media and
growing intolerance of political opposition.

Influential nationalists in Russia, for their part, say they feel frustrated by
criticism from the United States, which they see as an attempt to interfere in
the country's internal affairs.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (95%); ANNUAL REPORTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRUPTION (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (57%); TERRORISM (51%) United States International Relations; Freedom
and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: GROUP OF EIGHT (G8) (55%) State Department

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (59%); GEORGE W BUSH (51%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Russia

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. SAYS IT FEARS DETAINEE ABUSE IN REPATRIATION

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN; Margot Williams contributed research for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1696 words


A long-running effort by the Bush administration to send home many of the terror
suspects held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, has been stymied in part because of
concern among United States officials that the prisoners may not be treated
humanely by their own governments, officials said.

Administration officials have said they hope eventually to transfer or release
many of the roughly 490 suspects now held at Guantanamo. As of February,
military officials said, the Pentagon was ready to repatriate more than 150 of
the detainees once arrangements could be made with their home countries.

But those arrangements have been more difficult to broker than officials in
Washington anticipated or have previously acknowledged, raising questions about
how quickly the administration can meet its goal of scaling back detention
operations at Guantanamo.

''The Pentagon has no plans to release any detainees in the immediate future,''
said a Defense Department spokesman, Lt. Cmdr. Jeffrey Gordon of the Navy. He
said the negotiations with foreign governments ''have proven to be a complex,
time-consuming and difficult process.''

The military has so far sent home 267 detainees from Guantanamo after finding
that they had no further intelligence value and either posed no long-term
security threat or would reliably be imprisoned or monitored by their own
governments. Most of those who remain are considered more dangerous militants;
many also come from nations with poor human rights records and ineffective
justice systems.

But Washington's insistence on humane treatment for the detainees in their
native countries comes after years in which Guantanamo has been assailed as a
symbol of American abuse and hypocrisy -- a fact not lost on the governments
with which the United States is now negotiating.

''It is kind of ironic that the U.S. government is placing conditions on other
countries that it would not follow itself in Guantanamo or Abu Ghraib,'' said a
Middle Eastern diplomat from one of the countries involved in the talks. He
asked not to be named to avoid criticizing the United States in the name of his
government.

The push for human rights assurances now, some officials said, also reflects a
renewed effort by the State Department to influence the administration's
detention policy, even as the United States continues to face wide criticism for
sending terror suspects to be interrogated in countries known to practice
torture.

Neither the State Department, which is the lead agency in the repatriation
talks, nor the Pentagon would comment on them in detail. United States officials
who agreed to discuss them would do so only on the condition of anonymity,
either because they were not authorized to speak publicly or to avoid disrupting
the negotiations.

Those officials said the talks had been particularly difficult with Saudi Arabia
and Yemen, two nations that account for almost half of the detainees now at
Guantanamo.

The Saudi government was among the first to seek the return of its citizens from
Guantanamo, and its discussions with United States officials have proceeded in
fits and starts for more than three years.

Five Saudi prisoners were sent home in May 2003 in an arrangement that some
officials said could be a template for future transfers.

But several American officials have since acknowledged privately that the
repatriation was part of a secret, high-level pact with the Saudi and British
governments, in which the Saudi authorities later freed five British citizens
and two other men Saudi Arabia had convicted on what British officials said were
trumped-up charges of terrorism.

United States officials said they had no indication that any of the five
repatriated Saudis were abused after returning home. But as discussions have
moved forward on the 128 Saudis still at Guantanamo, Saudi Arabia's record on
human rights has emerged as a central obstacle, several American officials said.

According to a State Department human rights report released in March, the Saudi
authorities have used ''beatings, whippings and sleep deprivation'' on Saudi and
foreign prisoners. The report also noted ''allegations of beatings with sticks
and suspension from bars by handcuffs.''

Mindful of such allegations, officials of the State Department's human rights
bureau, among others, have insisted that any transfer deal include clear
assurances that the prisoners will not be tortured and will be treated in
accordance with international humanitarian law, and that those pledges can be
verified, officials familiar with the discussions said.

The negotiations have bogged down over questions of how those commitments should
be formalized and monitored. United States officials at one point suggested that
the prisoners be visited by the International Committee of the Red Cross, but
the Saudi government does not now allow the Red Cross access to its prisons, and
the proposal was set aside, officials said.

Although Saudi Arabia ratified the Convention Against Torture and other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment in 1997, it also does not accept
the jurisdiction of a committee that the convention established to investigate
allegations of systematic torture.

A spokesman for the Saudi Embassy in Washington, Nail al-Jubeir, said he could
not comment on specifics of the negotiations, but recalled that the United
States had earlier insisted that foreign governments agree to imprison the
repatriated Guantanamo detainees, regardless of whether they had committed
crimes at home.

''The people coming back from Guantanamo will be questioned and investigated,
and if they have blood on their hands, they will face the Saudi justice
system,'' Mr. Jubeir said. But he added, ''If we have nothing to hold them on,
why hold them?''

United States officials said they had hoped to begin repatriating Saudi
detainees last year in groups of about 20 at a time. They noted that some --
including Mohammed al-Qahtani, who was captured in Afghanistan months after he
tried to meet up with some of the 9/11 hijackers in Florida -- were expected to
remain at Guantanamo for years, if not decades, to come.

By last summer, the Defense Department had approved 18 Saudi detainees for
repatriation, and the number has since increased to about two dozen, officials
said. But their transfers have been held up by continuing differences between
the governments, the officials said.

''We're operating in an environment where we don't want to send people to a
country where we are going to find out two weeks later that they've been
tortured,'' a State Department official said. Referring to Saudi Arabia, he
said, ''We hope to reach the point soon where we are comfortable with the
humanitarian arrangements.''

Other major difficulties have emerged in Washington's negotiations with the
government of Yemen, which has about 105 citizens at Guantanamo. (The Pentagon
has refused to make public the nationalities of all of the Guantanamo
prisoners.)

The State Department report cited the use of sleep deprivation, threats of
sexual assault and other abuses by Yemeni state-security agents. Despite efforts
by the Yemeni Interior Ministry to curb torture in its prisons, the department
said, there were also reports that ministry agents ''routinely'' used of torture
to extract confessions from criminal defendants.

Even so, some American officials said a more immediate obstacle to the possible
transfer of Guantanamo prisoners was a basic lack of security in Yemeni prisons.
The most vivid example, they said, was the escape on Feb. 3 of 23 men, including
some important operatives of Al Qaeda, from ahigh-security prison run by the
country's intelligence service in the capital, Sana. (Eight have surrendered or
been recaptured.)

Barely a month later, Yemeni security officials announced that they had thwarted
two more escape attempts involving a dozen Qaeda operatives at other prisons.

A spokesman for the Yemeni Embassy in Washington, Mohammed al-Basha, said his
government was eager to have Yemeni detainees repatriated and was ''fully
committed'' to international laws governing their treatment.

Of the Afghans captured during and since the American-led overthrow of the
Taliban, nearly 100 remain at Guantanamo; their repatriation may be easier. The
United States is paying $12 million to refurbish part of an old Soviet-built
prison outside Kabul to house transferred detainees; the work is to be completed
by December.

Since 2002, the Defense Department has sent 187 Guantanamo detainees to their
home countries to be released and 80 more for continued incarceration. Panels of
military officers at Guantanamo who reviewed the status of 463 prisoners last
year recommended 120 transferred to foreign custody and 14 released outright.

But only 15 of those 134 prisoners have thus far been sent home, a military
spokesman said. The rest -- along with 22 others whose transfer or release was
approved earlier and 9 more who have been deemed ''no longer enemy combatants''
-- remain at Guantanamo.

Among those that remain are 22 Chinese Muslim separatists from the Uighur ethnic
minority. United States officials have said they would respect the men's request
not to be sent back to China because of the possibility that they would be
mistreated. But the State Department has been unable to find a third country
that will accept them as refugees.

Human rights concerns have also been a sticking point in the possible transfer
of Guantanamo detainees to countries including Egypt, Algeria and Uzbekistan,
United States officials said.

The one clear case in which repatriated detainees have suffered serious abuse
involves seven Russians sent home from Guantanamo in May 2004. At the time,
American officials were primarily concerned with ensuring that the men would
continue to be detained. Instead, they were jailed briefly and released without
charge.

But at least four of the men were later rearrested by various security forces.
Three reported being beaten or tortured into confessing to an involvement in
terrorism, and although one was later acquitted after a jury trial, he has since
been arrested again.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''Guantanamo Bay: Prisoners of the Fight Against Terrorism''The
Guantanamo Bay prison currently holds approximately 490 prisoners captured in
Afghanistan and elsewhere. Most of the detainees were transferred from Bagram,
Afghanistan, in the first half of 2002. Of the 267 prisoners who have been sent
home, 187 were released outright and 80 were transferred for continued detention
in their own countries.NUMBER OF PRISONERS HELD AT GUANTANAMOJanuary 2002The
first 160 detainees arrive in Guantanamo. Among them are six Algerians captured
in Bosnia and reportedly turned over to the C.I.A.Oct. 27, 2002The first group
of four is transferred out.May 14, 2003Five detainees are sent back to Saudi
Arabia as part of an exchange involving British prisoners held there.Sept. 18,
2004Lengthy negotiations with the Pakistani government led to the release of 35
detainees to Pakistan, the largest transfer out.Sept. 22, 2004The last transfer
of detainees into Guantanamo, including several higher-value detainees who had
reportedly been held by the C.I.A.Feb. 8 & 9, 2006Most recent groups transferred
out: seven to Afghanistan, three to Morocco, one to Uganda.(Sources by
Department of Defense
 interviews)(pg. 6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CORRECTIONS
(77%); TORTURE (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); NAVIES (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(76%); INTERVIEWS (73%) Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States Armament
and Defense; United States International Relations; Prisoners of War; Terrorism;
Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (56%)

PERSON: Tim Golden; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%);
PAKISTAN (92%); MOROCCO (79%); UGANDA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Saudi Arabia; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              40 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Director Urges Europe to Improve Oversight

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 633 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 1


Frustrated by his failure to find clear evidence that European governments have
taken part in the secret detention or transportation of American-held terrorism
suspects, the chief of Europe's human rights agency called Wednesday for tougher
oversight of European intelligence services and stricter controls over foreign
agents operating in Europe.

''These are two glaring gaps in Europe,'' said the official, Terry Davis,
secretary general of the Council of Europe, which is responsible for enforcing
the European Convention on Human Rights.

Mr. Davis released a report documenting responses by the council's 46 member
states to questions about whether any of their officials had been involved in
the extrajudicial transportation or detention of terrorism suspects. No country
said yes; some failed to reply adequately or at all. He singled out Italy and
Poland for special criticism, as well as two former Yugoslav republics,
Macedonia and Bosnia and Herzegovina. Albania's response was so cursory it was
not even included.

In the report, Mr. Davis called Europe a ''happy hunting ground'' for foreign
security services and said the skies ''appear to be excessively open,'' noting
that no government had procedures in place to check for human rights offenses in
civilian aircraft passing over or landing in their countries.

The Council of Europe investigation and one by the European Parliament were
undertaken after reports were published in November that the C.I.A. had operated
secret prisons in central and eastern Europe as part of its well-documented
''rendition'' program, in which American-held terrorism suspects are sent to
third countries for interrogation, outside the jurisdiction of United States
law.

Though the council's recommendations carry little weight, participation in
renditions by members would constitute a breach of the rights convention. All
members must conform to the convention under their national laws.

The council says it has evidence that the C.I.A. carried out extrajudicial
seizures in Europe, most notably of a cleric, Hassan Mustafa Osama Nasr, who was
seized by American agents in Milan, Italy, in February 2003 and sent to Egypt.

But evidence that European governments have been involved or that detainees were
interrogated in Europe remains oblique and circumstantial, consisting primarily
of flight logs for planes used by the C.I.A.

Such records show, for example, that a Boeing 737 operated by a C.I.A.-linked
company and suspected of being used to transport detainees made stops in Poland
and Romania in 2003 and 2004.

The plane, with the registration number N313P, flew from Kabul to a remote
airport in northeastern Poland on Sept. 22, 2003, about the time, according to
Human Rights Watch, that several ''high value'' detainees were transferred from
Afghanistan. It left Poland that evening for Morocco and continued the next day
to the Guantanamo Naval Base in Cuba.

The same plane later flew from Skopje, Macedonia, to Kabul on Jan. 24, 2004, on
the day that a German-Lebanese man, Khaled el-Masri, was flown from Macedonia to
Afghanistan. The plane flew to Romania the next day.

Mr. Davis, a Briton, said responses to his questions about those and other
flights showed that given current regulations, it was ''virtually impossible''
for governments to know whether aircraft using their airspace or airports were
being flown ''for purposes incompatible with internationally recognized human
rights standards.''

''You'll not see something if you do not look,'' he said in a telephone
interview from Council of Europe headquarters in Strasbourg, France.

He also complained that the principle of diplomatic immunity hindered the
enforcement of laws when it came to foreign agents. ''Immunity,'' Mr. Davis
said, ''cannot mean impunity.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRISONS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); AIRPORTS (78%); COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT
(78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: BOEING CO (55%)

ORGANIZATION: COUNCIL OF EUROPE (83%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (54%)

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (55%); BA (NYSE) (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (55%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (55%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (55%)

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (97%); POLAND (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
ITALY (92%); ALBANIA (79%); CUBA (79%); ROMANIA (79%); MOROCCO (79%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); EGYPT (79%); MACEDONIA,
THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%); EASTERN EUROPE
(58%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Symbol of Abu Ghraib Seeks to Spare Others His Nightmare

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Kirk Semple contributed reporting from Baghdad for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, March 8


Almost two years later, Ali Shalal Qaissi's wounds are still raw.

There is the mangled hand, an old injury that became infected by the shackles
chafing his skin. There is the slight limp, made worse by days tied in
uncomfortable positions. And most of all, there are the nightmares of his nearly
six-month ordeal at Abu Ghraib prison in 2003 and 2004.

Mr. Qaissi, 43, was prisoner 151716 of Cellblock 1A. The picture of him standing
hooded atop a cardboard box, attached to electrical wires with his arms
stretched wide in an eerily prophetic pose, became the indelible symbol of the
torture at Abu Ghraib, west of Baghdad. [The American military said Thursday
that it would abandon the prison and turn it over to the Iraqi government.]

''I never wanted to be famous, especially not in this way,'' he said, as he sat
in a squalid office rented by his friends here in Amman. That said, he is now a
prisoner advocate who clearly understands the power of the image: it appears on
his business card.

At first glance, there is little to connect Mr. Qaissi with the infamous picture
of a hooded man except his left hand, which he says was disfigured when an
antique rifle exploded in his hands at a wedding several years ago. A disfigured
hand also seems visible in the infamous picture, and features prominently in Mr.
Qaissi's outlook on life. In Abu Ghraib, the hand, with two swollen fingers, one
of them partly blown off, and a deep gash in the palm, earned him the nickname
Clawman, he said.

A spokesman for the American military in Iraq declined to comment, saying it
would violate the Geneva Conventions to disclose the identity of prisoners in
any of the Abu Ghraib photographs, just as it would to discuss the reasons
behind Mr. Qaissi's detention.

But prison records from the Coalition Provisional Authority, which governed Iraq
after the invasion, made available to reporters by Amnesty International, show
that Mr. Qaissi was in American custody at the time. Beyond that, researchers
with both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International say they have interviewed
Mr. Qaissi and, along with lawyers suing military contractors in a class-action
suit over the abuse, believe that he is the man in the photograph.

Under the government of Saddam Hussein, Mr. Qaissi was a mukhtar, in effect a
neighborhood mayor, a role typically given to members of the ruling Baath Party
and closely tied to its nebulous security services. After the fall of the
government, he managed a parking lot belonging to a mosque in Baghdad.

He was arrested in October 2003, he said, because he loudly complained to the
military, human rights organizations and the news media about soldiers' dumping
garbage on a local soccer field. But some of his comments suggest that he is at
least sympathetic toward insurgents who fight American soldiers.

''Resistance is an international right,'' he said.

Weeks after complaining about the garbage, he said, he was surrounded by
Humvees, hooded, tied up and carted to a nearby base before being transferred to
Abu Ghraib. Then the questioning began.

''They blamed me for attacking U.S. forces,'' he said, ''but I said I was
handicapped; how could I fire a rifle?'' he said, pointing to his hand. ''Then
he asked me, 'Where is Osama bin Laden?' And I answered, 'Afghanistan.' ''

How did he know? ''Because I heard it on TV,'' he replied.

He said it soon became evident that the goal was to coax him to divulge names of
people who might be connected to attacks on American forces. His hand, then
bandaged, was often the focus of threats and inducements, he said, with
interrogators offering to fix it or to squash it at different times. After
successive interrogations, he said he was finally given a firm warning: ''If you
don't speak, next time, we'll send you to a place where even dogs don't live.''

Finally, he said, he was taken to a truck, placed face down, restrained and
taken to a special section of the prison where he heard shouts and screams. He
was forced to strip off all his clothes, then tied with his hands up high. A
guard began writing on his chest and forehead, what someone later read to him
as, ''Colin Powell.''

In all, there were about 100 cells in the cellblock, he said, with prisoners of
all ages, from teenagers to old men. Interrogators were often dressed in
civilian clothing, their identities strictly shielded.

The prisoners were sleep deprived, he said, and the punishments they faced
ranged from bizarre to lewd: an elderly man was forced to wear a bra and pose; a
youth was told to hit the other adults; and groups of men were organized in
piles. There was the dreaded ''music party,'' he said, in which prisoners were
placed before loudspeakers. Mr. Qaissi also said he had been urinated on by a
guard. Then there were the pictures.

''Every soldier seemed to have a camera,'' he said. ''They used to bring us
pictures and threaten to deliver them to our families''

Today, those photographs, turned into montages and slideshows on Mr. Qaissi's
computer, are stark reminders of his experiences in the cellblock. As he scanned
through the pictures, each one still instilling shock as it popped on the
screen, he would occasionally stop, his voice breaking as he recounted the story
behind each photograph.

In one, a young man shudders in fear as a dog menaces him.

''That's Talib,'' he said. ''He was a young Yemeni, a student of the Beaux-Arts
School in Baghdad, and was really shaken.''

In another, Pfc. Lynndie R. England, who was convicted last September of
conspiracy and maltreatment of Iraqi prisoners, poses in front of a line of
naked men, a cigarette in her mouth. ''That's Jalil, Khalil and Abu Khattab,''
he said. ''They're all brothers, and they're from my neighborhood.''

Then there is the picture of Mr. Qaissi himself, standing atop a cardboard box,
taken 15 days into his detention. He said he had only recently been given a
blanket after remaining naked for days, and had fashioned the blanket into a
kind of poncho.

The guards took him to a heavy box filled with military meal packs, he said, and
hooded him. He was told to stand atop the box as electric wires were attached to
either hand. Then, he claims, they shocked him five times, enough for him to
bite his tongue.

Specialist Sabrina Harman was convicted last May for her role in abusing
prisoners at Abu Ghraib, but she was accused of threatening to electrocute a
hooded inmate on a box if he stepped off it, not of shocking him while he was
atop it.

After almost six months in Abu Ghraib, Mr. Qaissi said, he was loaded onto a
truck, this time without any shackles, but still hooded. As the truck sped out
of the prison, another man removed the hood and announced that they had been
freed.

With a thick shock of gray hair and melancholy eyes, Mr. Qaissi is today a
self-styled activist for prisoners' rights in Iraq. Shortly after being released
from Abu Ghraib in 2004, he started the Association of Victims of American
Occupation Prisons with several other men immortalized in the Abu Ghraib
pictures.

Financed partly by Arab nongovernmental organizations and private donations, the
group's aim is to publicize the cases of prisoners still in custody, and to
support prisoners and their families with donations of clothing and food.

Mr. Qaissi has traveled the Arab world with his computer slideshows and
presentations, delivering a message that prisoner abuse by Americans and their
Iraqi allies continues. He says that as the public face of his movement, he
risks retribution from Shiite militias that have entered the Iraqi police forces
and have been implicated in prisoner abuse. But that has not stopped him.

Last week, he said, he lectured at the American University in Beirut, on Monday
he drove to Damascus to talk to students and officials, and in a few weeks he
heads to Libya for more of the same.

Despite the cruelty he witnessed, Mr. Qaissi said he harbored no animosity
toward America or Americans. ''I forgive the people who did these things to
us,'' he said. ''But I want their help in preventing these sorts of atrocities
from continuing.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article last Saturday profiled Ali Shalal Qaissi,
identifying him as the hooded man forced to stand on a box, attached to wires,
in a photograph from the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal of 2003 and 2004. He
was shown holding such a photograph. As an article on Page A1 today makes clear,
Mr. Qaissi was not that man.

  The Times did not adequately research Mr. Qaissi's insistence that he was the
man in the photograph. Mr. Qaissi's account had already been broadcast and
printed by other outlets, including PBS and Vanity Fair, without challenge.
Lawyers for former prisoners at Abu Ghraib vouched for him. Human rights workers
seemed to support his account. The Pentagon, asked for verification, declined to
confirm or deny it.

Despite the previous reports, The Times should have been more persistent in
seeking comment from the military. A more thorough examination of previous
articles in The Times and other newspapers would have shown that in 2004
military investigators named another man as the one on the box, raising
suspicions about Mr. Qaissi's claim.

The Times also overstated the conviction with which representatives of Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International expressed their view of whether Mr.
Qaissi was the man in the photograph. While they said he could well be that man,
they did not say they believed he was.

A front-page article last Saturday profiled Ali Shalal Qaissi, identifying him
as the hooded man forced to stand on a box, attached to wires, in a photograph
from the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal of 2003 and 2004. He was shown holding
such a photograph. As an article on Page A1 today makes clear, Mr. Qaissi was
not that man.

The Times did not adequately research Mr. Qaissi's insistence that he was the
man in the photograph. Mr. Qaissi's account had already been broadcast and
printed by other outlets, including PBS and Vanity Fair, without challenge.
Lawyers for former prisoners at Abu Ghraib vouched for him. Human rights workers
seemed to support his account. The Pentagon, asked for verification, declined to
confirm or deny it.

Despite the previous reports, The Times should have been more persistent in
seeking comment from the military. A more thorough examination of previous
articles in The Times and other newspapers would have shown that in 2004
military investigators named another man as the one on the box, raising
suspicions about Mr. Qaissi's claim.

The Times also overstated the conviction with which representatives of Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International expressed their view of whether Mr.
Qaissi was the man in the photograph. While they said he could well be that man,
they did not say they believed he was.

GRAPHIC: Photos: The business card of Ali Shalal Qaissi, a Abu Ghraib torture
victim, and the advocacy group for former prisoners that he helped start. (pg.
A8)
 Ali Shalal Qaissi in Amman, Jordan, recently with the picture of himself
standing atop a box and attached to electrical wires in Abu Ghraib. (Photo by
Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); TORTURE (76%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); LAW OF WAR (74%); ARMED FORCES (74%); DEFENSE
INDUSTRY (69%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); CLASS ACTIONS
(60%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (50%);
SOCCER (50%); ARRESTS (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%); AMMAN, JORDAN (87%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (92%); JORDAN (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              42 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 1, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Guatemala Bleeds in Vise Of Gangs and Vengeance

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1585 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA CITY


There were 52 new bodies at the morgue on a recent Monday morning; 52 new
chances for Guadalupe Diaz to find her son, Mario Toscano.

He was no angel, Ms. Diaz said of her son. The 20-year-old Mr. Toscano, known
around the neighborhood as Chespy, was the leader of the violent Mara 18 street
gang. And his mother long feared he might wind up dead, but not disappeared.

Mr. Toscano has been missing since Aug. 27, Ms. Diaz said, when he was abducted
at a convenience store by three gunmen. Ms. Diaz said that when neighbors tried
to intervene in the kidnapping, the gunmen pulled out their weapons, identified
themselves as police officers, warned the neighbors to move back, then loaded
Mr. Toscano into an unmarked car and drove away.

Since then, Ms. Diaz, a maid, stops at the morgue on her way to work almost
every Monday.

''To see them,'' she said of examining so many dead bodies, ''I get chills.''

A neighbor named Rosa Morales, 71, said her 15-year-old grandson, who was not a
member of a gang, was kidnapped by the same kind of mob two months ago. When
asked who she thought was responsible for the attacks, she raised an evil from
the past.

''The people say it's the death squads that are disappearing the people,'' Ms.
Morales said, sobbing. ''What gives them the right?''

Nearly a decade after the end of a civil war that left 200,000 people dead or
missing in this country of 14 million people, a new wave of violence has hit
Guatemala and it looks a lot like the old one -- some say worse. Guatemalan
authorities said an estimated 4,325 people were killed in the first 10 months of
2005. That is one of the highest per capita murder rates in Latin America, and
far more than the average annual killings in the last decade of this country's
armed conflict.

Even in peace, governments across Central America have said violence remains the
principal threat to stability. Here, as in neighboring Honduras and El Salvador,
the violence comes with many of the trademarks of the cold war: rape, torture
and extrajudicial kidnappings and killings. And now, as they did then, human
rights investigators have raised concerns about a clandestine ''social cleansing
campaign,'' led by rogue police officers and vigilante mobs.

This latest cycle of violence began five years ago, when street gangs with roots
in Los Angeles -- especially the Mara 18 and the Mara Salvatruchas, known as
MS-13 -- began to spread across Central America and southern Mexico, creating
the same kind of havoc in poor neighborhoods here as they once did in places
like Compton and Watts.

Then in the past year, men and boys suspected of being members of street gangs
began to disappear in much the same way people suspected of being guerrillas did
during the 1980's: abducted from busy streets or ambushed in their beds, and
forced into unmarked cars with tinted windows and no license plates.

Almost none of the kidnapped turn up alive. Some never turn up at all. When they
do, they are often not found in one piece.

Beyond the attacks against gang members and youths suspected of being gang
members, international human rights groups, including Amnesty International and
Human Rights Watch, have expressed concern about a disproportionate increase in
the killing of women. The Guatemalan Human Rights Ombudsman reported that from
2002 to 2004, killings of women increased by almost 57 percent, while the
killings of men increased 21 percent.

Adriana Beltran of the Washington Office on Latin America said many of the
killings were committed with unusual cruelty, involving the kind of rape and
mutilations that occurred during this country's armed conflict.

''This is a society that is rotten from the head down,'' said Jairo Gonzalez,
47. His daughter, Flor, a university student in graphics design, was abducted
one night in July and found raped and shot to death the next morning.

''The criminals have the arms,'' he said. ''They have the money. They have the
power. The people have no power to fight back. Millions stay silent, because of
impunity.''

The people of La Esperanza, Spanish for hope, live at the center of the storm.

''On June 16, they found a head in a bucket right there,'' said Elubia
Velasquez, pointing toward a tortilla shop while walking along the main street
of La Esperanza. ''The hands were found near a light pole where you met me this
morning. And farther down that way, under the bridge at Bucaro, they found the
body.''

Ms. Velasquez, born and reared in La Esperanza, said the neighborhood was once
terrorized by the Mara 18. She said the gang members demanded so-called war
taxes from all the merchants, bus drivers and delivery crews and killed several
people who refused to pay. The gang members, she said, had also raped dozens of
girls, robbed countless homes and turned schoolchildren into drug addicts.

In the past year, however, she said, most of the gang members were either dead
or in hiding.

The leader of the Mara 18 in Villalobos, known as El Quince, Spanish for 15, was
abducted a year ago. His body was found a day later, with his hands and feet
tied and with several gunshots wounds to the head, Ms. Velasquez said. A gang
member known as Gaspar had been strangled, other residents said. He was found
with a heavy stone tied with wire around his neck.

The root causes and perpetrators of the violence have been so obscured by
government cover-ups and corruption that they are often impossible to identify.

In the cases of the killing of women, for example, fewer than 12 of the more
than 1,800 murders since 2001 have been resolved, according to the nonprofit
Center for Legal Action on Human Rights.

Relatives of the victims, especially the relatives of dead gang members, said in
numerous interviews that they believed that police officers and private security
guards had led much of the kidnapping and killing in a secret campaign of
state-sponsored ''social cleansing,'' aimed at the young and the poor.

Interior Minister Carlos Vielmann flatly denied those accusations in a recent
interview. Unlike the governments in Honduras and El Salvador, which adopted
tough laws that made it a felony to belong to a gang, the Guatemalan government
has begun a softer war against gangs that focuses on recreation and
rehabilitation programs.

Mr. Vielmann said the government had also taken important steps to root out
corruption in the police force by punishing dozens of officers responsible for
abuses, upgrading equipment and training and cooperating with the United States
in vetting a special community policing unit that had had some success at
decreasing the violence in a neighborhood with heavy gang activity, Villa Nueva.

Still, Mr. Vielmann acknowledged corruption remained rampant among the officers
of the National Civil Police. And he said he suspected that some of the secret
security structures created during the civil war had become instruments of
organized crime.

The interior minister attributed much of Guatemala's violence to fighting among
rival gang members, and he included in that category much of the violence
against women, who he said have become increasingly involved in street gangs and
dealing dope. But he did not reject the theory that some of the attacks had been
committed by rogue police officers and citizen vigilantes, many of them
frustrated by the government's inability to deliver justice.

''I am not going to guarantee you that agents of state security forces or of
private security forces have not in some moment committed an excess and killed
someone,'' Mr. Vielmann said. ''But I can tell you that this is not a policy of
the state. And we would never allow this to be the policy of the state.''

''There are parallel groups that kill just to destabilize, or create problems
for the government,'' he added. ''They kill to kill.''

In a crime-plagued neighborhood called El Mezquital, people said some of the
killing had brought relief.

Guadalupe del Carmen Alvarado, a resident there, said that after gang members
had killed a couple of merchants and bus drivers who had refused to pay war
taxes, the other merchants and bus drivers pooled their money to hire gunmen to
''eliminate the gangs.''

''We don't like to see bad things happen, but to be sincere, when they started
to kill the gang members, I gave thanks to God,'' Ms. Alvarado said. ''The gangs
are like living with a lion, and we know if we don't kill it, it is going to eat
us.''

Ms. Velasquez acknowledged that ''the gangs made a lot of enemies'' in El
Mezquital. But she said she worried that innocent youths had fallen victim in
the fighting.

''Now it's not only gang members who are disappearing,'' Ms. Velasquez said.
''Now they are taking teenagers who don't have a single tattoo. Being young and
poor in neighborhoods like this one has become a crime.''

On Oct. 13, three neighborhood teenagers, who residents said were not involved
in gangs, were abducted by three men wearing ski masks as the youths played
soccer in front of their houses. The victims' bodies were found the next day
dumped along a small road about an hour away.

The authorities said the youths appeared to have been strangled. All three were
found with their hands and feet tied. Their relatives said the bodies showed
signs of torture.

Among them was Ms. Morales's 15-year-old grandson, Jose Arnoldo Arecis.

''They say a tree that is no good should be cut down,'' Ms. Morales said,
sobbing. ''But only God has the right to cut down a man. What is happening here
is a sin.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 4, 2006



CORRECTION: A picture caption on Sunday about a wave of violence in Guatemala
carried an incorrect credit for the two photographs shown. They were by Daniel
Hernandez.

GRAPHIC: Photos: On Mondays, Guadalupe Diaz looks for her son Mario Toscano, a
gang leader, at Guatemala City's morgue.
 At a protest aimed at violence against women, Jairo Gonzalez holds a banner
with a photograph of his daughter, Flor, who was raped and killed. (Photographs
by Rodrigo Abd/Associated Press, for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); GANGS (90%);
MISSING PERSONS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); CIVIL WAR (86%);
GRANDCHILDREN (78%); AUTOPSIES (78%); SEX OFFENSES (76%); MURDER (76%);
ASSASSINATION (76%); CRIME RATES (75%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (75%); MISCONDUCT
(74%); COLD WAR (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); VIOLENT CRIME STATISTICS (62%);
CONVENIENCE STORES (55%) Police Brutality and Misconduct; Torture  ; Sex Crimes;
Women; Gangs; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Assassinations and Attempted
Assassinations; Kidnapping; Freedom and Human Rights; Discrimination; Children
and Youth; Missing Persons

PERSON: Ginger Thompson

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (97%); HONDURAS (79%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); EL SALVADOR
(79%); MEXICO (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (68%)

REGION: Guatemala; Guatemala

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Remote Pakistan Province, a Civil War Festers

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Salman Masood contributed reporting from Karachi,
Pakistan, for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1907 words

DATELINE: DERA BUGTI, Pakistan


Explosions at gas pipelines and railroad tracks are common in this remote desert
region. Now, roadside bombs and artillery shells are, too. More than 100
civilians have been killed in recent months, along with dozens of government
security forces, local residents and Pakistan's Human Rights Commission say.

This is the other front of Pakistan's widening civil unrest, not the tribal
areas along the Afghan border where the United States would like the government
to press a campaign against Islamic militants, but the restive province of
Baluchistan, home to an intensifying insurgency.

It is here, say local leaders and opposition politicians, that Pakistan, an
important ally in the United States' campaign against terrorism, has diverted
troops from the fight against Al Qaeda and the Taliban to settle old scores as
it seeks to develop the region's valuable oil and gas reserves.

One visit makes it clear that, despite official denials, the government is
waging a full-scale military campaign here. Rebel leaders say they have several
thousand men under arms, fighting what they estimate are 23,000 Pakistani
troops.

During a 24-hour trek on camel, horse and foot across the rugged, stony terrain
in early March, the fighting was plain to see. Military jets and surveillance
planes flew over the area, and long-range artillery lighted up the distant night
sky.

This fight is altogether separate from the Taliban insurgency on Afghanistan's
border or the Shiite-Sunni violence that sporadically flares in and around the
provincial capital, Quetta, and it threatens to dwarf the nation's other
conflicts.

It is about the ethnic rights and self-rule of the Baluch people, who are
distinct among Pakistanis. They speak their own language, Baluchi, which has its
roots in Persian, and are probably the oldest settlers in the region.

In particular, tensions have been aggravated by President Pervez Musharraf's
determination to develop the area's oil and gas fields, the largest in the
country, as well as his aim to build a pipeline across the region to carry oil
from Iran and a strategic deep sea port to expand trade with China, local
residents say.

They charge that General Musharraf has shown little regard for their concerns
and that for years their province has received paltry royalties on its
resources, while remaining one of the country's poorest regions.

The government has branded two of the rebel leaders, Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti,
nearly 80, and Balach Marri, 40, ''miscreants,'' outlaws who oppose economic
development to retain a hold over their tribes.

In an interview under the shade of a rocky overhang, Mr. Bugti and Mr. Marri,
who share the names of the tribes they lead, dismissed the charges. They are not
opposed to economic development, they said, but rather to the Pakistani
government's military campaign to suppress them.

''The military government has imposed military rule and this has forced the
Baluch to defend their land and resources against the might of the armed forces
of Pakistan assembled in our area,'' Mr. Bugti said, perched in a carved wooden
armchair as tribesmen sat around him cradling Kalashnikov rifles.

''The dispute is about the national rights of the Baluch,'' he added, ''and if
the government accepted these rights then there would be no dispute.''

Mr. Bugti and others said that the government was using its American-supplied
jets and helicopter gunships against them. They said they had found bomb
fragments with ''Made in U.S.A.'' stamped on them.

Indeed, huge craters and fragments from American-designed MK-82 bombs lay beside
a badly damaged school in the village of Mararar, the results of a bombing raid
that the Baluch fighters said had occurred at the beginning of March.

Another bombing raid on or around March 14 hit two bulldozers building a road,
the fighters said. A collection of bomb fragments gathered by tribesmen from
other raids revealed a ''valve solenoid'' made in New York, and part of a gas
generator made in Mesa, Ariz.

Last year, the Baluch political leaders presented a 15-point agenda to the
central government. The demands included greater control of the province's
resources, protection for the Baluch minority and a halt to the building of
military bases that local residents say have proliferated here.

Concern over the issues had been building for years, said Suret Khan Marri, a
historian living in Quetta, the provincial capital, and the concerns and
violence reach far beyond the Bugti and Marri tribes.

''The movement is there,'' he said in an interview. ''Sometimes it is crushed.
Now it is the fifth insurgency, and it has spread all across the Baluch area.''

Armed resistance by Baluch nationalists has been a repeating occurrence since
the birth of Pakistan in 1947, when tribal leaders, Mr. Bugti among them, only
grudgingly joined Pakistan after having ruled independent territories under the
British.

The bitterness today is such that the tribal leaders compare the situation to
the 1970's, when Bangladesh broke from Pakistan. ''If grievances have come to
this level -- that we do not mind if Pakistan disintegrates -- then things are
bad,'' Mr. Marri, the rebel leader, said.

The terrain here is marked by harsh, rocky desert, rising into craggy mountains
and cut through with narrow gorges that supply many hiding places for shepherds,
or guerrilla fighters. In the summer, temperatures soar to more than 120
degrees.

The shadowy Baluchistan Liberation Army, one of three armed resistance groups
born in the 1970's, has claimed responsibility for many of the recent attacks,
including the killing of three Chinese engineers working on the deep sea port,
at Gwadar. Mr. Marri said that he did not know who was leading the group, but
that it was neither a Bugti nor a Marri.

The most recent violence has included summary killings of settlers from the
Punjab, whom Baluch nationalists blame for stealing jobs and land.

Hundreds of political party members, students, doctors and tribal leaders have
been detained by government security forces, many disappearing for months, even
years, without trials in well-documented cases. Some have been tortured or have
died in custody, say officials of Pakistan's Human Rights Commission.

A Baluch doctor, Bari Langove, 36, said he had examined a student leader, Dr.
Allah Nasar Baloch, in a prison ward in Quetta six months ago and found him so
debilitated that he could neither walk nor talk at first.

''He was mentally exhausted and wholly unable to speak,'' Dr. Langove said in an
interview in Quetta. ''We examined him and found he had post-traumatic stress
disorder, symptoms of loss of short-term memory, insomnia, loss of appetite and
energy.''

In places like Dera Bugti and Kohlu, government forces have carried out
reprisals against villagers, Baluch leaders and human rights officials say. In a
case documented by the Human Rights Commission, the Frontier Corps, a
paramilitary force commanded by army officers, killed 12 men from Pattar Nala on
Jan. 11 after a mine explosion near the village killed some of its soldiers.

Two old men from the village who went to the base to collect the bodies were
also killed. The next day, the 14 bodies were handed over to the women of the
village.

Local fighters say the Frontier Corps has carried out 42 such reprisal killings
in the last three months, the latest involving six villagers during the week of
March 6.

The government offensive began after a rocket attack on General Musharraf as he
opened a military base in Kohlu on Dec. 17 -- an attack for which officials
blamed Marri rebels, and Mr. Marri in particular.

Shortly afterward, government forces stormed the town of Dera Bugti, Mr. Bugti
said, adding that they were burning shops and houses there still, including his
family home.

The government has played down the fighting, and denies that the Pakistani Army
is even deployed in Baluchistan, saying that it is merely using the Frontier
Corps to run a police operation to stem violence.

In interviews, the police chief, Chaudhry Muhammad Yakub, put the number of
rebels at no more than 1,000. The provincial governor, Owais Ahmed Ghani, said
36,000 Frontier Corps soldiers were deployed in Baluchistan, with two-thirds
concentrated along the Afghan border. Both predicted that the Baluchistan
conflict would be over within two months.

In all this, Mr. Bugti is an unexpected participant. He has been a prominent
player in regional politics for many years and was governor of Baluchistan. He
has spent time in detention on charges of murder during a long and colorful
life.

Educated under the British Raj, he is a man from a bygone era, who said he
attended the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II in London in 1953.

Now, forced to flee his home, he lives an austere life, camping out under the
stars with his loyal tribesmen, a Kalashnikov propped by his aluminum walking
stick.

''I have had a good and full life,'' he said, unperturbed. ''It is better to die
quickly in the mountains than slowly in your bed.''

He warned that the government would be foolish not to negotiate with the senior
tribal leaders. ''If we are removed from the scene, I can guarantee the
government will have a heck of a time from the younger generation, because they
are more extreme,'' he said.

One of his grandsons, Brahamdagh, 25, is commanding the Bugti resistance
fighters, and he appeared silently every so often to brief his grandfather. He
took to the mountains in 2002 with just 50 to 60 men.

Brahamdagh contended that he now had more than 2,000 fighters in Dera Bugti and
thousands more civilian helpers. He said the Marris had roughly the same number
in Kohlu. In addition, small cells of fighters are in every district of the
province, he said.

''There are so many groups,'' he said. ''Three to four guys get together and
decide what to do, to hit a railway or a bus. We are showing our bitterness. We
are fighting the government to show we are not happy with you and you should
leave our homeland.''

Mr. Marri, who arrived unannounced one afternoon, on foot and accompanied by a
dozen armed fighters, is another of the younger generation. The third son of the
leader of the Marri tribe, he has spent most of his life outside Pakistan.

In 2002, he returned to run for Parliament but spent most of his time in his
home in Kohlu, the capital of the Kohlu district, until forced to flee by the
government offensive. ''If they think they can pressure us like this, then they
don' t know us,'' he warned. ''The Baluch people have woken up.''

The Human Rights Commission and opposition political parties have urged both
sides to seek a political solution to the conflict. Yet at the moment there is
no dialogue.

Two parliamentary committees set up last year to look into Baluch grievances
have stalled, and General Musharraf has been blunt in his determination to use
force against anyone opposing his vision for the region.

In their mountain stronghold, Mr. Bugti and Mr. Marri, and a third leader,
Ataullah Mengal, in his home in Karachi, are disparaging about talks with the
government.

''They are not worth sitting with at the table,'' Mr. Marri said. ''The general
keeps offering peanuts when my rights are at stake. We are not against
negotiations, but only negotiations that are worthwhile.''

Mr. Bugti offered his own grim prognosis. ''I don' t see it ending,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A rebel fighter in Dera Bugti, in the Pakistani province of
Baluchistan. The rebels say the government wants the region's oil and gas
reserves but is neglecting its economic development. (Photo by Scott Eells for
The New York Times)(pg. 14)
 Nawab Akbar Khan Bugti, a tribal leader in the impoverished Baluchistan region
of Pakistan, travels by camel with his band of guerrilla fighters. (Photo by
Scott Eells for The New York Times)(pg. 1)Map of Pakistan highlighting Dera
Bugti: Villagers have been caught up in the conflict around Dera Bugti. (pg. 14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); NATURAL
GAS PRODUCTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%);
MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (90%);
TALIBAN (90%); MILITARY RULE (89%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (88%); ROYALTIES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (78%); OIL & GAS PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION (78%); WAR ON TERROR
(77%); MARTIAL LAW (77%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (76%); POLITICS (75%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); ARMED FORCES (74%);
CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (72%); RIOTS (71%); RELIGION (70%);
SURVEILLANCE & RECONNAISSANCE AIRCRAFT (67%); MARINE SHIPPING (65%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (65%); HARBORS & PORTS (60%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Pipelines; Oil
(Petroleum) and Gasoline; Gas (Fuel); International Trade and World Market;
Ships and Shipping; Freedom and Human Rights; Ports

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group); Taliban

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (57%) Carlotta Gall; nawab akbar khan bugti; balach
marri

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CHINA (92%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

REGION: Pakistan; Baluchistan (Pakistan); China; Iran; Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              45 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

At Human Rights Film Festival, Horror and Hope

BYLINE: By STEPHEN HOLDEN

SECTION: Section E; Column 2; The Arts/Cultural Desk; CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 884 words


Amid the somber procession of injustices paraded by the annual Human Rights
Watch International Film Festival, rays of light inevitably filter through.
Human resilience, determination and hope in the face of hardship and oppression
can never be underestimated. When you run across such radiance in a grim
environment, your heart surges with wonder.

''The Refugee All Stars,'' the opening film this evening of the 15-day festival
at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center, follows a hardy band of six
Sierra Leonean musicians who fled their country's civil war to settle in the
Sembakounya refugee camp in rural Guinea. For all their diversity in age and
background -- members of the group include a teenage rapper and a rhythm
guitarist in his 50's -- their stories, told in a reggae- and soul-tinged West
African style, knit into a powerful expression of common experience. As
harrowing as these personal tales may be, the music buoying them is uplifting.
The cliche bears repeating: music heals and creates community.

Directed by Zach Niles and Banker White, two documentarians from the Bay Area,
this no-frills movie, made over three years, follows the group, founded in 2002,
as it embarks on a concert tour of Guinean refugee camps during which the
members tell their stories and reunite with friends they had assumed had been
killed in the war. With enormous trepidation, they eventually decide to leave
the relative safety of Guinea and go back across the border to confront the
unknown in their homeland, where an uneasy peace has been reached.

Two more screenings of the film on June 22 will be accompanied by a discussion
and appearances by the band.

''Rain in a Dry Land,'' written and directed by Anne Makepeace, is a fascinating
companion to ''The Refugee All Stars'' because it illustrates the cultural chasm
between Africa and America. The movie follows the amazing journey of two Somali
Bantu families from a refugee camp in Kenya to the United States under the
sponsorship of two different relief organizations.

One settles in Atlanta, the other in Springfield, Mass. As they learn the basics
of life in the industrialized West (they have to be taught to walk up and down
stairs), individual personalities emerge. The particular strength of this film
is its intimacy, its insistence on portraying immigrants, too often lumped
together by documentaries as a huddled mass of suffering, as complicated,
high-strung people negotiating the personal boundaries between their traditions
and Western modernity.

In the Spanish documentary ''Switch Off,'' the indigenous Pehuenche-Mapuche
people of the Chilean Andes protest their displacement when a hydroelectric
project built by the Spanish energy company Endesa floods their legally
protected land in the Ralco Valley. This film shows a classic confrontation
between the weak and strong in which the strong, the impersonal forces of
globalization, will not be stopped.

Underlying this year's Human Rights Watch festival is the groundswell of
opposition to the war in Iraq, examined directly from three different
perspectives and indirectly in several other films. The unspoken parallels
between Iraq and Vietnam and the antiwar movements then and now are illustrated
by ''The Camden 28,'' a poignant documentary recalling the all-but-forgotten
trial of 28 Vietnam War opponents, mostly members of the Catholic Left, who were
prosecuted for breaking into a draft board office in August 1971. Thirty-five
years later, the participants, who were acquitted of any crime, proudly recall
their accomplishment.

Michael Winterbottom and Mat Whitecross's already famous docudrama, ''The Road
to Guantanamo'' (it opens in New York on June 23), dramatizes the ordeal of four
Pakistani-British who, traveling to Pakistan via Afghanistan to attend a
wedding, found themselves in the wrong place at the wrong time. They were
rounded up as suspected terrorists, and three of the four were eventually
shipped to Guantanamo Bay, where they were held for nearly two years without
charges. (The whereabouts of the fourth is not known.)

If the graphic depiction of their stomach-turning experiences of abuse and
humiliation makes no pretense to objectivity, the film remains a devastating
indictment of where the relaxing of safeguards against the inhumane treatment of
prisoners may have taken us.

James Longley's ''Iraq in Fragments,'' which already won three awards at the
Sundance Film Festival and was shown at the Tribeca Film Festival, observes
ordinary Iraqi citizens in three regions: Baghdad, the Shiite south and the
Kurdish north. Only the Kurds, grateful for being freed from the tyranny of
Saddam Hussein, speak kindly of the American presence. The cumulative portrait
is of a country relentlessly pulled apart by ethnic and religious differences.

Finally, ''Winter in Baghdad,'' a Spanish documentary filmed in the winter of
2004 and having its New York premiere, offers a ground-level view of ordinary
Iraqis, including a group of resourceful teenagers, surviving however they can
in the war-torn capital city. If the film is not overtly polemic, like almost
every documentary that examines the ravages of war on the people living through
it, its infinitely sad portrait of waste, destruction and suffering speaks for
itself.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An image from ''The Refugee All Stars,'' about musicians who
fled war. (Photo by Film Society of Lincoln Center)(pg. E1)
 From ''Rain in a Dry Land,'' about Somali Bantu families in America. (Photo by
Film Society of Lincoln Center)(pg. E2)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (91%); FILM (91%); MUSIC (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%);
SINGERS & MUSICIANS (90%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (90%); FESTIVALS (90%);
REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%); FILM DIRECTORS (89%);
IMMIGRATION (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); ARTISTS &
PERFORMERS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); CELEBRITIES (76%); FOLK & WORLD MUSIC
(75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (70%); HIP HOP
CULTURE (70%); RAP MUSIC (70%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (70%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER
(60%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (60%) Motion Pictures; Human Rights Watch
International Film Festival; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures;
Motion Pictures  ; Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures  ; Motion Pictures

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%)

PERSON: Stephen Holden

CITY: SPRINGFIELD, MA, USA (52%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); GUINEA (93%); SOMALIA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%);
AFRICA (79%); KENYA (79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              46 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Court Rejects Tactic Used in Cases Of Terrorism

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 28


Throwing down a new challenge to the government's tactics against terrorism, a
High Court judge ruled Wednesday that so-called control orders -- a form of
house arrest without trial -- were incompatible with European human rights laws.

The government is expected to appeal the ruling, issued by Justice Jeremy
Sullivan, while civil rights groups depicted it as a victory in a sharpening
duel over the state's efforts to amass ever greater powers, ostensibly to combat
terrorism.

The debate, mirroring similar concerns in the United States, began after the
Sept. 11 attacks on New York and the Pentagon. But it has become more intense
here following last July's bomb attacks in London.

If the government's appeal fails, the authorities will have to seek some other
mechanism to continue holding the six suspects -- a Briton and five Iraqis --
whose cases prompted the ruling.

In his decision, Justice Sullivan said control orders conflict with the right to
liberty under the European Convention on Human Rights. The authorities, thus,
had no power to make the orders, he ruled.

Control orders provide for the electronic tagging of terrorism suspects who have
not been charged with a crime, and for their confinement to their homes for most
of the day. So-called controlees may be forced to relinquish their passports and
permit unrestricted searches of their homes.

The government of Prime Minister Tony Blair has displayed increasing irritation
with the European human rights legislation, which was drawn up in 1950 and
written into British law in 1998.

Last month, Mr. Blair criticized a judge who cited human rights considerations
as an argument to prevent nine Afghan airplane hijackers from being deported to
Afghanistan. Mr. Blair called the decision ''an abuse of common sense.''

Earlier this week, David Cameron, the leader of the opposition Conservatives,
called for replacing the European code with a British bill of rights.

Control orders were introduced after Britain's highest court, the Law Lords,
ruled in 2004 that indefinite detention of foreign terrorism suspects in prisons
also contravened the European Convention. Control orders can be used against
both Britons and foreigners.

Natalia Garcia, a lawyer representing people held under control orders, said her
clients were ''prisoners without rights who have not been charged with an
offense and who, it is now clear, are denied their liberty for political
reasons.''

The government, for its part, argues that protecting the public against
terrorist attacks and controlling the movements of people it considers dangerous
outweigh such arguments.

''Public safety is our top priority,'' John Reid, the home secretary, said in a
statement in response to Wednesday's ruling.

In a separate case last April, Justice Sullivan found that the 2005 Prevention
of Terrorism Act, which authorized control orders, was also incompatible with
the European Convention because people held under control orders had not
received a fair hearing.

Both of Justice Sullivan's rulings are likely to be scrutinized at the Court of
Appeal, possibly on Monday. The six men will remain under the control orders
during the appeal.

The details of the six cases have not been made public, but they highlight the
difficulties the authorities have faced in marrying their security concerns to
human rights strictures championed by lawmakers and upheld by the courts.

The British man held under a control order was accused by the authorities of
planning to go to Iraq to fight British and United States forces.

Beyond the six men, another six people previously held under control orders have
appealed government plans to deport them, and are now being held on a form of
bail that restricts their movements in much the same way as control orders,
according to lawyers acting for them. The newest ruling does not apply to their
cases.

After the July 7 bombings, Mr. Blair threatened a series of new measures to
combat terrorism but did not put some of them into effect, like closing mosques
used for firebrand sermons and outlawing one Islamic group called Hizb ut
Tahrir.

But in a series of parliamentary contests, he has secured legislation extending
the period during which suspects may be held without charge, to 28 days from 14
days.

The law has also been changed to criminalize the glorification of terrorism,
raising worries that freedom of expression could be restricted.

The police have also been accused of using broader powers to stop and search
people on the street.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); APPEALS (90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%);
LEGISLATION (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JUDGES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); ELECTRONIC MONITOR SENTENCING (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); PRISONS (77%); ARRESTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); LAWYERS (74%);
BOMBINGS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (73%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (72%); DEPORTATION (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%) Terrorism;
Decisions and Verdicts; Freedom and Human Rights; Law and Legislation; Terrorism

PERSON: DAVID CAMERON (79%); TONY BLAIR (78%) Alan Cowell; Jeremy (Justice)
Sullivan

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Great Britain; Europe

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 4, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peru Asks Chile to Extradite Fujimori to Face a Range of Charges

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER and PASCALE BONNEFOY

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 588 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Jan. 3


The government of Peru formally requested Tuesday that Chile extradite former
President Alberto Fujimori, who governed Peru during the 1990's and has been
held in custody here ever since he unexpectedly arrived two months ago from
exile in Japan.

Mr. Fujimori, 67, is wanted in Peru on more than a dozen counts of corruption
and violating human rights. The accusations against him range from bearing the
responsibility for death squad killings and unauthorized wiretaps to paying
bribes and siphoning money from government ministries.

In the past, Mr. Fujimori has denied all of the charges against him, saying they
are part of a political campaign to discredit him. Peru is scheduled to hold an
election for president in April, and though Mr. Fujimori has been ruled
ineligible because of the charges, he had declared himself a candidate and was
apparently on his way back to Peru to campaign when he landed here in November.

Relations between Chile and Peru have been tense for more than a century, and
remain so because of disagreements over maritime boundaries. But at a news
conference, the Chilean foreign minister, Ignacio Walker, said the Fujimori case
was a purely legal matter, not an affair of state. ''The courts offer guarantees
of complete impartiality,'' he said. ''This should not perturb our bilateral
relations in any way.''

Leaders of Peruvian human rights organizations and relatives of death-squad
victims came from Lima to lobby for extradition. ''We hope that the Chilean
courts will act as consistently as they have recently with Pinochet,'' said
Francisco Soberon, a member of one such group, referring to the former Chilean
dictator who has been stripped of his immunity from prosecution for human rights
abuses and corruption offenses.

Under Chilean law, government lawyers will now question Mr. Fujimori about the
charges against him. Eventually, the case will move to the Chilean Supreme
Court, which may take months to rule. ''We are convinced there is more than
enough evidence than what the Chilean Supreme Court normally requires for an
indictment,'' Jose Miguel Vivanco, the executive director of Human Rights Watch,
said in an interview here. ''Denial of extradition would be incomprehensible,
inexcusable.''

When Mr. Fujimori arrived here, he was given a 90-day tourist visa, which
expires Feb. 7. Theoretically, Chile's president, Ricardo Lagos, could decide
not to renew the visa and have Mr. Fujimori expelled to Peru.

There are, however, local legal precedents that work in Mr. Fujimori's favor,
including some involving both Nazi war criminals and former associates of Mr.
Fujimori. When Argentine judges recently sought the arrest and extradition of
one of that country's former presidents, Carlos Saul Menem, after he went into
exile here, Chilean courts turned down their requests.

Mr. Fujimori, in fact, has hired Mr. Menem's lawyer, Gabriel Zaliasnik. Mr.
Zaliasnik said last month that his client had come here because he ''thought
that the Chilean authorities would not discriminate against him'' but that they
would ''treat him the same way they did with respect to Carlos Menem.''

Hours after his arrival here, Mr. Fujimori was detained because of the charges
he faces, and remains in custody at a police training school. His lawyer said
Mr. Fujimori had been learning to play guitar and cultivating a small rose
garden, but the Peruvian authorities complain that he has also been using
meetings with relatives and associates to direct his supporters' actions back
home.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (95%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CORRUPTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); EXECUTIVES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); ARRESTS
(78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHICS (76%);
INDICTMENTS (76%); BRIBERY (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (73%); IMMUNITY (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); LOBBYING
(73%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (72%); LAWYERS (71%); WIRETAPPING (71%); SUPREME COURTS
(71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%)
Extradition; Ethics; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Alberto Fujimori; Larry Rohter; Pascale Bonnefoy

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LIMA, PERU (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); PERU (97%); JAPAN (92%); ARGENTINA (79%)

REGION: Peru; Chile

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 27, 2006 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Report on Mexican 'Dirty War' Details Abuse by Military

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON; Antonio Betancourt contributed reporting for this
article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1290 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Feb. 26


A secret report prepared by a special prosecutor's office says the Mexican
military carried out a ''genocide plan'' of kidnapping, torturing and killing
hundreds of suspected subversives in the southern state of Guerrero during the
so-called dirty war, from the late 1960's to the early 1980's.

The report, which was not endorsed by the government of President Vicente Fox
but was leaked by its authors last week, says that the genocide plan was ordered
by President Luis Echeverria in 1970, and devised by Hermenegildo Cuenca Diaz,
who was defense minister at the time.

It is based partly on declassified documents from the Mexican military and for
the first time provides names of military officers and units involved in
destroying entire villages that the government suspected of serving as base
camps for the rebel leader Lucio Cabanas.

In those towns, soldiers rounded up all the men and boys, executed some on the
spot and detained others, and then used violence, including rape, to drive the
rest of the people away, the report says. Most of those detained suffered severe
torture, including beatings, electric shock and being forced to drink gasoline,
at military installations that were operated like ''concentration camps.''

''With this operation, a state policy was established in which all the
authorities connected to the army -- the president, ministers of state, and the
presidential guard, commanders of the military regions in Guerrero, and officers
and troops in their command -- participated in the violations of human rights
with the justification of pursuing a bad fugitive,'' the report says. ''Such an
open counter-guerrilla strategy could not have been possible without the
explicit consent and approval of the president.''

President Fox and the special prosecutor, Ignacio Carrillo Prieto, however, did
not endorse the report, which was presented to Mr. Fox in December. Mr.
Carrillo, who was appointed by Mr. Fox four years ago, said the government
refused to make it public without changes. The report is an unedited draft of a
document called The White Book, which is to be the government's historical
accounting of the egregious abuses by the long-ruling Institutional
Revolutionary Party.

In an interview on Friday, Mr. Carrillo said the draft of the report, prepared
by a team of 27 researchers, including former student militants and advocates
for the victims, was filled with bias and sprinkled with loaded language. He
said it put too much of the blame for the abuses of the ''dirty war'' on the
military, without describing the abuses committed by rebel groups. He said an
edited version of the report would be presented to Mr. Fox on Monday, and later
to the public.

''There are assertions in the draft that the army conducted the operations
alone,'' Mr. Carrillo said. ''But they did not conduct them alone. They
conducted them in response to orders from civilians above.''

The dispute over the draft of The White Book tore a deep rift in the special
prosecutor's office. The handful of international human rights investigators who
have seen the report said that it offered a glimpse of the chaos that has
crippled the special prosecutor's efforts and that it raised new questions about
Mr. Fox's commitment to bring officials responsible for past abuses to justice.

Mr. Fox, whose rise to power ended seven decades of authoritarian rule by the
Institutional Revolutionary Party, began his presidency with soaring promises to
end impunity. So far, he has delivered very little.

An effort to indict Mr. Echeverria, accused of genocide in the killings of
students in 1968 and 1971, failed when the Supreme Court found that the statute
of limitations for murder had passed and that there was not enough evidence to
prove genocide.

At the end of 2003, however, the Supreme Court opened the way for prosecutions
for ''dirty war'' crimes when it found that no statute of limitations applied to
political ''disappearances,'' presumed deaths in which no body has been found,
opening the way for former government officials to be prosecuted in these cases.

The government's National Human Rights Commission reported that up to 74
government officials could be liable for the disappearances of about 275 people.
The unedited draft of The White Book lists more than 500 missing people.

But the disputes over the document's contents, human rights investigators said,
make clear that there remain serious obstacles standing in the way of winning
justice.

Authors of the unedited draft of The White Book leaked parts of it to several
prominent Mexican writers. The authors said that they were disgruntled because
the government fired them without paying them for the last eight months and that
they were worried the report was going to be sanitized.

A copy of the document was also obtained by a Mexican magazine, Eme-Equis, which
published a report about the document on Sunday, and by the National Security
Archives, a private nonpartisan research group based in Washington.

Kate Doyle, director of the security archives' Mexico Project, said the report
was posted on the archive's Web site on Sunday to give victims and relatives
access to the information. She provided a copy of the report last week to The
New York Times.

''The fact that a version of the Special Prosecutor's final report is
circulating among a handful of prominent people yet is still closed and
inaccessible to those most affected by the violence is a state of affairs
reminiscent of Mexico's past,'' said a note on the Web site, ''when citizens
were routinely shut out of civic participation by a government determined to
keep them in the dark.''

Mr. Carillo acknowledged that his office had been unable to pay its workers,
saying that Attorney General Daniel Cabeza de Vaca was trying to ''asphyxiate''
his efforts by withholding his budget. But he said that the authors of the
report had been hired under contract, and that their contract ended when the
report was complete.

''We are attacked from above and below,'' Mr. Carillo said. ''From the front and
from the back.''

He said the editing of the document was aimed at correcting it, not ''watering
it down.''

''Of course the violations were committed as part of a policy of the state,''
Mr. Carrillo said, referring to the principal conclusion of the report, ''but it
was not one that was orchestrated by the armed forces. It was individuals and
groups inside the armed forces that were always accompanied by civilians.''

''For us, it is important to make that distinction.''

His comments echoed the official position of Mexico's military, which, unlike
militaries in Argentina and Chile, has never publicly acknowledged the
institution's leading role in this country's ''dirty war.'' Instead, a
succession of defense ministers, including the current one, Gen. Gerardo
Clemente Vega, have said only that certain officers and units operated out of a
sense of duty to stop a violent rebel uprising, and that abuses were committed
by soldiers and the guerrillas alike.

''This army did what it was told to do by the state,'' General Vega said in a
speech in February 2002.

Daniel Wilkinson of Human Rights Watch said the report provided the ''clearest
picture to date of the state's repressive machinery at work.'' The military
documents do not describe tortures and killings, Mr. Wilkinson said, and they
use coded language to describe illegal detentions. Still, Mr. Wilkinson said,
the military documents fill in blanks left by an already large trove of
declassified documents from the police and other government agencies.

Mr. Wilkinson said, ''The question now for the Fox administration is: when are
we going to see results in the prosecutions of these cases?''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 3, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Monday about a report that detailed abuses of
suspected subversives by the Mexican military during the country's ''dirty war''
from the late 1960's to the early 1980's misstated the name of the private
research group that posted the report on its Web site. It is the National
Security Archive, not Archives.

An article on Monday about a report that detailed abuses of suspected
subversives by the Mexican military during the country's ''dirty war'' from the
late 1960's to the early 1980's misstated the name of the private research group
that posted the report on its Web site. It is the National Security Archive, not
Archives.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); APPOINTMENTS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); WRITERS (71%);
APPROVALS (65%) Freedom and Human Rights; Kidnapping; Torture; Civil War and
Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (89%) Ginger Thompson; Vicente (Pres) Fox Quesada;
Ignacio Carrillo Prieto; Luis Echeverria; Hermenegildo Cuenca Diaz; Lucio
Cabanas

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (95%)

REGION: Mexico; Guerrero State (Mex); Mexico

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 21, 2006 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

No Proof of Secret C.I.A. Prisons, European Antiterror Chief Says

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 541 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, April 20


The European Union's antiterrorism chief told a hearing on Thursday that he had
not been able to prove that secret C.I.A. prisons existed in Europe.

''We've heard all kinds of allegations,'' the official, Gijs de Vries, said
before a committee of the European Parliament. ''It does not appear to be proven
beyond reasonable doubt.''

But Mr. de Vries came under criticism from some legislators who called the
hearing a whitewash. Kathalijne Buitenweg, a Dutch member of Parliament from the
Green Party, said that even without definitive proof, ''the circumstantial
evidence is stunning.''

''I'm appalled that we keep calling to uphold human rights while pretending that
these rendition centers don't exist and doing nothing about it,'' she said.

Many European nations were outraged after an article in The Washington Post in
November cited unidentified intelligence officials as saying that the C.I.A. had
maintained detention centers for terrorism suspects in eight countries,
including some in Eastern Europe. A later report by the advocacy group Human
Rights Watch cited Poland and Romania as two of the countries.

Both countries, as well as others in Europe, have denied the allegations. But
the issue has inflamed trans-Atlantic tensions.

Mr. de Vries said the European Parliament investigation had not uncovered rights
abuses despite more than 50 hours of testimony by rights advocates and people
who say they were abducted by C.I.A. agents. A similar investigation by the
Council of Europe, the European human rights agency, came to the same conclusion
in January -- though the leader of that inquiry, Dick Marty, a Swiss senator,
said then that there were enough ''indications'' to justify continuing the
investigation.

A number of legislators on Thursday challenged Mr. de Vries for not taking
seriously earlier testimony before the committee of a German and a Canadian who
gave accounts of being kidnapped and kept imprisoned by foreign agents.

The committee also heard Thursday from a former British ambassador to
Uzbekistan, Craig Murray, who said: ''I can attest to the willingness of the
U.S. and the U.K. to obtain intelligence that was got under torture in
Uzbekistan. If they were not willing, then rendition prisons could not have
existed.'' But Mr. Murray, who was recalled from his job in 2004 after
condemning the Uzbek authorities and criticizing the British and American
governments, told the committee that he had no proof that detention centers
existed within Europe.

He said he had witnessed such rendition programs in Uzbekistan, but he seemed to
back up Mr. de Vries's assertion when he said he was not aware of anyone being
taken to Uzbekistan from Europe. ''As far as I know, that never happened,'' he
said.

While he was ambassador, Mr. Murray made many public statements condemning the
government of President Islam Karimov of Uzbekistan for its poor human rights
record.

At the time, the Bush administration was using Uzbekistan as a base for military
operations in Afghanistan after the Sept. 11 attacks. Mr. Murray, who has
remained an outspoken critic of American and British policy toward Uzbekistan,
has since been criticized by Foreign Secretary Jack Straw of Britain for
breaching diplomatic protocol.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 26, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Friday about the failure of European Union
investigators to confirm the existence of secret C.I.A. prisons in Europe
misstated the interim findings of a separate inquiry conducted by the Council of
Europe, a human-rights monitoring organization. Those findings, reported in
January, said that the council had not uncovered evidence that such centers had
ever existed, but that there were enough indications to justify continuing the
inquiry. The findings did not assert that no rights abuses had been uncovered.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); EUROPEAN UNION (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (87%); TESTIMONY (78%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); TORTURE (74%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); TERRORISM (52%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (56%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (55%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); UZBEKISTAN (94%);
UNITED KINGDOM (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ROMANIA (79%);
POLAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%); GERMANY (73%); EASTERN EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              52 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dangers of the Gag Rule

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 191 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Abortion Rights in Latin America'' (editorial, Jan. 6):

Human Rights Watch's research in Latin America confirms that the criminalization
of abortion results in violations of women's most basic rights to equality,
life, health and physical integrity and does nothing to prevent unwanted
pregnancies.

As you mention, the Bush administration's reimposition of the global gag rule,
which prevents groups that get American money from speaking out against the
criminalization of abortion, has prevented democracies from freely debating a
central public health issue.

Worse, the administration has taken concrete steps to expand the global gag rule
conditions to financing intended for prevention of H.I.V. and AIDS. For example,
such conditions were included in a financing proposal for H.I.V. prevention work
in Kenya in November 2005.

The expansion of this rule to H.I.V. prevention financing would be a good way to
endanger women's lives, but a very bad way to prevent both abortion and the
spread of H.I.V.

Marianne Mollmann
New York, Jan. 6, 2006

The writer is a researcher in the Women's Rights Division of Human Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); ABORTION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (78%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (73%);
WRITERS (73%) Abortion

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (93%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Marianne Mollman

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (90%); KENYA (68%)

REGION: Latin America

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              53 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Necessity or Atrocity?

BYLINE: By Lance Morrow.

Lance Morrow is the author of ''Evil: An Investigation,'' and most recently of
''Second Drafts of History,'' a collection of his essays. He is working on a
biography of Henry Luce.

SECTION: Section 7; Column 2; Book Review Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1667 words


THE TORTURE DEBATE IN AMERICA

Edited by Karen J. Greenberg.

414 pp. Cambridge University Press.

Paper, $18.99.

TORTURE

Does It Make Us Safer? Is It Ever OK?

Edited by Kenneth Roth and Minky Worden;

Amy D. Bernstein, contributing editor.

218 pp. The New Press. $25.95.

Sept. 11 encouraged a corrupted version of American exceptionalism, among other
things. The superpower suddenly became the embattled victim, the injured
innocent -- which was how Americans imagined themselves when they declared their
independence in 1776. The Bush Justice Department's 2002 ''torture memos'' --
hardboiled pettifogging intended to give legal cover for getting rough, for
''taking the gloves off'' in America's war on terror -- were later repudiated by
the administration. But the memos amounted subliminally to a different sort of
declaration of independence, conjured up out of the founding Shinto: America,
claiming a special dispensation under Providence, would make its own rules,
especially if national security was at stake. The signal emanating from the
White House and the Pentagon borrowed a memory from the American subconscious:
we would not be contradicted by the tainted Old World, with its treaties and
conventions drawn up far away -- in Geneva, for example -- especially not when
such conventions would protect the likes of Al Qaeda.

New reality trumps old morality. Out of a new emergency of history, one
particularly menacing narrative took shape, darkened by the prestige of
apocalypse -- the ticking bomb. A script emerged, along these lines:

The Qaeda terrorist breaks under aggressive questioning. (The waterboard worked.
He came up spluttering and talking.) The interrogator relays information that,
just in time, snips the wire on the dirty nuke hidden in the heart of an
American city. The interrogator -- ''torturer,'' if you insist -- is actually a
hero. Thousands of lives are saved.

The ticking bomb may be hypothetical for now, but according to this scenario a
certain amount of rough stuff may already have paid off in the war on terror,
which, mind you, is a real war against ingeniously concealed fanatics traveling
the globe at will, capable of mass killing, anywhere, without warning. In this
context, due process, beyond a certain formal point, is for sissies. We live in
a newly vulnerable, porous world. Human rights fetishists, fighting the last war
(a state-to-state conflict, with old rules now rendered quaint) have become Al
Qaeda's useful idiots. What will the bien-pensants have to say if and when
another 9/11 -- or something worse -- occurs?

Who-whom?, Lenin asked. The rough-stuff rationale elicits an indignant
counterversion from advocates of human rights:

Abu Ghraib and Guantanamo have become outposts in a global American gulag in
which innocent and guilty alike are illegally detained and tortured, usually
with no yield of usable intelligence -- we squander the nation's moral capital
for trash. Torture is the refuge of the lazy, the stupid, the pseudo-tough. Real
intelligence services don't have to torture; they are intelligent enough to
learn the prisoner's language and culture. Why would a tortured man tell you the
truth? He will say anything to stop the pain. What happened to those mystic
chords of memory about all men -- all of them -- being created equal, endowed
with unalienable rights? What of America's respect for human dignity? For
itself? A couple of dozen prisoners, give or take, have died in the American
gulag -- not to speak of those whom the C.I.A. has disappeared into regimes far
less fastidious than our own.

The American superpower, many human rights advocates go on, has under George W.
Bush turned its back on civilized opinion from Aristotle on, has abandoned the
Geneva Conventions, America's 1994 antitorture law and a century's progress
toward basic rights, and in the process, compromised the ideals of freedom and
democracy for which the wars on terror and in Iraq are supposedly being fought.
America has become a pariah among nations by committing human rights crimes
similar to those for which Nazi government officials were tried and convicted at
Nuremberg.

Two new volumes of essays take up all of the questions contained in these
contrasting views, examining the subject of torture in the context of
international terrorism, studying it in various lights -- moral, legal,
political, historical, military, philosophical. ''The Torture Debate in
America,'' edited by Karen J. Greenberg, focuses especially on legal questions;
almost all of its contributors have been trained as lawyers, and are either
professors of law or human rights workers. ''Torture: Does It Make Us Safer? Is
It Ever OK?,'' edited by Kenneth Roth and Minky Worden, looks at torture from a
more global and historical perspective, ranging from ancient Greece and Rome,
through the Renaissance, to contemporary Israel and Algeria and Argentina and
Rwanda. Both collections proceed from an essentially left-brain mentality; the
right brain's script has only token defenders. Overall, the voices in these
books suffer from a tendency toward piousness: Torture bad, me virtuous.

Critics in both volumes dismiss the ticking-bomb scenario as chimerical -- a
puerile Hollywood hypothesis highly unlikely in actuality. The real danger of
the administration's anything-goes message, they say, was that it fatally
routinized and bureaucratized the coercive impulse, and once that message had
made its way down the chain of command to the grunt level, it ordained in effect
that all of Islam should be considered a ticking bomb. Any Muslim was fair game
for waterboarding.

Is that version overdone? Heather Mac Donald, a fellow of the conservative
Manhattan Institute, is one of the few contrarian contributors to either of the
volumes. She argues in ''The Torture Debate'' that Abu Ghraib, which she says
showed nothing more than ''the sadism of a prison out of control,'' generated
among the critics of President Bush a false ''master narrative -- call it 'the
torture narrative.' '' ''The actual interrogation techniques promulgated in the
war on terror,'' Mac Donald writes, were ''light years from real torture and
hedged around with bureaucratic safeguards.''

Mac Donald's defense of rough coercive interrogation contrasts the Americans'
''torture lite'' with the gruesome, mangling, sadistic and genuinely evil
ingenuity that torturers have historically shown, from the Inquisition to Pol
Pot. Training manuals for Al Qaeda, according to Chris Mackey in ''The
Interrogators,'' tell fighters that a failure to cooperate with Americans
carries no penalties and no risk of torture -- a sign of American weakness. Mac
Donald quotes an American interrogator who said: ''They realized: 'The Americans
will give us our Holy Book, they'll draw lines on the floor showing us where to
pray, we'll get three meals a day with fresh fruit, do Jazzercise with the
guards. . . . We can wait them out.' '' Gitmo as Club Med.

Conscience is a protean thing; it reprehends acts that, unofficially, it may
consider necessary under some circumstances. We have formal morals and
vernacular morals, like the good china and the everyday. Torture is that
paradox, an all-but-universal practice that is simultaneously a universal taboo,
like incest. In the real world lots of people marry their cousins.

IF you call something torture, you are officially bound tobe against it. So call
it ''interrogation.'' Almost everyone concedes that it is all right to try to
find out what a terrorist in your custody may know. But what methods are all
right? Sleep deprivation? Being forced to stand for long periods? Bright lights?
Hooding? Rock music? Menacing dogs? Cigarette burns? Thumbscrews? Electric
shock? Rape? Where do you draw the line?

Any wholesome mind thinking of torture sympathizes with the victim. (A diseased
mind identifies with the torturer.) Therefore, anyone inclined to countenance
rough physical or psychological treatment is bound to argue either that what he
has in mind is not really torture, but something short of that, temporary
discomfort maybe, or that a certain amount of brutal questioning is legitimate
because it is aimed not at the past but the future: it is inflicted not for
purposes of punishment or revenge, but to prevent a future catastrophe, another
9/11. The change of tense from past to future is what might turn the
interrogator from villain to hero.

But surely torture -- whether torture lite or torture satanic -- is, in the long
run, bad karma for the United States. Noah Feldman, a professor of law at New
York University School of Law, argues in one essay in ''The Torture Debate''
that ''whatever the merits of unilateralism in foreign policy, unilateralism in
law and morals is incoherent and dangerous.''

Saul Bellow's Mr. Sammler observed that different people living at the same time
may inhabit different centuries. What century does Osama bin Laden inhabit? In
what century is Guantanamo located? Who is pulling whom back to darkness and
barbarism? Being a victim of 9/11 gave Americans a kind of moral Get Out of Jail
Free card. But a superpower cannot plausibly play the victim for long; for many
of those who recognize the dilemmas surrounding torture, the card expired
somewhere between Shock and Awe and Abu Ghraib.

As for myself, after reading these two thoughtful collections, I would contend
that America should be setting an example of attention to international norms
and treaties, and respect for the opinions of others in the world. Torture is a
mug's game. You give up too much in the way of ideals for too little in the way
of information. Al Qaeda may not abide by the Geneva Conventions, but Americans
should do so scrupulously, ostentatiously, not in order to coddle terrorists but
to encourage the rule of law in a bad world. God presumably granted Americans
their dispensation only on condition that they aspire upward. When they head in
the other direction, the dispensation is rescinded.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An undated composite picture released Nov. 17 by the Iraqi
Islamic Party. It purports to show the marks of torture on men mistreated in
Iraqi prisons. (Photographs by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (91%); WAR ON TERROR (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TORTURE
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); DUE PROCESS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%);
AL-QAEDA (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); DIRTY BOMBS
(69%); NATIONAL SECURITY (67%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (67%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES
(67%); LITERATURE (64%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (55%) Books and Literature; Reviews

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: Lance Morrow; Karen J Greenberg; Kenneth Roth; Minky Worden

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Separate and Unequal for Gypsies

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 318 words


For all the difficulties Muslim immigrants face, Europe's most-abused group is
still, by far, the Gypsies. They are compelled to live in slums, shunted off to
inferior schools and denied jobs. They are subjected to pogroms, forced
sterilization and police abuse.

The view that Gypsies, also known as Roma, are capable of only playing the
violin and picking pockets is widely and deeply held, especially in Eastern
Europe. Many there still believe the Communist humbug that says discrimination
is found in America and South Africa, not in Europe.

Sadly, the European Court of Human Rights has just backed one of the worst forms
of discrimination: the nearly automatic placement of Gypsy children in dead-end
schools for the mentally handicapped. The case was brought by families of 18
Czech Gypsy children, but according to the European Roma Rights Center, based in
Budapest, similar discrimination exists throughout Eastern Europe. The Czech
government estimates that 75 percent of Gypsy children go to these schools, and
that 90 percent of the children in Czech remedial schools are Gypsies.

The court's majority, made up largely of Eastern Europeans, acknowledged the
problem but found no proof that bigotry was the cause. The president of the
panel, a Frenchman, voted with the majority but recommended that the case go to
the court's appeals body.

Decades ago, America painfully learned that government policies and social
attitudes could keep an underclass down, and that discrimination might exist
even though laws seemed fair. Europe has not yet absorbed these ideas. The Court
of Human Rights has long been reluctant to prohibit biased practices without
proof of intent to discriminate, allowing discrimination to hide behind another
name. The court should seize the opportunity to modernize and reverse a decision
that has anchored European race relations today well behind where America was in
1954.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHILDREN (90%); ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RACE & RACISM (78%); SLUM DWELLINGS (78%); FAMILY (77%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%); PUBLIC POLICY (68%); DISABLED PERSONS (54%) Education
and Schools; Editorials; Gypsies; Mental Health and Disorders; Special Education
(Handicapped)  ; Discrimination

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (83%) European Court of Human
Rights

COUNTRY: EASTERN EUROPE (94%); CZECH REPUBLIC (94%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES
(93%); HUNGARY (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

REGION: Czech Republic; Europe

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Symbol of Abu Ghraib Seeks to Spare Others His Nightmare

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Kirk Semple contributed reporting from Baghdad for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, March 8


Almost two years later, Ali Shalal Qaissi's wounds are still raw.

There is the mangled hand, an old injury that became infected by the shackles
chafing his skin. There is the slight limp, made worse by days tied in
uncomfortable positions. And most of all, there are the nightmares of his nearly
six-month ordeal at Abu Ghraib prison in 2003 and 2004.

Mr. Qaissi, 43, was prisoner 151716 of Cellblock 1A. The picture of him standing
hooded atop a cardboard box, attached to electrical wires with his arms
stretched wide in an eerily prophetic pose, became the indelible symbol of the
torture at Abu Ghraib, west of Baghdad. [The American military said Thursday
that it would abandon the prison and turn it over to the Iraqi government.]

''I never wanted to be famous, especially not in this way,'' he said, as he sat
in a squalid office rented by his friends here in Amman. That said, he is now a
prisoner advocate who clearly understands the power of the image: it appears on
his business card.

At first glance, there is little to connect Mr. Qaissi with the infamous picture
of a hooded man except his left hand, which he says was disfigured when an
antique rifle exploded in his hands at a wedding several years ago. A disfigured
hand also seems visible in the infamous picture, and features prominently in Mr.
Qaissi's outlook on life. In Abu Ghraib, the hand, with two swollen fingers, one
of them partly blown off, and a deep gash in the palm, earned him the nickname
Clawman, he said.

A spokesman for the American military in Iraq declined to comment, saying it
would violate the Geneva Conventions to disclose the identity of prisoners in
any of the Abu Ghraib photographs, just as it would to discuss the reasons
behind Mr. Qaissi's detention.

But prison records from the Coalition Provisional Authority, which governed Iraq
after the invasion, made available to reporters by Amnesty International, show
that Mr. Qaissi was in American custody at the time. Beyond that, researchers
with both Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International say they have interviewed
Mr. Qaissi and, along with lawyers suing military contractors in a class-action
suit over the abuse, believe that he is the man in the photograph.

Under the government of Saddam Hussein, Mr. Qaissi was a mukhtar, in effect a
neighborhood mayor, a role typically given to members of the ruling Baath Party
and closely tied to its nebulous security services. After the fall of the
government, he managed a parking lot belonging to a mosque in Baghdad.

He was arrested in October 2003, he said, because he loudly complained to the
military, human rights organizations and the news media about soldiers' dumping
garbage on a local soccer field. But some of his comments suggest that he is at
least sympathetic toward insurgents who fight American soldiers.

''Resistance is an international right,'' he said.

Weeks after complaining about the garbage, he said, he was surrounded by
Humvees, hooded, tied up and carted to a nearby base before being transferred to
Abu Ghraib. Then the questioning began.

''They blamed me for attacking U.S. forces,'' he said, ''but I said I was
handicapped; how could I fire a rifle?'' he said, pointing to his hand. ''Then
he asked me, 'Where is Osama bin Laden?' And I answered, 'Afghanistan.' ''

How did he know? ''Because I heard it on TV,'' he replied.

He said it soon became evident that the goal was to coax him to divulge names of
people who might be connected to attacks on American forces. His hand, then
bandaged, was often the focus of threats and inducements, he said, with
interrogators offering to fix it or to squash it at different times. After
successive interrogations, he said he was finally given a firm warning: ''If you
don't speak, next time, we'll send you to a place where even dogs don't live.''

Finally, he said, he was taken to a truck, placed face down, restrained and
taken to a special section of the prison where he heard shouts and screams. He
was forced to strip off all his clothes, then tied with his hands up high. A
guard began writing on his chest and forehead, what someone later read to him
as, ''Colin Powell.''

In all, there were about 100 cells in the cellblock, he said, with prisoners of
all ages, from teenagers to old men. Interrogators were often dressed in
civilian clothing, their identities strictly shielded.

The prisoners were sleep deprived, he said, and the punishments they faced
ranged from bizarre to lewd: an elderly man was forced to wear a bra and pose; a
youth was told to hit the other adults; and groups of men were organized in
piles. There was the dreaded ''music party,'' he said, in which prisoners were
placed before loudspeakers. Mr. Qaissi also said he had been urinated on by a
guard. Then there were the pictures.

''Every soldier seemed to have a camera,'' he said. ''They used to bring us
pictures and threaten to deliver them to our families''

Today, those photographs, turned into montages and slideshows on Mr. Qaissi's
computer, are stark reminders of his experiences in the cellblock. As he scanned
through the pictures, each one still instilling shock as it popped on the
screen, he would occasionally stop, his voice breaking as he recounted the story
behind each photograph.

In one, a young man shudders in fear as a dog menaces him.

''That's Talib,'' he said. ''He was a young Yemeni, a student of the Beaux-Arts
School in Baghdad, and was really shaken.''

In another, Pfc. Lynndie R. England, who was convicted last September of
conspiracy and maltreatment of Iraqi prisoners, poses in front of a line of
naked men, a cigarette in her mouth. ''That's Jalil, Khalil and Abu Khattab,''
he said. ''They're all brothers, and they're from my neighborhood.''

Then there is the picture of Mr. Qaissi himself, standing atop a cardboard box,
taken 15 days into his detention. He said he had only recently been given a
blanket after remaining naked for days, and had fashioned the blanket into a
kind of poncho.

The guards took him to a heavy box filled with military meal packs, he said, and
hooded him. He was told to stand atop the box as electric wires were attached to
either hand. Then, he claims, they shocked him five times, enough for him to
bite his tongue.

Specialist Sabrina Harman was convicted last May for her role in abusing
prisoners at Abu Ghraib, but she was accused of threatening to electrocute a
hooded inmate on a box if he stepped off it, not of shocking him while he was
atop it.

After almost six months in Abu Ghraib, Mr. Qaissi said, he was loaded onto a
truck, this time without any shackles, but still hooded. As the truck sped out
of the prison, another man removed the hood and announced that they had been
freed.

With a thick shock of gray hair and melancholy eyes, Mr. Qaissi is today a
self-styled activist for prisoners' rights in Iraq. Shortly after being released
from Abu Ghraib in 2004, he started the Association of Victims of American
Occupation Prisons with several other men immortalized in the Abu Ghraib
pictures.

Financed partly by Arab nongovernmental organizations and private donations, the
group's aim is to publicize the cases of prisoners still in custody, and to
support prisoners and their families with donations of clothing and food.

Mr. Qaissi has traveled the Arab world with his computer slideshows and
presentations, delivering a message that prisoner abuse by Americans and their
Iraqi allies continues. He says that as the public face of his movement, he
risks retribution from Shiite militias that have entered the Iraqi police forces
and have been implicated in prisoner abuse. But that has not stopped him.

Last week, he said, he lectured at the American University in Beirut, on Monday
he drove to Damascus to talk to students and officials, and in a few weeks he
heads to Libya for more of the same.

Despite the cruelty he witnessed, Mr. Qaissi said he harbored no animosity
toward America or Americans. ''I forgive the people who did these things to
us,'' he said. ''But I want their help in preventing these sorts of atrocities
from continuing.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 18, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article last Saturday profiled Ali Shalal Qaissi,
identifying him as the hooded man forced to stand on a box, attached to wires,
in a photograph from the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal of 2003 and 2004. He
was shown holding such a photograph. As an article on Page A1 today makes clear,
Mr. Qaissi was not that man.

  The Times did not adequately research Mr. Qaissi's insistence that he was the
man in the photograph. Mr. Qaissi's account had already been broadcast and
printed by other outlets, including PBS and Vanity Fair, without challenge.
Lawyers for former prisoners at Abu Ghraib vouched for him. Human rights workers
seemed to support his account. The Pentagon, asked for verification, declined to
confirm or deny it.

Despite the previous reports, The Times should have been more persistent in
seeking comment from the military. A more thorough examination of previous
articles in The Times and other newspapers would have shown that in 2004
military investigators named another man as the one on the box, raising
suspicions about Mr. Qaissi's claim.

The Times also overstated the conviction with which representatives of Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International expressed their view of whether Mr.
Qaissi was the man in the photograph. While they said he could well be that man,
they did not say they believed he was.

GRAPHIC: Photos: The business card of Ali Shalal Qaissi, a Abu Ghraib torture
victim, and the advocacy group for former prisoners that he helped start. (pg.
A8)
 Ali Shalal Qaissi in Amman, Jordan, recently with the picture of himself
standing atop a box and attached to electrical wires in Abu Ghraib. (Photo by
Shawn Baldwin for The New York Times)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); LAW OF
WAR (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); ARMED FORCES
(74%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (69%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%);
WAR & CONFLICT (64%); GENOCIDE (63%); CLASS ACTIONS (60%); ARRESTS (60%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (50%); SOCCER
(50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Torture; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Photography

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (54%) Hassan M Fattah; Ali Shalal Qaissi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%); AMMAN, JORDAN (87%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); JORDAN (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 9, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jailed Sudanese Refugees Pose a Moral Puzzle for Israel

BYLINE: By DINA KRAFT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 987 words

DATELINE: TEL AVIV, June 8


Israel sees itself as both a refuge for Jews fleeing persecution and a light
unto nations. So when it was disclosed here that 200 Sudanese, many fleeing the
bloodshed of the Darfur region, had found their way to Israel only to be locked
up in prison, controversy ensued.

The government says that because Sudan is on the American State Department's
list of terrorist countries, it fears that terrorists could be lurking among the
Sudanese here. But human rights groups have challenged the detentions in court,
and now some of Israel's most loyal supporters are saying the policy is wrong
because it allows fear to overwhelm moral obligation.

This week, the Nobel laureate Elie Wiesel, a Holocaust survivor, joined the
protesters.

''We as Jews are obliged to help not only Jews,'' Mr. Wiesel said in an
interview published in the daily Haaretz. ''History constantly chooses a capital
of human suffering, and Darfur is today the capital of human suffering. Israel
should absorb refugees from Darfur, even a symbolic number.''

About a third of the detained Sudanese are from Darfur, a third are Christians
fleeing Muslim persecution and the rest fled Sudan's grinding poverty or left
for other reasons.

The 1954 enemy infiltrators law under which the Sudanese were arrested allows
the government to hold them without judicial review to determine if they are
security threats. A small number of Sudanese, mostly minors or mothers with very
young children, are confined to communal farms and villages.

Human rights groups here have petitioned the Supreme Court to press the
government to give hearings to the detainees, some of whom have been held for
about a year. The government is due to respond to the court any day.

The historian Yehuda Bauer, one of Israel's leading experts on the Holocaust,
has added his name to the human rights groups' appeal. He said the Sudanese
should be given the right to temporary political asylum until Israel or another
country agrees to give them a home.

He said that in 1949, the very young state of Israel's lobbying resulted in the
addition of a clause to the Geneva Conventions requiring countries to
differentiate between refugees from enemy countries and enemy citizens, citing
the example of Jewish refugees seeking safety in England from Nazi Germany.

''I feel that as a Jewish state we have special responsibility to people fleeing
from genocide,'' he said in a telephone interview.

In a letter that underscores the effect of the Holocaust on the debate, Avner
Shalev, chairman of Yad Vashem, Israel's official Holocaust Memorial, wrote to
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert in an effort to resolve the problem.

''As members of the Jewish people, for whom the memory of the Holocaust burns,
we cannot stand by as the refugees from the genocide in Darfur hammer on our
doors,'' he wrote.

Some human rights advocates in Israel say the government is worried that if it
takes a softer stance toward the detainees, throngs of Sudanese will stream
across the border.

Mark Regev, a spokesman for the Israeli Foreign Ministry, responded to the
growing criticism of the detentions by saying Thursday that Israel understood
the plight of the Sudanese. ''We don't want to see these people incarcerated,''
he said. But he added that the government feared a flood of migrants.

''We are a small country with a small population,'' he said. ''We might not be
able to deal with the numbers.''

Mr. Regev said Israel took in Vietnamese boat people in 1977 and ethnic
Albanians, who were Muslim, from Kosovo in 1999. Israel also took in Bosnian
Muslims in 1993.

He and other Israeli officials said the Sudanese detainees would not be deported
to their country.

The United Nations has been interviewing the Sudanese in Israel, trying to
determine who should be granted refugee status and what countries might take
them in. But it could take months, or longer, to find people a home.

At Maasiyahu Prison, a low-security lockup in central Israel, the Sudanese are
being held in a section for foreign workers where conditions are said to be
better than in criminal wards. They are allowed to use cellphones and are free
to move around the prison wing. The detainees spend their days playing chess,
watching television and napping. Huge industrial fans provide some relief from
the heat.

For Yassin, 30, who like most of those interviewed in the prison would give only
his first name, the 11 months he has spent in custody has been a terrible
surprise.

''I expected everyone would have heard of the genocide in Darfur,'' he said. ''I
was sure they would help me. I'm just looking for protection, but not protection
in prison.''

Yassin, a soft-spoken architect, left Darfur three years ago when
government-sponsored militias attacked his village. He and his relatives fled
into the mountains, but militiamen tracked them down and killed his father, an
uncle and a cousin, he said. He ran.

''I kept on running for two days. I had no food, but even if I had, I would not
have been able to eat after what I saw,'' he said, sitting in a visiting room, a
windowless pink hall with fluorescent lights and scattered tables and chairs.
Yassin said he was later arrested, beaten and told he would be killed if he did
not become a government informer. He said he was eventually smuggled into Israel
from Egypt by Bedouins.

Musa, another detainee, is an orphan from Darfur who gives his age as ''about
17'' and keeps his eyes fixed on the floor as he talks. He has been on the run
since gunmen shot and killed the aunt who reared him and set fire to the family
hut, burning his young cousins alive, he says.

His long escape led him through Egypt and across the Sinai Desert into Israel,
he said.

''I am all alone,'' he said. ''I have no father, no mother, no relatives. I
should have been dead a long time ago, but I've been running from place to place
and now have ended up in prison.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Musa, standing at center, an orphan held at Maasiyahu Prison in
Israel, fled Sudan after gunmen killed the aunt who reared him and his cousins.
(Photo by Rina Castelnuovo for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); REFUGEES (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); PRISONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); RELIGION (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); TERRORISM
(71%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); PETITIONS (70%); CHILDREN (69%); AWARDS & PRIZES
(69%); HISTORY (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); ARRESTS (65%); JUDICIAL REVIEW
(55%); NOBEL PRIZES (54%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (51%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (59%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES (92%); ENGLAND (79%); GERMANY
(66%)

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              59 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                                 Early Edition

Serbia Begins Prosecuting Some War Crimes Cases

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia


Slowly, Serbia is prosecuting some of the war crimes cases from the Kosovo
fighting of 1999 and the 1992-95 conflict in Bosnia, even while it has failed to
deliver major suspects to the tribunal in The Hague.

Seven cases have been brought to trial so far. In the past two years, five of
them in a war crimes court that has been financed partly by the United States.
Prosecutors say they have plans to bring dozens more cases to trial. They and
others following the cases say the trials suggest that the country is beginning,
at least tentatively, to acknowledge its recent history.

These trials have highlighted some of the most brutal acts reportedly carried
out by Serbian forces during wars in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo.

The accusations include the massacre of 192 Croatian men taken from a hospital
where they were seeking refuge in the town of Vukovar in 1991 and the killing of
an extended Albanian family in Kosovo in 1999, when 45 people, including 14
children, a pregnant woman and a 90-year-old woman, were attacked with grenades
and then shot.

''It points to the readiness of the state and judiciary to face the past,'' said
Dragoljub Stankovic, one of five deputy prosecutors assigned to Serbia's war
crimes department.

Despite such claims and praise from some of the victims' families and human
rights groups, there have been notable omissions.

While The Hague tribunal has indicted senior Serbian police and army officers
for crimes committed during the 1999 Kosovo conflict, the Serbian courts have
focused on midranking officers, human rights groups and diplomats here say. As a
result, they say a large number of senior officers have not been challenged
about their role in the war.

Also, one prominent case, involving the killing of three American brothers in
1999, appears to be stuck.

''In my opinion, many commanders of police stations were involved in or ordered
killings in Kosovo,'' said Natasa Kandic, a lawyer and the director of the
Humanitarian Law Center, a human rights group based in Belgrade.

Some senior police and army officers accused by human rights groups of ordering
the crimes, or failing to prevent them, have remained at their posts.

The officers include Goran Radosavljevic, who was the commander of Serbia's
special units during the Kosovo fighting and was recently the commander of the
Serbian gendarmerie. In addition, the senior police officer in charge of war
crimes investigations, Vozdan Gagic, was a member of the joint police and army
command during the Kosovo campaign, a position in which he would have known
about war crimes taking place, Ms. Kandic said.

''It was impossible for him not to know,'' she said.

Both Mr. Radosavljevic and Mr. Gagic have denied any involvement in war crimes.

''The army and the police are powerful, and barely reformed, institutions,''
said Bogdan Ivanisevic, the Human Rights Watch representative in Belgrade.
''Addressing the responsibility of the senior officers would be quite a bite for
the prosecutors, something they could do only if they felt supported by the
government.''

The case of the Americans involves the Bytyqi brothers, ethnic Albanians from
Long Island who had been among 400 or so Albanian-Americans who had gone to join
the fighting in Kosovo in 1999. Their bodies were found in a mass grave near a
police training camp in 2001. Their hands were bound behind their backs and they
had bullet wounds in the back of the head.

Prosecutors believe they know most of the details about the days leading up to
their killing. They say the brothers were held by the Serbian police after they
strayed across Kosovo's boundary on June 26, 1999, just weeks after the end of
the Kosovo conflict. The three, Ylli, Agron and Mehmet Bytyqi, were in their
20's. They were ordered jailed for 15 days.

While they were serving their sentences, two members of a special police unit
came to move them from jail to their training camp, according to testimony given
to prosecutors by Sreten Popovic, then deputy commander of the camp. Mr. Popovic
said he acted after hearing from Serbia's assistant minister for internal
affairs, Gen. Vlastimir Djordjevic.

Mr. Popovic, who is currently the commander of the gendarmerie in Nis, Serbia's
third-largest city, has so far escaped prosecution. The investigation into the
brothers' deaths shows little sign of reaching trial soon.

Officials at the United States Embassy in Belgrade said they believed that the
brothers had been killed because they were American and members of the Kosovo
Liberation Army. They say prosecutors have sufficient evidence to bring the case
to trial.

R. Nicholas Burns, the State Department's under secretary for political affairs,
said in a recent interview that the outcome of the investigation into the Bytyqi
brothers' deaths would influence the United States government's view as to
Serbia's willingness to handle domestic war crimes cases.

''The authorities already have collected substantial evidence relating to the
illegal detention and/or killings,'' he said. ''It is time to bring the
perpetrators to justice.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARMIES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); LAW OF WAR
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); GENDARMERIE (78%);
PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (77%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(66%); POLICE FORCES (64%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); CROATIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%);
ALBANIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              65 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Investigators for U.N. Urge U.S. to Close Guantanamo

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1141 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Feb. 16


Human rights investigators working for the United Nations called on the United
States on Thursday to shut down the Guantanamo Bay camp and either try its
detainees quickly or free them.

Arguing that many of the interrogation and detention practices used in
Guantanamo amounted to torture, the investigators' report said those who ordered
or condoned abusive practices should be brought to justice ''up to the highest
level of military and political command.''

The 54-page report, based largely on interviews with former detainees and
publicized information, including news accounts, is not legally binding. But it
urged that Guantanamo be closed, ''without further delay,'' and called for
American personnel to be trained in international standards for the treatment of
detainees.

The White House promptly dismissed the report, suggesting that the investigators
had based their conclusions on false information spread by terror suspects.

''I think what we are seeing is a rehash of allegations that have been made by
lawyers representing some of the detainees,'' Scott McClellan, the White House
spokesman, said Thursday.

''We know that Al Qaeda detainees are trained in trying to disseminate false
allegations.''

The report, released Thursday after a draft circulated this week, said the
United States should immediately revoke all ''special interrogation techniques''
authorized by the Defense Department. It called upon the United States ''to
refrain from any practice amounting to torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment, discrimination on the basis of religion and violations
of the right to health and freedom of religion.''

Mr. McClellan asserted that the American military already treated detainees
humanely. ''These are dangerous terrorists that we are talking about who are
there,'' he said. ''Nothing has changed in terms of our views.''

The report was requested by the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva
and compiled by five independent scientists, lawyers and academics in the last
18 months. As such, it does not prompt any official United Nations action, and
Secretary General Kofi Annan, who has no direct authority over the commission,
distanced himself from its specific recommendations.

''I cannot say that I necessarily agree with everything in the report,'' he said
Thursday. ''But the basic point that one cannot detain individuals in perpetuity
and that charges have to be brought against them and their being given a chance
to explain themselves and be prosecuted, charged or released, I think is
something that is common under any legal system.''

Mr. Annan added that ''sooner or later there will be a need to close Guantanamo,
and I think it will be up to the government to decide hopefully to do it as soon
as possible.''

In a response included in an appendix to the report, the United States rejected
the findings, noting that the investigators had turned down an invitation to
visit Guantanamo Bay and accusing them of using information selectively to
support their conclusions.

Among the practices the report said amounted to torture were the use of
excessive force during transportation, force-feeding detainees through nasal
tubes during hunger strikes, shackling, chaining and hooding prisoners, placing
them in solitary confinement, subjecting them to severe temperatures while naked
and threatening them with dogs.

It also expressed ''utmost concern'' about ''attempts by the United States
administration to redefine 'torture' in the framework of the struggle against
terrorism in order to allow certain interrogation techniques that would not be
permitted under the internationally accepted definition of torture.''

The United States is holding about 500 detainees at its Guantanamo Bay naval
base on the coast of Cuba, and some have been there since the camp was opened in
early 2002. Some of the detainees' lawyers, however, have cited Pentagon
documents as showing that only 45 percent of the prisoners have committed a
hostile act against the United States or its allies, and that only 8 percent
have been classified as Qaeda fighters.

The report for the Human Rights Commission was based on the work of the five
United Nations rapporteurs, or investigators, who look into accusations of
arbitrary detention, torture and other abuses.

They said they based their conclusions on interviews with former detainees now
in Britain, France and Spain, lawyers representing current inmates, news
accounts, reports from nongovernmental organizations and answers to a
questionnaire submitted to the United States government.

The investigators had been seeking permission to go to Guantanamo Bay since June
2004, and obtained it this fall to go in December. But they turned down the
invitation when the United States said they would not be permitted to talk to
individual detainees. Such interviews were a ''totally nonnegotiable
precondition'' for the trip, the investigators said.

The report said that the ''executive branch of the United States government
operates as judge, prosecutor and defense counsel of the Guantanamo Bay
detainees,'' and asserted that this constituted ''serious violations of various
guarantees of the right to a fair trial.''

In a Jan. 31 letter appended to the report, Kevin E. Moley, the American
ambassador to the United Nations offices in Geneva, said the United States
objected to most of the report as ''largely without merit and not based clearly
on facts.''

He said ''it selectively includes only those factual assertions needed to
support those conclusions and ignores other facts that would undermine those
conclusions.''

The investigators report to the United Nations Human Rights Commission in Geneva
but are not employees of it and have only their expenses paid by the United
Nations.

The commission itself has come under intense criticism for admitting notorious
rights violators like Sudan and Zimbabwe, and intense efforts are under way in
New York to replace it with a more credible entity before its annual meeting in
March.

But recommendations for change have not included the investigators, and the
United States has cited them in the past as reliable monitors of rights
violations.

On Monday, after a draft of the investigators' report began to circulate, Sean
McCormack, the State Department spokesman, said, ''The United States has tried
to work with these individuals, these rapporteurs who have gone around the world
and done some good work in other places, but in this case, I'm sorry to say it's
just not the case.''

The prisoners held at Guantanamo have been classified as enemy combatants and
have not been brought before American courts. As a result, many remain in a
state of legal uncertainty, and to protest their indefinite confinement some
have tried suicide and engaged in hunger strikes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); CRUEL &
UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); LAWYERS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); NAVIES
(71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (68%); AL-QAEDA (68%); RELIGION (64%) Terrorism;
Freedom and Human Rights; Torture; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AL-QAEDA (55%) United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (93%); SWITZERLAND (73%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Challenge for U.S.: Iraq's Handling of Detainees

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG; Khalid al-Ansary and Max Becherer contributed reporting
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: TRAINING; Pg.
1

LENGTH: 2114 words

DATELINE: CAMP JUSTICE, Iraq


The blindfolded detainees in the dingy hallway line up in groups of five for
their turn to see a judge, like schoolchildren outside the principal's office.

Each meeting lasts a few minutes. The judge rules whether the detainee will go
free, face trial or be held longer at this Iraqi base in northern Baghdad. But
Firas Sabri Ali, squeezed into a fetid cell just hundreds of yards from the
judge's office, has watched the inmates come and go for four months without his
name ever being called.

He is jailed, along with two brothers and his father, solely as collateral, he
says. The Iraqi forces are hunting another brother, suspected of being an
insurgent. The chief American medic here says that he believes Mr. Ali to be
innocent but that it is up to the Iraqi police to decide whether to free him.
The Iraqis acknowledged that they were holding Mr. Ali until they captured his
brother.

''I hope they catch him, because then I'll be released,'' said Mr. Ali, 38, a
soft-spoken man who until his arrest worked for a British security company to
support his wife and three sons. ''They said, 'You must wait.' I told them:
'There's no law. This is injustice.' ''

Such is the challenge facing the American military as it tries to train the
Iraqi security forces to respect the rule of law. Three years after the invasion
of Iraq, American troops are no longer simply teaching counterinsurgency
techniques; they are trying to school the Iraqis in battling a Sunni-led
rebellion without resorting to the tactics of a ''dirty war,'' involving
abductions, torture and murder.

The legacy of Abu Ghraib hampers the American military. But the need to instill
respect for human rights has gained a new urgency as Iraq grapples with the
threat of full-scale civil war and continuing sectarian bloodletting. It is not
uncommon now for dozens of bodies, with hands bound and gunshot wounds to the
heads, to surface across Baghdad on any given day.

The Americans are pushing the Shiite-dominated Iraqi forces to ask judges for
arrest warrants, restrain their use of force and ensure detainees' rights.

The Iraqi officers at this base, the headquarters of the Public Order Forces, a
police paramilitary division with a history of torture and abuse, are gradually
changing their behavior, American military advisers say. Cases of detainee abuse
have declined in recent months, they say.

But detainees can still languish for months without any hope of a legal appeal
because of a shortage of judges or, in the case of Mr. Ali, an unwillingness by
the Iraqi police to allow detainees to see a judge. Overcrowding is chronic,
because the Justice Ministry has been slow in building new prisons.

''The tradition in this country of a law enforcement agency that had absolute
power over people, we've got to break them of that,'' said Maj. Andrew Creel,
the departing joint operations officer here. ''I think it'll take years. You
can't change a cultural mind-set overnight.''

Control of the Interior Ministry, which oversees the police, has become one of
the stumbling blocks in forming the new national government, with Sunni Arab
politicians accusing Shiite leaders of running militias and death squads from
the ministry.

Last fall the American military raided at least two police prisons where it said
detainees had been abused. This year's State Department human rights report
noted that the police, especially the paramilitary forces, had been accused of
torture and killings.

Those forces number 17,500. This base -- in the heart of Kadhimiya, just blocks
away from a golden-domed Shiite shrine -- serves as the headquarters for one of
the two major paramilitary branches, the 7,700-member Public Order Forces. An
11-member American military team began advising the Iraqi commanders here last
spring. It moved into the base in October and is now handing over its duties to
a new team.

Here, 650 prisoners are packed into four spartan rooms. They complain of a lack
of food and regular access to showers and toilets. A foul odor wafts from each
holding pen. To cope with the overcrowded conditions, the police converted the
dining hall into a cell; the three other areas were originally built as storage
rooms.

Camp Justice was never meant to hold prisoners for more than a few weeks. Iraqi
law says prisoners to be tried are to be transferred to a Justice Ministry
penitentiary after interrogation. But the ministry has been unable to build
enough jails to keep pace with arrests. It has 10 centers across Iraq, which
hold 7,500 detainees, and an additional 7 are expected to be built, a ministry
spokesman said.

So the detainee population at temporary police prisons like the one here,
separate from those of the Justice Ministry, has ballooned to more than 10,000
in Baghdad alone, spread across a shadowy network of about 10 centers, an
Interior Ministry official said.

That has ignited concerns among American officials. But Col. Gordon Davis Jr.,
the head of Camp Justice's departing advisory team, praised the Iraqi commander
here, Maj. Gen. Mehdi Sabih Hashem al-Garawi, for showing a willingness to
embrace human rights. The general has, for instance, assigned the Iraqi
division's only medic to look after the detainees.

''I won't say he's gone 180, but he's realized that the best way of getting
information is not to beat or abuse detainees,'' Colonel Davis said as he stood
in the operations room, the walls plastered with maps of Baghdad.

''The current generation has been brought up with a certain code and a certain
tolerance for abuse,'' he said in another interview. ''They've got to be
constantly worked on.''

The academy for recruits to the Public Order Forces has increased the time spent
on human rights training to 20 hours from about eight last October, the colonel
said.

Lt. Col. Dhia al-Shammari, the chief interrogator and a supervisor of detainee
operations, said: ''Beating or insults, any policeman can do. Professionals
don't use them. This is not allowed, and I myself reject it.''

Certain Public Order units have had fearsome reputations, and residents of
Baghdad and nearby towns have complained of abuse and torture. From April to
June of last year, American advisers found prisoners with bruises at the
headquarters of the Second Brigade every couple of weeks, Colonel Davis said.

When confronted with incidents of abuse, the colonel said, the Iraqi brigade
commander told the Americans, ''Are you more worried about our enemies or about
us?''

That officer was replaced at the urging of the Americans. So was a commander of
the Third Brigade, in Salman Pak. Prisoner abuse has been relatively rare here
at the division level, the advisers say, and became even scarcer after the
American team moved in last fall. Before that, the advisers had been living at
an American base. If the Americans saw a bruised prisoner back then, they often
kept quiet for fear of alienating the Iraqi officers, said Master Sgt. Joseph
Kaiser, a medic who regularly examines the detainees.

Now the Americans can be more direct, advisers say. The Americans have trained a
32-man guard force. Sergeant Kaiser helps supervise the Iraqi medic who examines
the detainees daily.

The Iraqi division's intelligence chief ''said we have to treat detainees, since
they're subjected to visits by the press and human rights groups,'' said the
medic, Hazem, 32, who declined to give his full name for security reasons. ''He
said to me, 'Your main job is to treat the patients, not to check if they're
terrorists.' If I know they're terrorists and I'm told to kill them, I'd kill
them. But I do what my job requires.''

Checking on the Detainees

  On a balmy afternoon, as Sergeant Kaiser walked up to a holding pen to make
one of his daily health checks, a blindfolded man in a brown leather jacket
squatted outside the metal door. The man was awaiting interrogation, said
several guards with Kalashnikov rifles.

The guards went into the cell and brought out Mr. Ali, the man whose brother is
being hunted by the Iraqi police. Dressed in a blue and pink tracksuit and a
black ski cap, he shuffled up to the sergeant. Because Mr. Ali speaks English,
he serves as an unofficial cellblock leader.

''How are the people inside?'' Sergeant Kaiser asked.

''We need to have more food,'' Mr. Ali said. Mr. Ali said he dreaded the idea of
American advisers leaving this base one day. ''That's bad,'' he said, shaking
his head. ''That's very bad. We need the sergeant or another American officer
here. When we see them we say, 'Please stay here.' ''

A reporter asked Mr. Ali whether detainees had been abused or tortured. ''Don't
ask these questions,'' he said, lowering his voice. ''You know that.''

Sergeant Kaiser said that since September, when he joined the advisory team, he
had found only ''a few'' cases of abuse. He recalled two that he had written up.
Prisoners have been brought in with baton marks, he said, but they might have
been resisting arrest.

Sergeant Kaiser and Mr. Ali stepped into the cell. Some sunlight streamed in
through three small windows near the roof. Three ceiling fans whirred. The 140
detainees mostly sat up on blankets; there was not enough room for them to lie
down without touching each other. By the door, one detainee used an electric
hair clipper to shave the head of another. A man with glasses sat reading the
Koran.

The detainees complained that family visits occurred only once every couple of
months. The sick lay on blankets. Sergeant Kaiser gave medicine for diarrhea to
a man in gray robes and tablets for oral fungus to an inmate with yellowing
teeth. He poked at the torso of a man with rib pains.

''Some are innocent,'' said a guard, Sabah Ali, 21, as he looked around the
room. ''But some have given their confessions and they are guilty. Those who are
innocent, we'll release them.''

But those detainees sometimes end up waiting months before being freed, because
the division prefers to release detainees in large groups.

Prisoners from the division's field units are funneled to this base ''so you can
exploit intelligence and take any opportunity for abuse out of the field,'' said
Lt. Col. John Shattuck, the deputy commander of the advisory team.

Seeking Arrest Warrants

  Since his appointment to Camp Justice in February, Judge Majid has come for
several hours almost every day. He is a nervous man dressed in a dark suit who
prefers that his full name not be printed.

Detainees are marched from cells in groups of five to see him in an office. The
ringing of his cellphone can keep him up at all hours -- he is expected to be on
call around the clock to approve an arrest warrant if the Iraqi forces suddenly
come up someone they want to detain.

Arrest warrants were mandated by Interior Ministry officials starting last July
to provide some accountability, especially among the paramilitary forces. It is
unclear, though, how closely field units stick to the requirement.

The Iraqi operations officer at Camp Justice says warrants are needed only for
apprehending people on the Interior Ministry's wanted list, not for instances in
which the police may be responding to a report of suspicious activity.

Colonel Davis says the warrant policy has had some effect. Because of it, and
because the Iraqis are improving their intelligence gathering, the Public Order
Forces no longer round up hundreds of people on each raid, he said. On a typical
operation, he added, they may take in a dozen.

After being brought here, the detainees are fingerprinted and have their retinas
scanned. A photograph is taken, partly to record their condition at the time of
arrest. The Americans have asked the Iraqis to deliver a daily report accounting
for all detainees held throughout the division; one recent printout listed 896.

The law says detainees are entitled to have their cases reviewed by a judge
every two weeks, but there are not enough judges, said Colonel Shammari, the
chief interrogator.

The main question, one impossible to answer for now, is whether respect for rule
of law will become deeply rooted in the Iraqi forces, despite a tradition of
tyranny in this country, as the guerrilla war continues to rage.

Outside one of the prison cells, a blue-uniformed guard, Salim Abdul Hassan, 35,
watched as his colleagues led blindfolded detainees to a row of outdoor toilets.

He said that the American training had been of great help, but that ''it would
be much better if the Iraqis worked on their own without the Americans.''

''We wouldn't be tied down,'' he said. ''Three-quarters of the terrorists ask
for the help of the Americans. They want to be in the care of the Americans, not
the Iraqis.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Maj. Gen. Mehdi Sabih Hashem al-Garawi, left, the Iraqi
commander at Camp Justice, and Col. Gordon Davis Jr.
An Iraqi detainee, top, in a crowded cell in an Iraqi-run base in northern
Baghdad, is examined by Master Sgt. Joseph Kaiser, an American medic, whose hand
is visible at right. Above, Hazem, an Iraqi medic supervised by the sergeant,
dresses gunshot wounds. (Photographs by Max Becherer/Polaris, for The New York
Times)(pg. A6)
 Master Sgt. Joseph Kaiser, an American medic, examining a detainee held by the
new Iraqi national police force called the Public Order Forces. (Photo by Max
Becherer/Polaris, for The New York Times)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PRISONS (89%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CIVIL WAR (86%); CHILDREN (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); RULE OF LAW (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%);
ARREST WARRANTS (74%); POLICE FORCES (74%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (70%); SHOOTINGS (63%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (50%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(50%); APPEALS (50%) Freedom and Human Rights; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: Edward Wong; Andrew (Maj) Creel

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (98%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              68 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 3, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Dutch Try One of Their Own Over Links to Liberia

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1079 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, April 30


They became partners during some of the worst convulsions in West Africa:
Charles Taylor, the warlord and former president of Liberia, and Guus van
Kouwenhoven, a resident Dutch businessman and lumber trader.

Mr. Taylor, who was arrested in March for war crimes, is in an African prison
still awaiting trial. But very different legal proceedings have already opened
against his former business associate at a district court in The Hague.

Mr. van Kouwenhoven, 63, is also charged with war crimes. He is accused of
supplying Mr. Taylor with militia fighters from his lumber companies. He is
further charged with violating a United Nations embargo by smuggling weapons
into Liberia. His trial, held under a new mix of national and international law,
is drawing attention because it is the second time a Dutch court is prosecuting
a Dutch businessman for being involved with human rights abuses on another
continent.

Human rights lawyers say they hope the case signals a new trend. Domestic courts
in Europe are increasingly taking on rights abuses that happened far away, but
the accused have usually been foreign military or political officials, not
businessmen who are their own citizens. But in December, a Dutch court sentenced
a Dutch businessman, Frans van Anraat, to 15 years in jail for selling chemicals
to Saddam Hussein. The chemicals were used in poison gas weapons that killed
Kurdish villagers.

Desiree Leppens, a spokeswoman for the prosecution, said the cases were a Dutch
initiative but were prompted in part by the opening here of the International
Criminal Court, which aims to prosecute grave human rights violations. Soon
after that court opened in 2002, its prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said he
hoped national prosecutors would join him in investigating the ''criminal
business'' of war.

Ms. Leppens said, ''We want to demonstrate that our government is also willing
to prosecute such crimes. This is also becoming an international priority.''

Mr. van Kouwenhoven's trial offers glimpses into the network of collaborators
and companies that Mr. Taylor and his cohorts used to organize and finance
conflicts across West Africa, leaving at least 300,000 people dead. Prosecutors
here have said that Mr. van Kouwenhoven became a critical player in the Taylor
network because he traded Liberia's valuable hardwood for weapons on the
international market.

He was arrested in 2005 while visiting the Netherlands from his home in France,
apparently unaware that Dutch prosecutors were investigating his activities in
Africa. He has pleaded not guilty to all charges, but could face a long prison
sentence if convicted.

In the small sober courtroom where the trial opened on April 24, Mr. van
Kouwenhoven, in a dark suit and tinted glasses, made light of his dealings with
the former Liberian president. He said he was part of a circle of businessmen
''who had direct contact with Taylor'' and had met with him regularly. ''I
wasn't his friend in the sense that I did not go swimming with him and never
even ate at his home,'' he said.

But prosecutors painted a darker picture. They said Mr. van Kouwenhoven, who
initially ran a car import business, a hotel and a casino in Monrovia, Liberia,
established ties with Mr. Taylor in the 1990's and became the director of two
large lumber companies. One of those, the Oriental Timber Company, was Liberia's
largest. It operated under different names and used its own fleet to export tons
of tropical hardwoods as far as France and China. Human rights groups have said
that Mr. Taylor was co-owner of the company.

The timber ships brought back weapons and ammunition, which were unloaded during
the night in the port of Buchanan, prosecutors said. The weapons came from a
Russian arms dealer, a Serbian company and other sources, they said.

Although the smuggling operations reportedly began earlier, Mr. van Kouwenhoven
is being prosecuted for weapon deliveries between 2001 and 2003, in violation of
the United Nations arms embargo of Liberia. The United Nations issued an
international travel ban on him in 2001, calling him an ''arms trafficker.''

Cinder Reeves, an associate and relative of Mr. Taylor and the first man on the
witness stand here, told the court that he was one of the people who took
deliveries of weapons at the timber company, perhaps 20 to 30 times.

''They gave us documents to sign for delivery and a list of the weapons in the
containers,'' said Mr. Reeves, whose nickname is Sunshine but who was darkly
disguised in the courtroom and wore a black wig and dark glasses for security
reasons. ''I saw ammunition, grenades, rocket launchers,'' he told the court.
Weapons were sometimes stored directly beneath Mr. Taylor's residence, White
Flowers, Mr. Reeves said.

He also told the court that he had regularly made appointments for Mr. van
Kouwenhoven to see Mr. Taylor at White Flowers to discuss arms imports and the
course of the war.

Mr. van Kouwenhoven told the court he had never seen Mr. Reeves.

Two lumber companies sent many of their security guards to fight along with Mr.
Taylor's militia, according to the prosecution. Militias from the companies
''participated in slaughter among the Liberian population wherein nothing and no
one was spared, not even babies,'' a prosecution statement said, adding that Mr.
van Kouwenhoven provided the weapons.

Defense lawyers and judges have agreed that Mr. Taylor himself should testify in
the case. Dutch investigators, who have questioned witnesses in Africa and Asia,
may return to Sierra Leone, where Mr. Taylor is awaiting trial in a cell of the
Special Court for Sierra Leone, a tribunal backed by the United Nations.

Both Liberia and Sierra Leone have asked that Mr. Taylor be transferred to The
Hague so he can be tried on the premises of another international court, arguing
that he poses a risk to the region's stability. But the United Nations Security
Council is still debating the terms of his transfer. He may not arrive in The
Hague before Mr. van Kouwenhoven's trial ends later this month.

Ms. Leppens, the prosecution spokeswoman, said Dutch investigators had received
much assistance from the Sierra Leone court and from Global Witness, a British
group that investigates the use of natural resources to finance conflict and
human rights abuses.

Investigators are now negotiating with Mr. Taylor's lawyers to have him testify
via video link or to make a sworn statement in his cell, she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Guus van Kouwenhoven, a Dutch lumber trader, has ties to
President Charles Taylor of Liberia. (Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty
Images, 1999)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); SMUGGLING (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%);
SENTENCING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LUMBER & PLYWOOD MARKETS (77%);
LOGGING INDUSTRY (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); LITIGATION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); ARMS TRADE
(75%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (69%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Arms Sales Abroad; Smuggling; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%) United
Nations

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Charles (Liberia) Taylor; Guus van Kouwenhoven;
Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (98%); NETHERLANDS (94%); AFRICA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (93%);
EUROPE (79%); FRANCE (75%)

REGION: Liberia; Netherlands; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: May 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Defends Itself on Inmate Abuse

BYLINE: By TOM WRIGHT; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 8


More than 100 American soldiers and intelligence officers have been disciplined
for abusing detainees, United States officials said Monday before an
international panel investigating the country's treatment of prisoners in its
fight against terrorism. The number is nearly twice that cited by human rights
groups.

In the second and final day of questioning by the United Nations Committee
Against Torture, members of a United States delegation responded to queries on
topics including the definition of torture and policies on transferring
prisoners to countries with poor human rights records.

The delegates said the United States was acting to ensure that it adhered to its
treaty obligations to prevent the torture of prisoners. It is one of 141 signers
of the Convention Against Torture, a 1987 treaty. Problems of abuse found in
prisons like Abu Ghraib in Iraq were isolated missteps, the delegates said.

''We recognize much of the world does hold the United States to a high
standard,'' said the State Department's legal adviser, John B. Bellinger III,
who led the delegation. ''Without question our record has improved.''

Nora Sveaass, a panel member from Norway, said the United States had given
''very reassuring answers'' on efforts to bring those responsible for torture to
justice.

Charles Stimson, deputy assistant secretary of defense for detainee affairs,
said the United States had court-martialed 103 American service members and
intelligence officers since 2001, leading to 19 convictions with jail terms of a
year or more.

That figure contrasted with numbers quoted by the panel last week and provided
by Human Rights Watch, a nonprofit organization based in the United States. The
group identified 54 courts-martial, 10 of which resulted in jail terms of a year
or more.

But human rights groups said the numbers cited by American officials were still
low. Last week the panel cited data from rights groups saying that more than 600
service members or intelligence officers had been involved in suspected acts of
torture.

In the two days of questioning, the panel pushed the delegation to define the
scope of torture. On Monday, Fernando Marino Menendez, a panel member from
Spain, asked whether torture could be defined to include the forced
disappearance of terrorism suspects and the establishment of secret prisons.

''I don't think one can say per se that it is,'' Mr. Bellinger replied. He said
the United States believed that some terrorism suspects posed such a threat to
security that they had forgone their rights to communicate with their families
and others.

As for the interrogation technique known as waterboarding, in which a suspect is
made to believe that he is drowning, Mr. Stimson said the revised Army Field
Manual would not include the practice.

When asked about the practice of sending prisoners for questioning to countries
where they could be at risk for torture, American officials said the terms of
the antitorture convention did not ban that policy.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ARMIES
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(75%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%) Terrorism; Torture; United States Armament
and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Tom Wright

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Over Tea, Sheik Denies Stirring Darfur's Torment

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1600 words

DATELINE: MISTARIHA, Sudan


Their camouflage uniforms bear no insignia. Their machine guns lack the brassy
patina of long use. Instead of boots, most wear sandals or flip-flops.

The armed men swarming this mysterious town, usually off limits to foreigners,
look almost, but not quite, like soldiers. Their allegiance does not appear to
be to any military commander, but to a tall, copper-skinned man in a white robe
and turban named Musa Hilal.

Mr. Hilal, the sheik who the State Department and human rights organizations say
is an architect and perhaps the key leader of the fearsome Arab militias that
have unleashed a torrent of misery in Darfur, laughed softly at the question of
who these armed men were.

''They are soldiers,'' he replied with an easy smile in a rare interview here.
''Just regular soldiers.''

But the commander of the African Union peacekeeping base two dozen miles away,
Col. John Bosco Mulisa, said there was little doubt who these men really were.

''They are janjaweed,'' he said, using the local term for the Arab militias.
''This town is their headquarters.''

Whoever their commander is and whatever they are called, these men and the
weapons they carry will determine whether, after three years of conflict that
has left at least 200,000 dead, the fragile efforts to bring peace to this
shattered region will succeed or fail.

''The greatest threat to this peace agreement right now is the janjaweed,'' said
a senior military intelligence officer with the African Union who is not
authorized to speak publicly. ''It is not clear what is in it for them or how it
serves their interests to disarm. No one is sure what they will do or who
exactly controls them.''

The first and most critical step of that agreement, signed in May between the
government in Khartoum and the largest rebel faction, is the disarmament of the
janjaweed. The government pledged to submit a plan to disarm the militias of
their heavy weaponry one month after signing the agreement and to finish the job
before the end of October.

But how do you disarm a phantom army whose sponsors and leaders deny its
existence? And exactly who are the janjaweed -- and is it within the
government's power to disarm them?

''Who are the janjaweed?'' asked Eltayeb Hag Ateya, director of the Peace
Research Institute at the University of Khartoum. ''It depends on what you mean
and who you ask.''

The term itself has long been used to refer to highwaymen and bandits from
tribes living across Sudan's western border in Chad who roamed the vast,
semidesert plains of Darfur, robbing Arabs and non-Arabs, nomads and farmers.

But the word came to have a new meaning after rebels attacked a government
outpost in Darfur in 2003, sparking the conflict that would engulf the region
and eventually spill into Chad.

The militias that came to be known as the janjaweed were deployed as a kind of
counterinsurgency proxy force that the government used in place of and sometimes
alongside its military. It had used such Arab militias with brutal success in
the 20-year civil war in the south.

These fighters were paid a small stipend, but their greatest reward was the
right to loot and seize livestock and land from the Fur and Zaghawa, non-Arab
tribes from which the rebels drew their ranks.

The chief figure in the deployment of these militias, according to the State
Department and human rights organizations, was Mr. Hilal, who leads a powerful
Arab tribe in Darfur called Um Jalul.

Long before the war began, Mr. Hilal wielded control over a fearsome tribal
militia, and because of his deep connections to the Arab elite of Khartoum, he
was the first tribal leader the government turned to when the insurgency among
non-Arab tribes began, human rights investigators say.

He responded to the call by summoning recruits to enlarge his militia to
thousands of men, who were trained and equipped in vast barracks here in
Mistariha. Soon, this dusty village nestled between a pair of mountains was a
beehive of military activity, with truckloads of recruits and helicopters full
of weapons and other supplies arriving daily.

Platoons of armed men on camels and horseback arrived constantly, their animals
weighed down with loot, according to witness accounts collected by human rights
groups. At the center of it all was Mr. Hilal, the witnesses said, directing and
rallying his troops and urging them to plunder.

Officially, the town was called the headquarters of the government's Border
Intelligence Unit, though it is about 120 miles from the nearest border, with
Chad.

In Mistariha, Mr. Hilal took pains to explain that he was not a militia leader,
merely an influential sheik. In a two-hour interview over a lunch of grilled
meats and tea near a bustling market, Mr. Hilal said repeatedly that the Arab
militias he was accused of commanding simply did not exist.

''It is a lie,'' he said. ''Janjaweed is a thief. A criminal. I am a tribal
leader, with men and women and children who follow me. How can they all be
thieves and bandits? It is not possible.''

He said there were no tensions here between Arabs and non-Arabs. By way of
demonstration, he ordered one of his soldiers to round up a group of market
women. When the women arrived, cowering under their bright robes as Mr. Hilal
hovered over them, one by one said there were no tensions here.

''I am a Fur,'' said Fatouma, a woman who sells millet in the market, naming the
largest non-Arab tribe in the region. Her eyes avoided Mr. Hilal's imperious
glare. ''We get along with the Arabs fine,'' she added, before begging to be
allowed to return to her market stall.

''See!'' Mr. Hilal exclaimed to his foreign visitors. ''We have no problems
here. We live together in peace.''

But in much of his territory the only peace is the peace of a graveyard. The
road leading here from the nearby town of Kebkabiyah tells another story -- new
Arab villages line the road, while old Fur and Zaghawa villages are burned-out
husks.

In one Zaghawa village, bullet holes scar a crumbling schoolhouse. All the
thatch roofs have been burned away, and rain and desert winds have worn the
walls of the decapitated huts down to mere suggestions of habitation. In time,
even those will disappear, leaving no trace of the Zaghawa.

Mr. Hilal's claim that he has no control over any militia does not bear
scrutiny, said Alex de Waal, an Africa scholar who studies Sudan. ''He is at the
center of all of this,'' Mr. de Waal said.

In letters to government officials and other tribal leaders, Mr. Hilal has
repeatedly said his fighters are engaged in a jihad, or holy war, and will not
disarm even if the government demands it.

''We will not retreat,'' he wrote in one such letter in 2004 to the leaders in
Khartoum. ''We continue on the road of jihad.'' Trying to disarm his men, he
wrote, would be ''cowardly,'' and impossible to enforce.

Another communique from Mr. Hilal's headquarters in 2004, obtained by Mr. de
Waal, demanded that the militias ''change the demography of Darfur and empty it
of African tribes.''

The janjaweed so far have not respected the new peace agreement, attacking
rebel-held towns in the area of Kutum in northern Darfur and Shearia in South
Darfur, killing dozens of people.

Indeed, the Arab militias did not sign the peace agreement. They were
represented, after a fashion, by the government, which has steadily denied their
existence.

Even so, one of the assumptions of the agreement was that the government had
control over the Arab militias and the power to disarm them. This is based on a
deeper assumption that the interests of Darfur's Arabs would be tended to by
Khartoum. Neither is turning out to be true.

''If you ask me where my allegiance lies, with the government or with Darfur, I
will have to tell you Darfur,'' Mr. Hilal said.

This is not the first time the government has promised to disarm the Arab
militias. It pledged during seven separate rounds of peace talks over the past
three years to neutralize them but has failed to do so. These failures have met
with no sanction, so there is little confidence the government will take action
now.

''Frankly it is the weakest link in an otherwise deeply flawed agreement,'' said
John Prendergast of the International Crisis Group, an organization that studies
violent conflicts. ''It leaves intact the same promise the international
community has relied upon, and that is that the government is principally
responsible for reining in and otherwise neutralizing the murderous militias. It
hasn't happened before and there is no new reason why it would happen now.''

For some time, the government has been simply integrating the janjaweed militias
into its official paramilitary Popular Defense Forces and the regular army, Mr.
Prendergast said. That process is likely to speed up in the coming months as
negotiations continue over whether Sudan will allow a United Nations
peacekeeping force to take over the understaffed and underfinanced African Union
mission here.

If the alliance of convenience between the Arab militias and the government
crumbles, there is little incentive for the militias to play along. Under the
peace agreement, they are likely to lose control of land they stole, and there
are deep fears that Arabs will be subjugated by the small but influential
Zaghawa tribe, which leads the most powerful faction of the rebels.

''There is going to be a lot of conflict between the government and some of the
Arab leaders,'' Mr. Prendergast said. ''But the government built the
Frankenstein monster and now they have got to deal with it.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Sheik Musa Hilal, left, is said to be a key leader of the
feared Arab militias that have brought misery to Darfur. (Photo by Michael
Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
 In a recent interview, Musa Hilal denied he led the janjaweed. ''I am a tribal
leader, with men and women and children who follow me,'' he said. (Photo by
Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A9)Map of Sudan highlighting
Mistariha: Armed men who look almost like soldiers swarm dusty Mistariha. (pg.
A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ARMIES (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); PEACEKEEPING (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); GENOCIDE (70%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (56%)

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Musa Hilal

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); AFRICA (92%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Arrests in Cambodia

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 199 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Cambodia Leader Cracks Down in Bid to Solidify Power'' (news article, Jan.
9):

Kem Sokha of the Cambodian Center for Human Rights and Yeng Virak of the
Community Legal Education Center displayed banners accusing the prime minister
of selling land to Vietnam and his government of being a second Pol Pot regime.

Responding to the grave charges of genocide and treason, the government
instituted legal proceedings against both men according to judiciary and
criminal law of the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia,
introduced by the United Nations in 1992, which stipulates, ''Any bad faith
allegation or imputation of a given fact which harms the honor or reputation of
an individual is a defamation.''

The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 12, states: ''No one shall be
subjected to  attacks upon his honor and reputation. Everyone has the right to
the protection of the law against such interference or attacks.''

The court has not restricted human rights or freedom of speech. Both
organizations are allowed to operate within the legal framework.

Chem Widhya
Ambassador, Permanent Mission
of Cambodia to the United Nations
New York, Jan. 11, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); GENOCIDE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM
OF PRESS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); LIBEL & SLANDER (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
LITIGATION (75%); CRIMINAL LAW (75%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); LAWYERS
(73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); LEGAL EDUCATION (72%); POLITICS (71%)
Politics and Government; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: Chem Widhya (Amb); Kem Sokha

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (97%)

REGION: Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              72 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Haunted by Past Horrors, Cambodians Speak Out

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Leaving their crops and animals behind, 800 of Cambodia's poorest people
gathered the other day in the shade of a blue tarpaulin in a village south of
the capital and poured out a torrent of complaints and demands.

The price of fuel, the poor education system, problems with health care, bribery
at every turn -- these grievances have found a new outlet in a series of
independent forums that are challenging the control of information by an
increasingly repressive government. But the subject that dominated all others in
this meeting in the commune of Rokar Khnong was a passionate demand for free
speech and democratic rights.

One man wept as he stood at the microphone. One shouted. One raised a cheer for
democracy. An elderly woman with cropped white hair recited a poem in which she
promised to die so that her country could live.

''I love democracy,'' declared a farmer, who spoke boldly, but like the other
participants did not give his name for fear of being arrested. ''I stopped work
on my harvest so I could come here and speak at a democratic forum. We want to
exercise our right to free speech.''

Even the organizers said they were taken aback by the turnout and assertiveness
of the villagers. The government has been cracking down on free speech and in
recent months has arrested several human rights advocates.

Among those arrested was Kem Sokha, who founded these independent forums three
years ago. Since then, they have taken place more than 100 times, in every
district of the country. And their impact has grown through taped broadcasts --
some lasting four hours or more -- on independent radio stations, which have
also become targets of the crackdown.

Earlier this month, under international pressure, Prime Minister Hun Sen
released Mr. Kem Sokha and three other activists on bail and now says he will
drop defamation charges against them. But other activists and political figures
remain in jail, and the threat of arrest still hangs over those who speak out.

The outrage in Rokar Khnong suggests that the government will not have it easy
if it tries to crush the democratic ideas that were introduced by the United
Nations in the early 1990's as it sought to end decades of bloodshed. The
concepts of human rights and free expression appear to have taken root, and if
Mr. Kem Sokha's forums are an indicator, the fields and villages of Cambodia are
restless with discontent.

''I have a question for the government,'' said an old woman wearing a checkered
head cloth. ''You talk about democracy, but how much right do the people of
Cambodia have to speak out? If we speak out, will we be arrested like Kem
Sokha?''

Another woman seized the microphone. ''I have lived through many wars, and I
only have two relatives left alive,'' she said. ''I am old now, and I want to
see democracy before I die.''

Another followed: ''I don't know how to speak,'' she said, ''but I just want to
send a message to Hun Sen. Stop sending people to jail for small crimes. You are
abusing your power.''

Furthermore, she said, nobody can believe anything the government says.
Referring to the government's official spokesman, she used a local expression:
''You ask him cow, and he answers buffalo.''

Several speakers were angry enough to refer to the torments of the Khmer Rouge
years, from 1975 to 1979, when 1.7 million people were executed or died of
starvation, disease or overwork.

''In the Khmer Rouge time, my father was served soup and they asked him if it
tasted good,'' one man said. '' 'Tell the truth,' they said. And so he said it
did not taste good, and they killed him. Now when we speak the truth, are we
going to be jailed? Is Cambodia going back to the Communists again?''

Another man, a former schoolteacher, noted that Mr. Kem Sokha had been arrested
simply for having political slogans painted on a banner. ''What about the Khmer
Rouge, who killed millions of Cambodians 27 years ago?'' he said. ''Why haven't
they been put on trial?''

After years of delay, preparations for a trial have finally begun, though any
proceedings are still many months away. Human rights advocates say the enduring
impunity of the Khmer Rouge has contributed to a sense of injustice in Cambodia.

As with other forums, local leaders were invited to join a panel in front of the
speakers. At Rokar Khnong, a deputy village chief and deputy district police
chief were present. Ou Virak, a member of Mr. Kem Sokha's organization, the
Cambodian Center for Human Rights, was moderating in his absence and invited
them to speak.

''In a democratic forum, we want to hear opposing ideas, not just the people who
support the forum,'' he said.

Seng Toich, the police officer, stood up.

''Some people focus all the time on individual rights and think that means we
can do anything we want,'' he said. ''But our rights have limitations. They
cannot be used to harm others.''

Temples must limit the use of loudspeakers in order not to disturb the peace, he
said. A motorcycle rider must obey traffic rules. A farmer cannot graze his
animals in a public park. Speech that is too free can harm the reputations of
others.

A student rose to rebut him. ''That is not what we are asking for, to break
traffic rules or disturb the peace, but to exercise our democratic rights,'' he
said.

The meeting ended with a reading of the section of the Cambodian Constitution
guaranteeing the rights of free speech and free assembly.

Mr. Ou Virak, the moderator, said it was beginning to be more difficult to
organize the forums because of new fears of retribution in the villages. As the
day's meeting dispersed, he thanked the local officials for allowing it to be
held.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kem Sokha, fourth from right, helped organize a series of
independent forums that encourage free speech and promote democracy in Cambodia.
(Photo by Tang Chhin Sothy/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF SPEECH (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
POOR POPULATION (90%); ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
(89%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); LIBEL & SLANDER
(75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); FREEDOM
OF PRESS (72%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (72%); BRIBERY (72%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); SENIOR CITIZENS (69%); WAR
CRIMES (69%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (63%); RIOTS (60%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom of Speech and
Expression; Demonstrations and Riots

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations; Khmer Rouge (Cambodia)

PERSON: Seth Mydans

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (73%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%)

REGION: Cambodia; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              73 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Shame of the Prisons

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 432 words


Who needs sophomoric cartoons to inflame the Muslim world when you've got the
Bush administration's prison system? One reason the White House is so helpless
against the violence spawned by those Danish cartoons is that it has squandered
so much of its moral standing at Guantanamo Bay and Abu Ghraib. This week, the
world got two chilling reminders of why both prisons must be closed.

On Thursday, the United Nations Human Rights Commission issued a scathing report
on the violations of democratic principles, human rights and the rule of law at
Guantanamo Bay: indefinite arbitrary detentions, hearings that mock fair process
and justice, coercive and violent interrogations, and other violations of laws
and treaties.

The Bush administration offered its usual weak response, that President Bush has
decided there is a permanent state of war that puts him above the law. And that
is exactly the problem: by creating Guantanamo outside the legal system for
prisoners who, according to Mr. Bush, have no rights, the United States is stuck
holding these 500 men in perpetuity. The handful who may be guilty of heinous
crimes can never be tried in a real court because of their illegal detentions. A
vast majority did nothing or were guilty only of fighting on a battlefield, but
the administration refuses to sort them out.

Some members of Congress tried to exert control over Guantanamo Bay late last
year. But their efforts were hijacked by Bush loyalists, who made matters worse
by stripping the prisoners there of the basic human right to challenge their
detentions.

Now the only solution is to close Guantanamo Bay and account for its prisoners
fairly and openly. The United States then needs a prisons policy that conforms
to the law and to democratic principles.

The U.N. report followed a broadcast by an Australian television station of
previously unpublicized photographs taken at Abu Ghraib in 2003. Many were
similar to the pictures the world saw two years ago when the scandal of abuse,
humiliation and torture first broke. Others show even worse abuses and
degradation.

All are a reminder that the Bush administration has yet to account for what
happened at Abu Ghraib. No political appointee has been punished for the
policies that led to the atrocities. Indeed, most have been rewarded.

The prison was a symbol of the worst of the Hussein regime. Now it's a symbol of
the worst of the American occupation. Congress should order it replaced. And
perhaps John Warner, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, could keep
his promise to dig out the truth about Abu Ghraib.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
WAR CRIMES (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); RELIGION
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
TERRORISM (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); RULE OF LAW (76%); TORTURE
(76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); VISUAL ARTISTS
(73%); SCANDALS (72%); NAVIES (68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (63%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (62%) Terrorism; Editorials; Islam;
Cartoons and Cartoonists; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Terrorism; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%); JOHN WARNER (55%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%) George W
(Pres) Bush; Muhammad (Prophet) (C570-632)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (93%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Denmark; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              75 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria Pressed by U.N. Court To Arrest Liberia's Ex-Leader

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 26


Pressure mounted Sunday on Nigeria to arrest Charles G. Taylor, the former
president of Liberia who is under indictment for war crimes in connection with
his role in the brutal, decade-long civil war here.

Mr. Taylor apparently remains in Nigeria, where he has been living since 2003,
when a deal brokered by Nigeria's president, Olusegun Obasanjo, sent him into
exile. But security around the compound where he is living has been lax,
according to local news reports and Human Rights Watch, leading to fears that
Mr. Taylor may try to flee.

Desmond de Silva, the chief prosecutor of the United Nations special court set
up to try those accused of atrocities in Sierra Leone's civil war, which ended
in 2002, called upon Nigeria to arrest Mr. Taylor immediately. ''Until the
indicted war criminal Charles Taylor is in the hands of Liberian authorities, to
whom Nigeria is making Taylor available for collection, the spotlight of the
international community will be upon Nigeria,'' Mr. de Silva said Sunday in a
statement.

''In particular, the watching world will wish to see Taylor held in Nigerian
detention to avoid the possibility of him using his wealth and associates to
slip away, with grave consequences to the stability of the region,'' he said.

If Mr. Taylor is brought to Sierra Leone, he will be the first African head of
state to face international prosecution for war crimes, a precedent that will
surely resonate on a continent where a fraternity of presidents has
traditionally protected its own, no matter how grave their alleged crimes, with
comfortable exile rather than the jail cell that awaits Mr. Taylor here.

Mr. Taylor had been living in a seaside villa in Calabar, a resort town on the
eastern edge of Nigeria's coastline, with dozens of relatives and close
associates -- an exile supplemented by money he is suspected of having stolen
from the Liberian treasury while he ruled the country, from 1997 until his
ouster in 2003.

That wealth, with his long history of wiggling out of seemingly impossible jams,
only increases the need to secure his arrest immediately, said Corinne Dufka, a
researcher for Human Rights Watch in Dakar, Senegal.

''There is an international arrest warrant for Taylor, so we are asking Nigeria
to honor the arrest warrant,'' Ms. Dufka said.

In 1985, Mr. Taylor escaped a Massachusetts jail, where he was awaiting
extradition on charges he embezzled at least $1 million from the Liberian
government. The circumstances of his escape have never been fully explained.

Backed by Libya and other regional powers, Mr. Taylor unleashed a cycle of civil
war in Liberia and its neighbors during the 1990's. He was indicted by the court
in Sierra Leone in 2003 on 17 charges in connection with his role in this
country's war, which killed 50,000 people, displaced millions and left thousands
maimed.

Nigeria has been under pressure, particularly from the United States, to turn
Mr. Taylor over to Liberia. Although he is not under indictment in that country,
the United Nations has authorized his transfer to Sierra Leone. Mr. Obasanjo had
said he would comply only with a request from an elected Liberian government.

During a visit to the United States this month, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, Liberia's
newly elected president, requested that Mr. Taylor be turned over, and on
Saturday, Nigeria's government indicated that it would comply. Mr. Obasanjo is
due to visit the United States this week.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, has been
indicted on charges related to war crimes. (Photo by Georges Gobet/Agence
France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
EXTRADITION (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); LARCENY &
THEFT (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); EMBEZZLEMENT (73%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Human Rights Watch;
United Nations

PERSON: Charles G Taylor; Desmond de Silva

CITY: FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (56%); DAKAR, SENEGAL (55%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (99%); NIGERIA (95%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); LIBYA (79%); SENEGAL
(79%)

REGION: Sierra Leone; Liberia  ; Nigeria

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              76 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

If Not Peace, Then Justice

BYLINE: By Elizabeth Rubin.

Elizabeth Rubin is a contributing writer for the magazine. She has reported
extensively from Saudi Arabia, Chechnya, Afghanistan and Iraq.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 7326 words


I. A Day in Court for the Criminals of Darfur?

A thick afternoon fog enveloped the trees and streetlights of The Hague, a
placid city built along canals, a city of art galleries, clothing boutiques,
Vermeers and Eschers. It is not for these old European boulevards, however, that
The Hague figures in the minds of men and women in places as far apart as
Uganda, Sarajevo and now Sudan. Rather, it symbolizes the possibility of some
justice in the world, when the state has collapsed or turned into an instrument
of terror. The Hague has long been home to the International Court of Justice
(or World Court), a legal arm of the United Nations, which adjudicates disputes
between states. During the Balkan wars, a tribunal was set up here for
Yugoslavia; it has since brought cases against 161 individuals. It was trying
Slobodan Milosevic -- the first genocide case brought against a former head of
state -- until his unexpected death last month. And now the International
Criminal Court has begun its investigations into the mass murders and crimes
against humanity that have been committed, and are still taking place, in the
Darfur region of Sudan.

The Hague has become a symbol of both the promise of international law and its
stunning shortcomings. We have reached a point in world affairs at which we
learn about genocide even as it unfolds, and yet it is practically a given that
the international community will not use military intervention to stop it.
Militias called janjaweed, recruited from Arab tribes in Darfur and Chad and
supported by the Sudanese government, continue to attack, rape and kill
villagers from African tribes -- more than 200,000 people have been killed in
Darfur, and two million have fled their homes. For more than two years,
politicians and activists have been shouting to the world that a genocide is
unfolding in Darfur, calling it a slow-motion Rwanda in the hope that the shock
of remembering the nearly one million people slaughtered in that African country
in 1994 would prompt action. Coalitions of students, religious leaders and human
rights groups have lobbied in Washington, have set up SaveDarfur.org and have
made green rubber bracelets, now worn all over the United States, that quote
George Bush recalling Rwanda and promising, ''Not on my watch.'' Yet the killing
rolls on, and no one intervenes to bring it to an end, as if the genocide in
Darfur were already history.

Last year the United Nations Security Council referred the Darfur file to the
International Criminal Court. And now the horrors of Darfur have become the
preoccupation of an extraordinary international team of investigators in a plain
and quiet Dutch town. They have no army, but they want to ensure that out of
this history -- this slow-motion genocide -- they can wrest some justice.

Luis Moreno-Ocampo is the chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Court.
A veteran Argentine lawyer in his 50's, he has a short, graying beard and
Groucho Marx eyebrows that are almost always in motion -- excited, alarmed,
disappointed. Moreno-Ocampo knows how difficult his position is. ''I'm a
stateless prosecutor -- I have 100 states under my jurisdiction and zero
policemen,'' he said when I visited him in The Hague in January. But he does not
see his court as a token body. ''No. No! Wrong!'' he said, swinging his arms one
Saturday afternoon as we strolled by The Hague's medieval prison. He recounted
how he had explained the court to his 13-year-old son: ''My son is studying the
Spanish conquerors in Latin America. Yesterday he says to me, 'They killed 90
percent of the Indians, so today you'd put them in jail?' I said: 'Yes. Exactly.
What happened to the native populations in the U.S. and Latin America could not
happen today with the I.C.C. Absolutely. Absolutely. We are evolving. Humanity
is not just sitting. There is a new concept. The history of human beings is war
and violence; now we're saying this institution is here to prevent crimes
against humanity.'''

The International Criminal Court was created by the Rome Statute in 1998 and
began work in 2003 with two goals -- to prevent crimes against humanity,
genocide and war crimes; and to prosecute them. Of the two, prevention is what
fires Moreno-Ocampo's ambition; it is what excites his imagination and intellect
and fuels his 18-hour workdays, far away from his family, his horses and his
farm in Argentina. It's not that he thinks the court can protect the villagers
now being killed and maimed and raped in Darfur; his investigation into war
crimes there will take years. What he is convinced of is that the prospect of
prosecuting war criminals in Darfur and elsewhere will deter others from
committing horrific crimes. Genocides ''are planned,'' he told me. ''They are
not passion crimes. These people think in cost.'' The I.C.C. is intended to
raise the cost. Moreno-Ocampo holds up Carlos Castano, one of Colombia's top
paramilitary commanders, as an example of the court's potential reach. After
Colombia ratified the I.C.C. treaty, Castano laid down his weapons because,
according to his brother, he realized that he might become vulnerable to I.C.C.
prosecution.

Colombia, however, is not Sudan, and Castano was not carrying out a genocide.
Does Moreno-Ocampo have a chance of bringing the perpetrators of the crimes in
Darfur to justice?

II. The Dreams of Gustave Moynier and Luis Moreno-Ocampo

In 1989, as Soviet rule crumbled, a tiny window of historical possibility
opened. For a moment, many people imagined a new world, with relations between
nations rooted in human rights and international norms. It was something of a
utopian vision, and the 90's -- with massacres in Rwanda and Bosnia, Chechnya,
Liberia, Congo and Sierra Leone -- quickly swept the world back into bloodshed
and genocide. Despite all the killing, an international movement was pushing the
principle that government officials must be held accountable before the law. An
early triumph of the movement was the successful prosecution in the mid-80's of
Argentine generals responsible for the ''dirty war'' that led to as many as
30,000 Argentines being ''disappeared.'' This was the first such trial --
against top generals and leaders -- since Nuremberg. Luis Moreno-Ocampo was the
assistant prosecutor and became a household name across Argentina. The Argentine
trials set a precedent for later tribunals like those for crimes committed in
the former Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra Leone.

The dream of an I.C.C. can be dated as far back as 1872 to a Swiss man named
Gustave Moynier, who helped found the Red Cross. He saw many atrocities
committed during the Franco-Prussian War of 1870-71 and realized that the 1864
Geneva Convention, on the treatment of wounded soldiers, was just paper without
a court that could try violators. Nearly 130 years later, 120 countries voted to
endorse the Rome Statute and began what could prove to be a small revolution in
the history of nations. World leaders dared expose themselves to international
law. No more immunity: they agreed to be held accountable for war crimes, crimes
against humanity and genocide. Investigators and prosecutors would detail crimes
and prosecute the criminals. Prisons would hold those convicted. Here was an
idealistic vision designed by liberal pragmatists.

In the end, the delegations of seven states involved in the negotiations voted
against the resulting treaty. Those states included Iraq, Israel, Libya, China
-- and the United States. But in 2000, just hours before the deadline, President
Bill Clinton signed the treaty, a necessary step before sending it on to the
Senate for ratification. A few weeks later, advisers to his successor, President
Bush, let it be known that his administration would not respect that signature
-- that it regarded most international treaties as tools for the weak. In May
2002, Under Secretary of State John R. Bolton sent a letter to Kofi Annan,
secretary general of the United Nations, announcing that the United States
didn't consider itself bound by the Rome Statute. In one public debate, Bolton,
who later became the American ambassador to the U.N., had argued: ''The United
States should pursue a policy of 'three nos': the United States should provide
no financial support for the court, directly or indirectly; the administration
should not collaborate further in efforts to make the court operational; and the
United States should not negotiate further with governments to 'improve' the
I.C.C. This policy will maximize the chances that the court will not come into
existence.'' Since the court was a fait accompli, President Bush signed into law
the American Service-Members' Protection Act, which requires American forces to
liberate any American in I.C.C. custody. It is popularly known as The Hague
Invasion Act.

Given that the reputation of the United States on human rights is today at one
of its lowest points -- Abu Ghraib, Bagram, Guantanamo -- Moreno-Ocampo gamely
regards Bush as an inadvertent boon to the court. Bush builds Moreno-Ocampo's
legitimacy by being against the court. For Moreno-Ocampo's work is political as
well as legal, and his approach is intensely pragmatic. As idealistic as he may
be in his global post, his career is rooted in the muck of reality. He was just
32 when he prosecuted the Argentine generals. He went on to prosecute
Argentina's military regime responsible for the Falklands war and other officers
for murder, torture and kidnapping. He endured assassination threats while
taking on corrupt officials, cabinet members and judges; preventing and fighting
corruption became his unusual specialty when he went into private practice in
1992.

The challenge in Darfur is, however, greater by far than anything in
Moreno-Ocampo's career. It was in March of last year that the Security Council
referred the case of crimes against humanity in Darfur to the I.C.C. Soon,
television footage was shown around the world of a truck delivering boxes of
documents, compiled by United Nations investigators, about the crimes committed
in Darfur. In New York, Kofi Annan handed Moreno-Ocampo an envelope containing
the names of 51 Sudanese people recommended for indictment by the commission.
News of the list's existence unnerved officials in Khartoum, Sudan's capital.
Moreno-Ocampo took the envelope, flew back to The Hague and opened it among a
few associates. He then locked the names away, later saying that he would
compile his own list.

Moreno-Ocampo's Darfur file is a first in international justice. His
investigators must work against the will of the Sudanese government. They cannot
gather any forensic evidence from schools where collective rapes occurred. They
cannot gather samples from wells that were poisoned. They cannot even gather
shrapnel from bombs dropped on civilians by the government. The collecting of
written material, however, did not stop with the U.N. commission. Sudanese
dissidents and activists have been feeding the I.C.C. investigators letters and
documents. A U.N. team recently returned from investigating key Sudanese
officials (and singled out 17 for international sanctions). And Moreno-Ocampo is
interviewing victims by every means possible, putting together the narratives of
selected crimes and connecting them to command decisions in government. Slowly,
too slowly for some, out of the murderous morass a case is being built.

III. What the I.C.C., and Sudan, Can Do

The government of Sudan, led by President Omar Hassan al-Bashir, contends that
the I.C.C. investigation is unnecessary. After all, Sudanese courts are
conducting their own investigations and prosecutions for whatever crimes may
have occurred in Darfur. Immediately after Moreno-Ocampo declared in June 2005
that the people he was likely to investigate would not face justice in Sudanese
courts, Bashir's ministry of justice announced the creation of the Darfur
Special Criminal Court, a three-judge traveling court.

There are several ways in which a case may be brought before the I.C.C. One is
by invitation of a state; this is the case in Uganda, for example, where the
government asked the I.C.C. to investigate crimes committed by the Lord's
Resistance Army, a murderous cult group composed of a few leaders and thousands
of kidnapped children that has been terrorizing northern Uganda for nearly 20
years. A second option is for an I.C.C. prosecutor to initiate an investigation.
This is the method that has made John Bolton and others apoplectic about the
court and led President Bush in the 2004 presidential campaign to refer to an
''unaccountable prosecutor.'' (In fact, the prosecutor is accountable to an
international panel of judges.) The third possibility is referral by the
Security Council. In every instance, a case will be inadmissible to the I.C.C.
if a state is carrying out its own investigation or prosecution -- unless the
I.C.C. determines that the state's prosecution is seriously inadequate.

That determination is made by the I.C.C. prosecutor and the court's judges, who
are nominated by the 100 states that are full parties to the Rome Statute. In
short, the court is empowered to assert jurisdiction in states like Sudan that
are not themselves parties to the treaty. This is the point at which the
aspirations of international law meet the resistance of sovereignty and
political power. For now, Sudan has set up courts with an eye toward
demonstrating that the Darfur cases are inadmissible to the International
Criminal Court because they're being handled perfectly well in Sudan.

The airport in Nyala, the capital of South Darfur, welcomes you with carefully
tended flowers and a soft breeze that is a pleasant change from the relentless
heat of Khartoum. A bustling market town on the edge of the desert, Nyala has an
air of normalcy about it. Children in blue-and-white uniforms walk the dusty
roads to school in the morning. Lawyers wait outside the courts to bring their
cases. Women in technicolor wraps make fresh tea and coffee on little stools in
the market. Arab nomads park their camels in the livestock market at the edge of
a neighborhood locally known as Falluja because of the violence there.

The governor has declared it a crime to call the neighborhood Falluja, one of
the many strange rules that remind you that you are in a police state. My
translator during my trip to Darfur this past winter was a Fur, the Fur being
one of the main African tribes of Darfur, and to protect himself he often had to
lie about his tribe when we went to neighborhoods like Falluja. On the edge of
town, African Union troops -- they have been in Darfur since July 2004 to
monitor a cease-fire and now number a mere 7,000 -- camp in tents provided by
American companies. Just outside town, the notorious Kalma camp spreads across a
stark plain alongside a dry riverbed. Some 90,000 people have come to live at
the camp after fleeing their villages. The camp is nearly two years old and has
sprawled almost five miles as families pack themselves in under thatch roofs and
flapping walls made of canvas USAid food sacks.

In a quiet corner of Nyala, in a modest stone house, is the Amal Center, one of
a handful of local institutions that offer some hope to Darfurians. The Amal
Center is financed mainly by international organizations. Volunteer doctors
treat victims of attacks, and a team of local Arab and African lawyers donate
their time to file cases of murder, looting and rape stemming from the crisis.
The center was founded in Khartoum in 2000 to help victims of torture in
Sudanese prisons and later expanded to Darfur.

Among the lawyers at Amal is Muhammad Ali, a local Arab whose clients are mostly
black African victims of janjaweed violence, and Thuriya Haroon Daldon, who is
teasingly nicknamed Mrs. I.C.C. by local judges and, unusually for a woman here,
drives herself around in a van. Thuriya Haroon's first case with Amal was in
2001, representing a group of men who said they had been tortured by
national-security officers. ''I submitted the names of the torturers to the
attorney general, but until now there's no permission even to pursue the case,
and no answer,'' she said, and laughed. A frank woman with a friendly but firm
aspect, Thuriya Haroon uses laughter to fend off the realities of death and
cruelty that now fill her workday. ''Instead, we face harassment,'' she said.
''They follow us, watch us. And until now the victims say to me: 'What do you
do? We give our stories, and those who tortured us are on the streets.'
Sometimes I'm ashamed. I've done nothing.'' She has handled hundreds of rape
cases, for example, and until now: ''No one has been convicted of rape in all of
Darfur. We've had only two cases of immoral behavior. They were sentenced to six
months.''

Since President Bashir and the National Islamic Front (now known as the National
Congress Party) took power in a coup in 1989, there have been dozens of
rebellions all over Sudan. The deadliest predated the regime: a civil war
between the north, where the Islamist regime was based, and the mostly Christian
or animist south. Unlike in the south, however, in Darfur the African and Arab
tribes are all Muslim. In Darfur, as elsewhere in Sudan, the rebels are fighting
their people's economic and political marginalization.

The current Darfur conflict began raging after rebels ambushed the Sudanese Air
Force at one of its bases in North Darfur early in 2003. It was a humiliating
defeat for Bashir and his government's security apparatus. The government
responded -- as it had previously in the Nuba Mountains and the southern oil
fields -- by recruiting local militias to wage a counterinsurgency campaign,
thus pitting tribes against one another. The name janjaweed means bandits or
ruffians; it combines ''devil'' (jinn) with ''horse'' (jawad) and conjures a
dark terror for Darfurians. The janjaweed were plucked from the mostly nomadic
camel- or cattle-breeding Arab tribes of Darfur and neighboring Chad.
Uneducated, destitute and landless, they are motivated mainly by promises made
by Sudanese government officials of land and loot. Today the government uses
them as a means of deniability: the militias are uncontrollable, the government
says, and are merely carrying on an ancient tribal conflict or a centuries-old
fight over resources between seminomadic Arabs and African farmers. Yet when the
government wants to control them, it does, and many of the janjaweed have simply
been incorporated into what are known as the popular defense forces.

Since August 2004, the Amal Center has compiled information on more than 72,000
cases. The documents are stored in boxes and a simple gray metal cabinet. Most
are in folders sorted by the name of the targeted village. Consider the case of
the town of Marla. In April of last year, after the Darfur file was referred by
the Security Council to the I.C.C., the governor of South Darfur, Atta
al-Mannan, announced that anyone from Marla who had a complaint could open a
court case. The people of Marla took the governor at his word. ''I brought all
the cases of torture to the governor,'' the omda, or community leader, of Marla,
Abdul Karim, told me one hot, windy afternoon at the Kalma refugee camp. ''The
one tied by plastic rope who was paralyzed, the ones who were hung and have
wounds on their necks, the ones who were burned with melting plastic. Sixteen
cases. I told them to stand in front of the governor to tell their story and to
show their wounds. One man couldn't even hold a cup of water anymore. The
governor said, 'I didn't know such things happened.''' The governor said he
would form a committee to investigate who committed the crimes. A prosecutor
from Khartoum came and did the investigation, submitted his report and returned
to Khartoum. The governor proudly showed me the bound report, along with several
other investigative reports that he had ordered and that sat in a glass display
case behind his desk.

Abdul Karim said that when investigators found that all the Marla cases were
against government or janjaweed or popular defense forces, they dropped the
investigation. Several men from Marla had filed cases against specific young men
who belonged to the popular defense forces. The men from Marla had a court
hearing and brought witnesses. But on the way out through the courtyard that
day, the plaintiffs were arrested by national security and then disappeared for
months. The men accused of the initial crimes were released. The tribal leader
who the Marla men and United Nations officials say assisted in commanding the
attack lives in a comfortable house in Nyala and hangs out at police
headquarters and the prosecutor's office.

Justice in Nyala begins and ends with the prosecutor of South Darfur, Mauwia
Abdullah Ahmed, who is from one of Darfur's Arab tribes. He decides which, if
any, cases will go to the Darfur Special Criminal Court. I met him one morning
in his office in a long one-story building just across a fence from Nyala's
courthouse. He wore a blazer and tie and seemed bored when I asked why he hadn't
transferred any of the serious cases -- like those brought by the survivors from
Marla -- to the special court. He said it was too difficult to arrest the
accused. He complained that the victims never identified their attackers, that
witnesses never showed up.

I then asked him about the case of Hamada, a village attacked by janjaweed in
January 2005. Muhammad Ali and others from the Amal Center filed the case on
behalf of the villagers of Hamada -- 93 people had been slaughtered, livestock
and possessions were looted and as the mayhem went on at least 19 women were
raped.

The Arab tribal leader Nazir al-Tijani, who commands most of the janjaweed in
that area and is said to be under the control of the governor, has admitted that
the attacks occurred and that he directed them. He said it was in retaliation
for cattle raids. ''He gave a big speech about his innocence, but he has not
read the Geneva Conventions very well,'' one international official told me,
quoting Tijani as having said, ''Just because I ordered and planned the attacks
doesn't mean that I was present during the attacks!''

The prosecutor told me that no individuals had been named in relation to Hamada.
I asked him about Tijani. ''That's a political case,'' he said. ''People talk to
the media, but no one came and gave us these details.'' I reminded the
prosecutor that the village leader of Hamada filed the case through the Amal
Center, and the prosecutor changed tactics. ''We made an order of arrest, but up
to now they're not arrested,'' he said. ''The police don't know these people.''
But everyone knew Tijani. He came into town several times a week, or you could,
as I once did, drive the two hours to his farm. ''Murder cases are so common
here,'' the prosecutor said, leaning back in his chair and scratching himself.
''Hamada is no different. It's not a war crime. It's a murder case.''

IV. A Visit to Sudan's Own Court

The Sudanese government's leading initiative to pre-empt the I.C.C. is its
Darfur Special Criminal Court. By late last fall the special court had heard
just six cases. One was a rape case that was dropped. (Thuriya Haroon, of the
Amal Center, tried to obtain a closed-session hearing for the under-age girl,
but the judges refused, and the girl clammed up.) Another case involved the
looting of a truck and the shooting of a USAid employee; the charge was reduced
to weapons possession. One of the harsher sentences went to a man convicted of
stealing 80 sheep. It's not that no one has been connected by Sudanese courts to
the genocide. They have convicted several men who did not want to take part in
it: Darfurian Air Force pilots who refused to fly bombing missions over their
homeland. They are serving 10 to 20 years in Kober prison in Khartoum.

One morning I visited the special court in El Fasher, the capital of North
Darfur. I asked the president of the court, Mahmoud Abkam, why, with all the
heinous crimes committed in Darfur over the past two years, so few cases of any
seriousness had come before his court. He was an elderly man and had been
retired when this job came up. He said, ''We've found nothing of importance
except those cases we heard.'' Why? ''Because no information went to the
prosecutor.'' What about Marla, Hamada, Deleig and all the other cases? He
reiterated that no cases had come to the court's attention and suggested that
this was because the victims preferred to talk to foreigners like me.

''You can serve their case better than the authorities,'' he said. ''Here you
can do nothing.'' He invited frustrated complainants to come to his court and
tell him that the attorney general's office is ignoring their cases, but, he
added, ''They won't do it.''

I said that many of the people who had told me their stories had no idea of his
court's existence. He said, with a distinct suddenness: ''To be frank, when we
came here we thought there would be cases ready for trial. And we heard of mass
rape, mass murder. We had the authority to see everything in the attorney
general's office. But nothing on paper was shown to us.'' How did he explain
that? ''Perhaps the attorney general could not proceed due to circumstances
beyond his control,'' he said. ''Let us be optimistic and say that.''

What if we were to be pessimistic?

''Higher authorities are not interested in these cases to be presented to the
court,'' he said, ''or for them to even come to the knowledge of the court.''
Another judge told me that, given the shortcomings of the court, the government
of Sudan, far from preventing the I.C.C. from taking over justice in Darfur, is
all but ensuring that the I.C.C. prosecutor will come to Sudan.

V. An I.C.C. Kind of Crime

A few days before I arrived in Nyala, the janjaweed and Arabs in military
uniform attacked the Fur village of Tama. In the courtyard of a small house in
Nyala, I met two women who had fled Tama and were wrapped in white shrouds, legs
stretched out on the earth, eyes fixed down. One of them, Zahara Muhammad
Abdullah, drew an orange cloth over the face of a young girl who was hiding in
her lap. The child was petrified. A few days earlier, the two women told me,
they rose before the sun for prayers in the mosque with their husband, the imam,
when out of the quiet came the sounds of hoofbeats and gunfire and shouts, and
janjaweed, some in uniform, burst through the mosque doors asking for the imam
by name. The women watched as their husband said, ''Yes, this is me,'' and the
armed men said, ''You, imam, are the one asking God to give victory to the Tora
Bora'' -- a nickname for antigovernment rebels -- ''so today is the last day for
you.'' The imam prayed and recited a sura from the Koran, Zahara said, ''and
then suddenly they shot him.'' Then the men fired their guns randomly around the
mosque. The bullets hit the imam's brother, his brother's wife, his brother's
two sons and his daughter's son. They all died. Another armed man appeared and
asked the other gunmen, ''Did you kill Fakir Tahir'' -- the imam. ''We did,''
they said. He wanted to make sure and pulled off the cloth covering the dead
imam's face.

The imam's two wives and Howa, the 5-year-old girl, were kept inside the mosque
and beaten periodically throughout the day while some 300 janjaweed continued to
kill and loot. Meanwhile, the janjaweed women known as Hakama, a kind of Greek
chorus who sing and encourage their warrior men during raids on villages, broke
into song when they saw the dead in the mosque: The blood of the blacks runs
like water, we take their goods and we chase them from our area and our cattle
will be in their land. The power of al-Bashir belongs to the Arabs, and we will
kill you until the end, you blacks, we have killed your God. It's a nonsensical
ending: one thing that distinguishes the war in Darfur is that all the tribes
are Muslim, and their God is the same.

The janjaweed killed 42 people that day, most of them running out of their homes
or through fields of sorghum, hoping to escape. They told the imam's wives, ''Go
now to your father.''

''We asked them, 'Who is our father?' and they said, 'The foreigners in Kalma
camp.'''

VI. The Perpetrators' Point of View

A few days later, I drove to Tama with African Union officers and troops. Their
mandate is a cruel one in that they are nearly powerless; they must monitor the
cease-fire, and that's it, no peacekeeping. Which means that many of these men
-- Rwandans, Gambians, South Africans, Kenyans, Nigerians -- have spent the last
year picking up and burying hundreds of dead bodies, and even watching as
janjaweed burn and shoot. And they can do nothing.

In Tama the fires hadn't yet gone out. Flames shot out of the freshly harvested
sorghum and sesame. Ceramic storage vats of food were smoldering. Homes were
ransacked. Empty toothpaste boxes, notebooks, onions and okra spilled across the
floors. A dog lay dead outside the smashed basins of the midwife's house. Inside
the brick mosque the floor was clean but for a bloodied turban, a bloodied
djellaba, a few bullet casings and two aluminum boxes holding Korans. ''This is
the Islam of Sudan,'' said a young Fur man, a Muslim. A sheik from the village
showed us the graves outside the mosque where they buried 10 men and a woman. A
week had passed since the janjaweed first attacked, and still they were burning
the place to ensure that the villagers wouldn't come back. The governor of South
Darfur, Atta al-Mannan, explained Tama to me this way: ''I warned the A.U. that
this is the seasonal trip south of the nomads and there may be an accident.''
But according to a military-intelligence officer, who spoke on condition of
anonymity because he feared he would be killed, the Sudanese military knew the
janjaweed were going to attack Tama. The janjaweed, he said, are considered
legal and are mostly part of Border Intelligence Guard units. ''They picked up
boxes of ammunition at 2 p.m. the day before,'' he said. ''So we knew some
attack was coming. That is the usual routine.''

Sudan's rulers seem to contemplate the murderous violence that sustains their
power with complete serenity. One evening in Khartoum I visited the former
governor of South Darfur, Lieut. Gen. Adam Hamid Musa. We sat in his garden
during Ramadan, accompanied by a professor friend of his. Hamid Musa lived in a
residential area cordoned off for favored military officers. He was removed as
governor in 2004 and now heads the Darfur Peace and Development Forum, which is
financed by Sudan's ruling party. He suggested that talk of rapes and racial
cleansing in Darfur was simple propaganda. ''Do you think a governor will go to
kill his own people?'' he asked.

Even before he was made governor in 2003, Musa was part of a group of Arab
ideologues who were in Darfur recruiting Arab nomads into the militia now known
as the janjaweed. In the garden that night, he noted that the allegations of
rape and slaughter all came from the tribes of victims.

''And they all lied?'' I asked.

''Yes,'' he said. ''A single case of raping hasn't been proved. The women there
don't even know what the word means.'' He chuckled happily and popped a toffee
into his mouth, as did his professor friend.

VII. Moreno-Ocampo Fights on Many Fronts

For Moreno-Ocampo, work- ing on the Darfur file is a never-ending tale of
bureaucracy and doublespeak. Interviews, access and permits are given to I.C.C.
investigators, then revoked, then rethought. Slow comes with the job, and in
some ways this is a throwback to Moreno-Ocampo's early days against a similar
regime. In prosecuting the perpetrators of the dirty war, 20 years ago,
Moreno-Ocampo and his team could not rely on evidence from intelligence or
police. They had no graves or remains -- the desaparecidos were mostly thrown
into the sea. What they had were 30,000 reported cases of desaparecidos
collected by a truth commission. They decided to focus on 700 cases. They based
their evidence on the testimony of survivors, many of whom were tortured
alongside those who disappeared. The prosecution proved that the generals had
command responsibility for the detention centers and the military pilots who had
dumped the bodies into the sea. This is exactly the strategy Moreno-Ocampo plans
to use in Darfur.

The Argentine trials gave Moreno-Ocampo a deeper understanding of the meaning of
the law for society. Argentina's new president at the time, Raul Alfonsin, won
the 1983 elections with a promise to prosecute the guerrillas and the junta.
''There was a social demand for law, but we the prosecutors were just the
strawberry -- the politicians were the cake,'' Moreno-Ocampo told me. ''Trials
are an expression of society. The victims finally received respect, for the
first time in my country. Before the trials, if you were a victim you were under
suspicion.'' Even his mother came around. She attended the same church as Gen.
Jorge Rafael Videla, the president and leader of the junta, and was furious with
her son for prosecuting him and betraying the family -- after all, her father
was a general. ''She changed her thinking through the media, watching the
trials. She said, 'I still love Videla, but he has to be in jail.'''

The trials were the most potent symbols of the fundamental changes sweeping
through Argentina. One disappointment with the Yugoslav tribunals, according to
Moreno-Ocampo, is that people were hoping ''the trials were the cake.'' But the
trials didn't change the country. ''The prosecutor cannot change job
opportunities or create consensus in society,'' he said. ''You need social
movements.''

But Sudan is not Argentina or even Yugoslavia. The regime is still in control,
and its officials are masters at manipulating the international community. As
one Sudanese foreign-ministry ambassador told me, ''We just have to get one step
ahead of the game so we can outmaneuver the I.C.C. when they finally request to
send investigators.'' Referring to the Darfur Special Criminal Court, he said,
''We make national trials, show no impunity'' -- that is, that the guilty are
being punished -- ''and ruin the I.C.C.'' You have to look long and hard to find
any political figure of significance in Sudan who is actively supporting the
I.C.C. -- while there are plenty who will draw a crowd by fulminating against
the court as one more instance of foreign meddling.

Given the lack of domestic support for prosecutions in Sudan, foreign support is
crucial. The European Union has been the I.C.C.'s most loyal backer but has
shown some wariness in the Sudan case, not least because of justifiable worries
about appearing colonialist. (There were huge anti-U.N. demonstrations in
Khartoum last month, and Sudanese politicians played the colonialism card very
heavily.) China and France, which are permanent members of the Security Council,
have interests in Sudanese oil, and though they referred the Darfur file to the
I.C.C., it is reasonable to question how deep their commitment goes. Russia,
another permanent member of the Security Council, has always been uneasy about
the I.C.C., given the continuing disaster in Chechnya. Neighboring countries,
through the African Union, have in general supported peace efforts and in some
instances have helped the I.C.C. But of course such support must be handled with
care, as the Bashir regime has active disputes with several of its neighbors --
notably Chad, with whom it is virtually at war.

The American position is a confused one. On one level, the Bush administration
is determined to hobble the I.C.C. For a few years, the United States has
pressed I.C.C. member states to sign a bilateral agreement swearing not to
surrender U.S. citizens, or foreign nationals working for the U.S., to the
I.C.C. But the administration's anti-I.C.C. policy has backfired. Gen. Bantz J.
Craddock, head of the Pentagon's Southern Command, testified before Congress
this year that the insistence on special bilateral agreements is undermining
American military influence. Eleven Latin American countries have not only lost
military aid; they no longer receive American training -- which means no bonds
are established with their American counterparts. Other countries, especially
China, are taking advantage of the American withdrawal to advance their own
foreign goals. On a trip to Latin America last month, Secretary of State
Condoleezza Rice acknowledged that this I.C.C.-immunity policy was damaging
America's interests.

The American willingness to allow, without voting for it, the Security Council's
referral of Darfur to the I.C.C. may have indicated a change in attitude, though
it seems to have come more from a belief that the court's investigation couldn't
hurt and might help. The State Department was working hard on Darfur even before
Secretary of State Colin Powell declared in 2004 that Sudan's actions in the
region constituted genocide. The peace agreement between North and South Sudan
last year, which ended decades of war, was a rare (and fragile) success for Bush
administration diplomacy in Africa. The United States has tried to push similar
negotiations on the warring parties in Darfur, so far with little result. At the
United Nations, John Bolton led the administration's push in February to have
the African Union force in Darfur reorganized under U.N. auspices and expanded,
which will probably take place by the end of the year.

At the same time, the Bush administration has stopped calling the crimes in
Darfur a genocide. The administration does not want to lose the North-South
agreement and the peace it has secured, and this may make it wishy-washy on
Darfur. It has also found Sudan to be a useful ally in the war on terror. At
least some Sudanese leaders being investigated by the I.C.C. are, according to
American officials who asked not to be named, highly valuable, if unreliable,
allies in hunting down Islamic terrorists. ''In 2004, when the Sudanese decided
to conclude the North-South peace, they got an A- on cooperation,'' a senior
American official said. ''They rendered people and gave us information on people
we didn't even know were there. Since then they've done stuff that saved
American lives.'' The C.I.A. flew Sudan's national-security director, Salah
Abdallah Ghosh, to Washington for a debriefing last year. He shared information
that his office had on Islamist militants training in Sudan before 9/11. Yet he
is one of a handful of top security men orchestrating Khartoum's crimes in
Darfur and deploying intelligence units that have carried out targeted killings
since 2003. In December, a United Nations panel recommended that Ghosh and 16
other Sudanese officials face international sanctions. ''The U.S. has pressed
the U.N. not to include Ghosh on the list of people who should be subject to
sanctions,'' John Prendergast, a senior adviser at the International Crisis
Group, told me. ''Trying to constructively engage with mass murderers in order
to gather information is the wrong policy. It reinforces the regime's
willingness to perpetrate atrocities.''

The Bush administration is reluctantly coming to terms with the usefulness, if
not the necessity, of the I.C.C. According to Roger Winter, the State
Department's special representative for the Sudan conflict, who has been
involved in America's Sudan policy for 25 years, ''If you want toliquidate an
Islamo-fascist regime that committed genocide, the way to do it that is accepted
by the international community is through the C.P.A.'' -- the Comprehensive
Peace Agreement that ended the North-South war -- ''and prosecutions by the
I.C.C.''

Despite the ambivalences, mixed messages and conflicting interests in the
international community, the biggest challenges for Moreno-Ocampo and his team
are in Sudan. The Khartoum government is learning how to play the game. It is
pushing tribal leaders from the Fur, Zaghawa and Massalit to accept
reconciliation and compensation; it has its roving Special Criminal Court. And
as the new minister of justice in Khartoum told me: ''We are sending 15
prosecutors to Darfur. We will try the armed forces, and convict rape offenders,
just to prove to the I.C.C. prosecutor that we are willing and able to try the
offenders in Darfur.'' He did add that under Sudan's Constitution, the president
and his cabinet members, members of the assembly and certain members of the
armed forces and police may be immune from prosecution.

Leaving aside the question of sincerity, Sudan's efforts do point to deeper
issues: should peace be allowed to trump justice? (The I.C.C. statute itself
advises that the prosecutor suspend indictments if they are not in the interests
of the victims.) Are reconciliation and compensation better justice than
prosecution and punishment? In northern Uganda, many tribal groups were against
the intervention of the I.C.C. at first. But some of Moreno-Ocampo's initial
enemies, like the northern mayors he was meeting with when I went to visit him
in The Hague, subsequently brainstormed with him on how to arrest Joseph Kony,
the leader of the Lord's Resistance Army.

Sudanese intellectuals close to the government are very good at painting
pictures of Armageddon to foreigners, insisting that if the international
community demands justice it will only hasten war. As Ghazi Salah al-Addin, a
moderate Islamist and presidential adviser, told me in Khartoum: ''Those who
feel threatened by the I.C.C., at a certain point, it will be a matter of life
and death to them. They could block the C.P.A. The situation is so fragile. We
shouldn't be complacent. Sudan is a very dangerous place. Your Somalia would be
a picnic if Sudan degenerates into chaos. It would draw in the elements you fear
most. It would require an influx of U.S. troops just like Afghanistan.''

But that is why the I.C.C.'s work is so crucial, including to the United States:
it has the potential to increase the pressure for peace as well as to deliver
some justice. Darfurians and activists across Sudan see it as the only way of
getting rid of one of the most murderous governments in the world. As the omda
of Marla, Abdul Karim, told me, ''After the intervention of the commission of
inquiry and the U.N. and all of them confessed that there are crimes of war and
crimes against humanity in this state, the best chance for the citizens of
Darfur is that the perpetrators of these crimes should be taken to account at
fair trials. Our hope is with the I.C.C.''

So, quietly and doggedly, Moreno-Ocampo is stitching together his file against
the top leaders of the genocide in Darfur, collecting evidence from victims,
activists and international officials, and perhaps this might, in a very partial
way, help keep Sudan from falling apart. In June he will present to the Security
Council a report on the crimes committed, a road map of how he will proceed and
probably a list of suspects to be indicted. Given that the Security Council is
backing Moreno-Ocampo, if he issues arrest warrants against President Bashir and
Vice President Ali Osman Taha, which is a real possibility, their political
careers will effectively end.

I met Moreno-Ocampo recently at a cafe on the Upper East Side of New York to
talk about his presentation at the Security Council. Sitting next to us was
Hector Timerman, the Argentine consul, and his family. Timerman told me that
when Moreno-Ocampo was first offered the job, Timerman was pushing him to
accept. ''Argentina is known in the world for the word desaparecidos -- it is
heavy for a country like us,'' Timerman said. ''I told him, 'It's time to show
the world a new Argentina committed to human rights.''' A few jokes were made
between the Timermans and Moreno-Ocampo about his arrogant confidence as a
lawyer and prosecutor. And then Timerman's wife said there was, after all, a
reason for it: ''Luis never loses.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Crimes Fighter: Luis Moreno-Ocampo, chief prosecutor in The
Hague.
Rings of Fire: The janjaweed kept the village of Tama burning to prevent
inhabitants from returning.
Burned Out: Victims rescued along the road three days after the attack on Tama
on Oct. 26.
 On the Run: Tama survivors fled to a nearby village with what possessions they
could salvage. (Photographs by Lynsey Addario/Corbis for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (86%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ARMIES (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); CLOTHING & ACCESSORIES STORES (72%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); RELIGION (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (83%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (82%); UNITED NATIONS (56%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (68%) George W (Pres) Bush; Elizabeth Rubin; Luis
Moreno-Ocampo

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); NETHERLANDS (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA (92%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); UGANDA (92%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 14, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Pentagon Rethinking Manual With Interrogation Methods

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 13


Under pressure from Congress and some of its own senior generals, the Pentagon
is backing away from including a classified set of interrogation techniques in a
new Army field manual, Pentagon and Senate officials said Tuesday.

The Defense Department is also expected to drop a plan to have one set of
interrogation methods for detainees that the military considers ''unlawful
combatants,'' like detainees at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and another set for
traditional prisoners of war captured on the battlefield, the officials said.

Some military officials and top aides to Vice President Dick Cheney have
insisted it is essential to have a secret set of techniques and to leave
ambiguous just how far American interrogators could go to extract information
from terror suspects.

But lawmakers from both parties, State Department officials and human rights
organizations argued that detainees would eventually disclose the secret
interrogation techniques and that keeping them secret would only reinforce the
perception abroad that the United States condoned torture as an interrogation
method.

The Associated Press first reported the change on Tuesday.

Senior Pentagon and State Department officials warned Tuesday that while the
administration was moving in the direction of making public all interrogation
techniques or removing some completely from the manual, a final policy had not
yet been set and further changes could be made.

''I think we are getting close to a resolution,'' Deputy Defense Secretary
Gordon England said in a brief interview on Tuesday.

The Bush administration has held that many captives in the campaign against
terrorism are not entitled to the same protections as prisoners of war. And that
seemed to be an underlying principle of revisions to a long-delayed Army field
manual, used by commanders, interrogators and military lawyers, that has been
the subject of an internal administration debate for more than a year.

Advocates of the classified techniques, which would be in an annex of the
manual, and of two sets of methods for different types of prisoners said they
were all valuable tools against a variety of detainees trained in Qaeda camps on
how to resist allied interrogations.

The Pentagon began reversing course last month, after three senior Republican
senators, John McCain of Arizona, John W. Warner of Virginia and Lindsey Graham
of South Carolina, expressed strong reservations about the draft field manual in
meetings with Mr. England and letters to him.

Mr. McCain and Mr. Graham said having two sets of interrogation techniques would
violate the legislation that Mr. McCain sponsored and that was enacted last
December to bar cruel and inhumane treatment of American detainees. The measure
requires that only interrogation techniques authorized by the new Army field
manual be used on prisoners.

Mr. Warner argued against publishing a classified annex to the field manual with
exacting details about which procedures may or may not be used, and in what
circumstances. The entire manual should be open to public review, he said.

''I asked them to weigh carefully the need for the classified version because it
could begin to undermine what I anticipate and hope will be a strong acceptance
for an open revision to the field manual,'' Mr. Warner said in an interview
Tuesday.

In addition to the lawmakers' complaints, some senior generals also objected. At
a recent meeting of the nation's top worldwide commanders, Gen. John P. Abizaid,
the head of the Central Command, and Gen. Peter Schoomaker, the Army chief of
staff, said the new interrogation techniques had to be clear and unambiguous
''so our corporals in the field can understand them,'' said a military officer
briefed on the remarks.

A senior Defense Department official, who was granted anonymity because the new
field manual has not yet been approved, said: ''If this debate were limited to
what's best for interrogation purposes, the decision would be pretty easy. But
then you have to look at what you lose diplomatically.''

Human rights groups applauded the apparent shift in the Pentagon's position.

''If the Pentagon is stepping back from that, it's a welcome sign that they now
understand the need for transparency and clarity,'' said Elisa Massimino,
Washington director of Human Rights First.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (90%); POWS & MIAS (89%); TORTURE (89%); TERRORISM (88%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); WAR ON TERROR (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); LAWYERS
(71%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Prisoners of War; Torture; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Terrorism

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (55%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (83%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (55%)

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (79%); JOHN WARNER (78%); DICK CHENEY (78%); LINDSEY GRAHAM
(58%); MARK WARNER (58%) Eric Schmitt; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (91%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 14, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

ISRAEL MISSILES KILL 10 IN GAZA

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER and IAN FISHER; Steven Erlanger reported from Gaza
for this article, and Ian Fisher from Tel Aviv.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1356 words

DATELINE: GAZA, June 13


Eight Palestinian civilians were killed and more than 40 wounded Tuesday by an
Israeli missile strike on Islamic militants riding in a van that Israeli
officials said was carrying rockets to launch at Israel. Two men in the van were
also killed, including a man the Israelis consider an important rocket maker.

The officials said the strike had prevented more of what has been a rising
number of Palestinian missile attacks launched from Gaza. But the civilian
casualties further inflamed Palestinian rage over eight deaths last week on a
beach from what residents said was an errant Israeli shell. Seven of the dead
were from one family.

In a news conference in Tel Aviv, Israel's defense minister, Amir Peretz,
announced Tuesday that an investigation into the deaths on Friday showed that
Israel was not to blame.

''We have enough findings to back up the suspicion that the intention to
describe this as an Israeli event is simply not correct,'' he said, citing
films, data on where and when the shells landed, and a piece of shrapnel taken
from a victim. ''The accumulating evidence proves that this incident was not due
to Israeli forces.''

The account was quickly disputed by officials from Human Rights Watch, who cited
contrary evidence from an investigation of their own.

In the attack on Tuesday, one missile struck a van and killed two members of
Islamic Jihad and apparently wounded a third. But a second missile fired shortly
afterward hit the curb just in front of a house whose occupants had emerged to
see what had happened, and members of the Mughrabi family and their neighbors
were killed.

Two children and three medical workers died in the second explosion, after the
first had destroyed the yellow Volkswagen van of a noted Islamic Jihad rocket
maker, Hamoud Wadiya, who was killed. Israel said Mr. Wadiya was transporting
Katyusha rockets to launch at Israel, and rockets were seen in the wreckage.

The Katyusha is a factory-made weapon of longer range and much greater accuracy
than the crude Qassam rocket that Palestinian militants build in machine shops
with explosives mixed in cooking pots.

The Katyushas, Israel says, have been smuggled into the Gaza Strip from Egypt
and represent a significantly enhanced danger to Israeli cities.

Since Israel withdrew from Gaza 10 months ago, scores of Qassam rockets have
been launched from Gaza; Israel says there were 100 rockets fired last month.
Between June 2004 and March 2006, eight Israelis, including three children, were
killed in the attacks, the Israeli military says.

Israel says it has been forced to go after the launching sites because the
Palestinian authorities have done nothing about them.

Palestinian militants say they launch the rockets in response to Israel's
continuing campaign to capture or kill Palestinian militants from Islamic Jihad
and Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades.

After Tuesday's attack, a weeping Hekmat Mughrabi said her 30-year-old son,
Ashraf, had died in her arms. Ashraf ran to the door after the first explosion,
trying to calm children playing on the roof, she said. ''He was shouting to the
kids, 'Don't be afraid, don't be afraid!' '' and had not even finished his
sentence when the second missile hit, she told The Associated Press.

An angry Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, called the Israeli
actions ''state terrorism'' and accused Israel of trying to ''wipe out the
Palestinian people.''

Mr. Abbas, whose aides feel his support for talks is being undermined by the
civilian death toll, said, ''Every day there are martyrs, there are wounded
people, all of them innocents, all of them bystanders.''

The deaths are bound to make it harder for Mr. Abbas and the United States to
persuade Hamas, which controls the Palestinian Authority, to recognize the right
of Israel to exist, to forswear violence and to accept previous
Palestinian-Israeli agreements, which are based on a permanent two-state
solution.

Mr. Abbas will also find it more difficult to get Hamas to accept a referendum
proposal that would at least implicitly recognize Israel.

There was pandemonium on Tuesday at Al Shifa Hospital, where the dead and the
wounded were brought. Gunmen surged through the courtyard, firing weapons into
the air, and banging on the door of the morgue to retrieve the bodies of their
colleagues or family members.

They grabbed stretchers and paraded the corpses in impromptu marches around the
hospital yards and into the streets, bearing the black banners of Islamic Jihad
and the yellow ones of Fatah and Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, to which Ashraf
Mughrabi belonged.

In a gruesome scene, one Islamic Jihad militant smeared the blood of his dead
colleague onto his rifle and lifted it high into the air. Amid the acrid smoke
of burning tires, women shouted, ''Death to Israel! Death to the occupation!''

After the explosion on the beach in Gaza on Friday, Hamas said it was abandoning
its 16-month cease-fire with Israel, though Israeli officials insist that Hamas
had started firing its own Qassams toward Israel a week before.

Human Rights Watch, which has been investigating the Israeli shelling in Gaza on
Friday, said of the deaths, ''The evidence we have gathered strongly suggests
Israeli artillery fire was to blame.'' It called on Israel to open an
independent investigation rather than relying on its own military.

An American expert working with Human Rights Watch, Marc Garlasco, is a former
Pentagon official who did bomb damage assessment for the American military in
Kosovo and worked for the Defense Intelligence Agency.

He said that he had visited the beach the day after the explosion, and that the
crater size, the shrapnel and the location of injuries on the bodies all pointed
to ''a shell dropping from the sky, not explosives under the sand.''

In an interview in Gaza, he said he had found shrapnel ''consistent with a
155-mm. Israeli shell fired from a M109 howitzer,'' including one piece stamped
''155mm.''

Defense Minister Peretz and other Israeli military officials offered a different
analysis.

They contended that the explosion on the beach occurred between 4:57 p.m. and
5:10 p.m. They based that on an array of films, not specifically identified but
shown at the news conference in Tel Aviv. One film taken from seaward showed
what the officials called normal activity on that stretch of beach, with the
time stamped as late as 4:57. A later film stamped at 5:15 showed an ambulance
arriving from a hospital about five minutes away.

Brig. Gen. Hezi Levy, Israel's surgeon general and one of the investigators,
said that they had accounted for all but one of the shells fired that day, and
that none of them had exploded during this time. He said the one unaccounted-for
artillery shell was fired ''much'' before 4:57. Later, another military official
specified that that shell was launched at 4:30.

''There is no chance that this shell caused such damage,'' the general said.

The news conference, however, did make clear that shelling had occurred near
that time and place. The last shell fell, according to a photograph of the site
marked with the artillery hits, at 4:48, several hundred yards north of the site
of the deaths.

General Levy said that four of those injured were taken to Israeli hospitals and
that the single piece of shrapnel extracted from one of them did not match any
munitions used that day.

The officials said they also reviewed other recent bombardments in the area and
ruled out the possibility that an Israeli shell had landed there earlierand
might have been set off by the Palestinian family.

Mr. Peretz and the others refused to speculate on what could have caused the
explosion, though military officials have contended that Hamas may have planted
land mines against Israeli commandos.

Mr. Peretz did not rule out the possibility of allowing outside experts review
Israel's evidence, as Human Rights Watch demanded. But the army's chief of
staff, Lt. Gen. Dan Halutz, said he did not see the need.

''What we are doing is very, very, very professional,'' he told reporters. ''We
don't need the assistance of anyone.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Victims from a house in Gaza that was hit yesterday by an
Israeli missile. A rocket maker was also killed. (Photo by Khalil
Hamra/Associated Press)(pg. A6)Chart: ''Comparing Rockets''A Palestinian van hit
by an Israeli missile on Tuesday was carrying Katyusha rockets.KatyushaRange: up
to 28 miles
length: 17 feetThere are two known variations of the Katyusha used against the
Israelis -- the 240-millimeter, above, which was test-fired by Hezbollah in
August 2005, and the 122-millimeter, fired from the Gaza Strip in March
2006.QasssamRange: 2-6 miles
length: 6 feetQassam are handmade rockets with shorter range and less accuracy
than the factory-made Katyusha.(Sources by Military Periscope
GlobalSecurity.org
Jane's
 Israel Defense Forces)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (92%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION
(89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); BEACHES (70%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (69%); WORKPLACE ACCIDENTS (68%); SMUGGLING (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(51%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (82%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD
(54%)

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 25, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Human Rights: New Leader For Amnesty International USA

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE STROM (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 104 words


Amnesty International USA, the American affiliate of the global human rights
organization, has named Larry Cox, an executive at the Ford Foundation, as its
executive director. Mr. Cox will replace William F. Schulz, who has presided
over the organization for the last 12 years, on May 1. At Ford, Mr. Cox guides
the foundation's grants to human rights organizations, including Amnesty. He is
returning to Amnesty, having previously worked for it from 1976 to 1990. He
takes over the organization as it grapples with an ever-increasing range of
human rights issues produced by concerns about terrorism.   STEPHANIE STROM
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (91%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); FOUNDATIONS (90%); EXECUTIVES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (50%) Appointments and Executive Changes

COMPANY: FORD MOTOR CO (91%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%) Amnesty International (Orgn)

TICKER: FORDP (PAR) (91%); F (NYSE) (91%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK & UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (91%);
NAICS336111 AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (91%); SIC3711 MOTOR VEHICLES & PASSENGER
CAR BODIES (91%)

PERSON: Larry Cox; William F Schulz; Stephanie Strom

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 1, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Prosecutors in Hussein Case Tie Him to Order to Kill 148

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE TRIAL;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1218 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 28


As Saddam Hussein watched quietly from the dock, prosecutors on Tuesday
displayed what they said was his signature on orders of execution for 148 men
and boys, some as young as 11, in what appeared to be the first evidence linking
the former dictator to large-scale crimes since his trial began in October.

The presentation was a striking turnaround for a trial that had been widely
dismissed as a farce, with the defendants and their lawyers alternately refusing
to appear and delivering angry tirades in court.

The new material and more orderly atmosphere also suggested that the trial --
which has come under strong criticism by Iraqi officials and human rights groups
-- may yet fulfill American hopes for a credible public forum on the crimes of
Mr. Hussein's rule. But it remains unclear what standard of proof they are using
in authenticating the evidence.

An unaccustomed hush fell over the courtroom as the lead prosecutor, Jaafar
al-Musawi, leafed through page after page of documents -- displayed on a screen
-- in which mass executions are discussed as calmly as purchase orders. Many
bore the letterhead of Iraq's feared intelligence service, the Mukhabarat.
Others were scrawled out by hand.

One letter stated, ''It was discovered that the execution of 10 juveniles was
not carried out because their ages ranged from 11 to 17 years old. We recommend
executing them in a secret manner in coordination with the management of the
prison and the Mukhabarat.''

An arrow runs from that sentence to the margin, where it is written by hand:
''Yes. It is preferable that they are buried by the Mukhabarat.'' The
handwriting is Mr. Hussein's, the prosecutor said, though he did not offer
independent handwriting analysis or other proof to back his claim.

The chief judge is the final arbiter of the documents' authenticity, though he
listens to both sides before making a decision.

Other letters showed that intelligence officials mistakenly printed a death
certificate for a 14-year-old boy. When they discovered he was still alive, they
had him brought to Baghdad and hanged, according to the letter, addressed to
Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, Mr. Hussein's half brother and fellow defendant.

Mr. Hussein, who in previous sessions often burst out laughing or delivered
lengthy tirades, said almost nothing on Tuesday. Dressed in a dark suit, he
looked gaunt and subdued as he watched the documents, and never stood up. He
said at one point, ''I want to tell the media -- there is no letter from me.''
But his voice could scarcely be heard.

Until now, much of the trial has been a flamboyant battle of wills between the
chief judges on one hand, and Mr. Hussein and Mr. Ibrahim on the other. But on
Tuesday, Mr. Musawi quickly established himself as a new force in the courtroom.
When Mr. Ibrahim began bickering with the current chief judge, Raouf
Abdel-Rahman, the prosecutor interceded, pointing at Mr. Ibrahim and loudly
demanding that he listen to the documentary evidence.

Prosecutors say most of the documents are originals obtained after the fall of
the government. The tribunal's statutes do not require guilt to be proved beyond
a reasonable doubt, and human rights groups have raised questions about whether
the trial can meet international standards in Iraq's current state of chaos.

As the documents were being read, the defendants stayed in their seats,
seemingly stunned by the sight of their own names and signatures.

''Does that document have the logo of the office on it?'' Mr. Ibrahim
interrupted at one point. When the prosecutor said the letter was an interoffice
memo that would not have been written on letterhead, Mr. Ibrahim merely replied,
in a weak voice, ''these papers are not official.''

Of the 148 men and boys whose death warrants Mr. Hussein is accused of signing,
96 were hanged in the Abu Ghraib prison, the documents showed. Forty-six died
under torture, including four additional inmates who were accidentally added to
the group. Ten boys and adolescents were executed in 1989, after they reached
the legal age.

For the first time, at least one of the defendants seemed to acknowledge a
connection to the executions, which took place after an assassination attempt on
Mr. Hussein in the Shiite village of Dujail in 1982.

''I have sentenced the 46 but I have no idea about the others,'' said Awad
al-Bandar, another defendant who was head of the revolutionary court when it
ordered the executions. It was not immediately clear why Mr. Bandar believed
this admission would be exculpatory.

The trial's resumption after a two-week adjournment -- the latest of many -- was
something of a triumph for American officials. The sectarian violence that broke
out last week after a bombing at a major Shiite mosque in Samarra had pushed the
country to a full-scale crisis, with government operations largely shut down
during three days of full-time curfew. It was uncertain until Monday night
whether the trial would resume Tuesday.

''Particularly after all this turmoil, we think it's a good sign that we were
able to move forward'' with the trial, said an American diplomat familiar with
the court.

The trial still faces serious problems that have drawn criticism from
international human rights monitors. Two defense lawyers and a judge were killed
last year, and the defense still insists it is not being given adequate
protection. In January the entire defense team walked out after Judge
Abdel-Rahman removed a member of it-- along with Mr. Ibrahim -- for disruptive
behavior. The judge also removed all of the defendants for similar reasons. The
defendants soon returned, and were represented by court-appointed lawyers who
appeared to be doing a lackluster job.

On Tuesday the defense team returned to the courtroom for the first time since
the walkout in January. But within minutes, after their request for an
adjournment was denied, Mr. Hussein's two lead lawyers, Khalil al-Dulaimi and
Khamis al-Obeidi, walked out again.

Mr. Hussein, too, has tried to draw attention by complaining about his
treatment, and his lawyers said he went on a weeklong hunger strike in protest
last month. But aside from his subdued manner, Mr. Hussein showed no signs of
ill health on Tuesday.

Political interference has also been a problem. The trial's first chief judge,
Rizgar Muhammad Amin, resigned in January after a number of high-level Iraqi
officials criticized him for being too lenient with the defendants. An alternate
judge was passed over after he was accused of having been a member of Saddam
Hussein's Baath Party, although he denied the charge. The court is not supposed
to be vulnerable to Iraq's highly politicized de-Baathification process, but it
appears to have had an effect anyway.

More documents are expected when the trial resumes on Wednesday. Once the
documentary phase is over, the court will adjourn briefly to prepare a formal
charge against the defendants. The defense will then be given a chance to call
its own witnesses.

The proceeding was very different from the events surrounding the executions of
the 148 men and boys after the Dujail incident, said Mr. Musawi, the lead
prosecutor.

''None of the defendants were brought to court,'' he said as he displayed the
documents. ''Their statements were never recorded.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A facsimile from the High Tribunal, one of several with a
signature said to be Saddam Hussein's. (Photo by Iraqi High Tribunal)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
FORENSICS (77%); JUDGES (77%); LAWYERS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Children and Youth

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Robert F Worth; Saddam Hussein; Awad al- Bandar

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Dujail (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberian Seized To Stand Trial On War Crimes

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN; Katharine Houreld contributed reporting from Monrovia
for this article, and Steven R. Weisman from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1301 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 29


Charles G. Taylor, the warlord who became Liberia's president, was captured
Wednesday after a dramatic 24 hours in which he disappeared from the villa in
Nigeria where he had lived in exile and then was recognized at a remote outpost
as he tried to leave the country.

He was brought here to face war crimes charges for his role in a brutal
decade-long civil war in Sierra Leone, one of a series of conflagrations that he
set off, killing at least 300,000 people. He is the first African head of state
to face such charges in an international court.

Mr. Taylor's arrival by helicopter under extraordinary security capped a saga
that began nearly three years ago, when he fled his nation in the face of a
rebel onslaught. He was captured Wednesday morning after a customs official
recognized him as he tried to escape into Cameroon.

He arrived unshaven and dressed in a white tunic covered by a bullet-proof vest,
tan pants and slip-on shoes. His appearance was in stark contrast to his dapper
look in his last public appearance, in 2003, when he went into exile after a
14-year civil war that killed a quarter million of his countrymen, defiantly
declaring, ''God willing, I will be back.''

He did return to Liberia, briefly, on Wednesday, but only to be handed over to
United Nations troops who promptly flew him here, where he was read the
indictment from a United Nations-backed court dealing with war crimes in Sierra
Leone -- 11 counts of crimes against humanity -- then jailed.

Desmond de Silva, the prosecutor who will try the case, said Mr. Taylor's
arrival ''sends out the clear message that no matter how rich, powerful or
feared people may be, the law is above them.''

The trial is sure to resonate on a continent where dictators have ruled with
ruthless impunity. From Idi Amin, the soldier whose murderous rule in Uganda
gave way to comfortable exile in Saudi Arabia, to Haile Mengistu Mariam, whose
14-year Communist rule in Ethiopia brought political purges that killed more
than a million people but who is now living quietly in Zimbabwe, African leaders
who brutalize their citizens have faced few consequences.

''The current perpetrators of serious human rights crimes should be put on
notice that international courts take the crimes they commit very, very
seriously,'' said Corinne Dufka of Human Rights Watch.

Mr. Taylor's arrival here was a dramatic turn in the already complicated saga of
the effort to bring him to justice after he ignited a series of civil wars in
the 1990's that engulfed much of West Africa.

In the early 1980's, Mr. Taylor was a senior government procurement officer in
Liberia. Charged in 1983 with embezzling nearly $1 million, he fled. He was
arrested in Massachusetts in 1984, then escaped from jail in 1985. He resurfaced
in Liberia in 1989 as a Libyan-trained warlord, leading a rebel force. He was
elected president in 1997, in a vote overshadowed by fears of what might happen
if he lost.

A warrant for his arrest was issued in March 2003. But as part of an agreement
to remove him from power and halt a bloodbath in Liberia, Nigeria offered him
asylum and refused to hand him over to the court in Sierra Leone, where he was
accused of fomenting a civil war.

Though under intense pressure by the United States to arrest him, President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria had insisted he would hand over Mr. Taylor only to
an elected Liberian government. Earlier this month, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,
Liberia's new president, herself facing pressure from the United States, made
the request, and Mr. Obasanjo agreed.

But Nigeria insisted that it was Liberia's responsibility to go and arrest him,
with Mr. Obasanjo's spokeswoman declaring that Mr. Taylor was ''not a
prisoner,'' which seemed almost to taunt Mr. Taylor into trying to escape from
his lightly guarded compound in Calabar.

Late Monday night the Nigerian government said he had vanished. He was found
more than 600 miles north, in an ash-colored Land Rover with a large quantity of
dollars, in the company of a woman and a driver, Haz Iwendi, a spokesman for the
National Police, said by telephone.

A customs official spotted Mr. Taylor, whose vehicle had diplomatic license
plates, early Wednesday morning in the border town of Ngala, Mr. Iwendi said.

The escape was an acute embarrassment for Mr. Obasanjo, who arrived Tuesday in
Washington for a visit to the White House to discuss security in the volatile
Niger Delta, where attacks by militants on oil facilities and kidnappings have
slashed output. Nigeria is the United States' fifth-largest supplier of oil.

Outraged American lawmakers called on President Bush to cancel his meeting with
Mr. Obasanjo, with whom Mr. Bush has had a warm relationship, based in part on
their shared Christian faith and bolstered by Mr. Obasanjo's role as a regional
problem solver.

But internal problems have eroded the Nigerian's status. Militants in the Niger
Delta, sectarian violence that killed more than 100 people last month and a
political crisis stemming from plans to try to extend his rule to a third term
have roiled Nigeria.

Mr. Bush met with him on Wednesday, and at a joint news conference, hailed the
arrest of Mr. Taylor. ''The fact that Charles Taylor will be brought to justice
in a court of law will help Liberia,'' Mr. Bush said, ''and is a signal, Mr.
President, of your deep desire for there to be peace in your neighborhood.''

Mr. Taylor was flown on a Nigerian government jet from Borno State, in
northeastern Nigeria, where he was captured, to Monrovia, Liberia's capital.
There he was handed over to Liberian officials, who promptly turned him over to
United Nations peacekeepers, who arrested him. After a brief medical checkup, he
boarded a helicopter for Sierra Leone.

The reaction to Mr. Taylor's arrival here was muted and fearful.

J. B. Jenkins-Johnson, a human rights lawyer in Freetown, worried that Mr.
Taylor's arrival would cause unrest in a country still reeling from the long
civil war. ''Let them not bring that man here,'' Mr. Jenkins-Johnson said.
''This man will bring us nothing but problems.''

Indeed, many Sierra Leoneans wonder if the court's work will do much to help
them improve their lives. ''The Taylor case doesn't have a lot of resonance,''
said Olu Gordon, a political analyst and journalist in Freetown. ''It is
abstract, while the problems they face are concrete: what to feed their
children, how to pay for school, and so on.''

The loudest calls for Mr. Taylor's arrest came not from his victims but from the
United States, which has backed the international court here financially and
diplomatically.

Ms. Johnson Sirleaf, the Liberian leader, had been hesitant to act on Mr.
Taylor, saying that the peace in Liberia was still fragile and that any action
could stir up his allies, several of whom hold seats in Liberia's new
legislature. Several of his commanders remain in Liberia, and news of Mr.
Taylor's arrest caused immediate fears of a coup attempt.

But removing him from the scene could also help stabilize the region, said Mike
McGovern, an analyst for the International Crisis Group, by demoralizing Mr.
Taylor's supporters.

''The arrest closes an ugly chapter in Liberian history and gives people the
confidence to look to the future,'' Mr. McGovern said in an interview in
Monrovia. ''A lot of people are still sitting on the fence. Once they have a
clear idea of where Taylor is and what's likely to happen to him, they're likely
to really turn their backs on that period and move forward.''

In Liberia, human rights advocates exulted in the news. ''This is a great day,''
said Jerome J. Verdier Sr., head of the country's Truth and Reconciliation
Commission. ''It's a fundamental triumph for the rule of law both in Liberia and
the sub-region.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Charles Taylor, on steps, ex-president of Liberia, arriving
yesterday in Sierra Leone after being caught in Nigeria while fleeing war crimes
charges. (Photo by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
 Charles G. Taylor as he was led off a Nigerian plane yesterday in Monrovia,
Liberia, his first stop en route to a jail cell in Sierra Leone. (Photo by
European Pressphoto Agency)(pg. A8)Map of Sierra Leone highlights the location
of Freetown. (pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); INDICTMENTS (76%); ARRESTS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(71%); GENOCIDE (71%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (68%); EMBEZZLEMENT (64%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; United
States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%) United Nations

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Charles G Taylor

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (79%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (57%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (96%); LIBERIA (95%); NIGERIA (94%); AFRICA (93%);
CAMEROON (92%); ZIMBABWE (79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); UGANDA (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone; Cameroon; Nigeria; Africa; Liberia; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              92 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

HUSSEIN CHARGED WITH GENOCIDE IN 50,000 DEATHS

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi and Kirk Semple contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1299 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, April 4


The Iraqi court trying Saddam Hussein announced Tuesday that it had charged him
with genocide, saying he sought to annihilate the Kurdish people in 1988, when
the military killed at least 50,000 Kurdish civilians and destroyed 2,000
villages.

The case is the first against Mr. Hussein to address the large-scale human
rights violations committed during his decades in power, the same acts the Bush
administration has publicized in explaining the American invasion of Iraq. Six
other defendants also face charges. Mr. Hussein is already being tried for the
torture and killings of 148 men and boys in the Shiite village of Dujail.

Since the United Nations adopted the genocide convention in 1948, very few
courts have charged defendants with genocide, the attempt to annihilate an
ethnic, religious, national or political group in whole or in part.

Convictions have been handed down in the tribunals for Rwanda and Yugoslavia.
This is the first time that a Middle Eastern ruler has been charged with it.

''It was during this campaign that thousands of women, children and men were
buried in mass graves in many locations,'' Raid Juhi, the chief judge of the
Iraqi High Tribunal's investigative court, said at a news conference.

Judge Juhi said it would be up to other judges to decide when the genocide trial
against Mr. Hussein would start, and whether it would overlap with the Dujail
case. Defense lawyers must be given 45 days to review the case files.

The court defines the bloody Anfal campaign, whose name means ''the spoils''
from a favorite Koranic verse of Mr. Hussein's, as eight military operations in
1988 in the mountainous Kurdish homeland of northern Iraq. Families who escaped
death squads or were allowed to live were forced to relocate into the
hinterlands or in neighboring countries.

The Kurds, who make up a fifth of Iraq's people, tried to fight back, but Mr.
Hussein used chemical weapons, including mustard gas and nerve agents.

Judge Juhi said the court had gathered enough evidence, like documents and mass
graves, to prosecute the defendants in the deaths of at least 50,000 civilians.
Kurdish officials and human rights advocates said the death toll had been much
higher. They also said the Anfal campaign began years earlier, with other
massacres and forced migrations.

The parties agree that at the very least, hundreds of thousands were arrested,
tortured, relocated or killed.

All seven defendants are charged with crimes against humanity and war crimes
related to an internal armed conflict. Mr. Hussein and one other defendant, Ali
Hassan al-Majid, known as Chemical Ali, also have been charged with genocide,
which legal experts say is difficult to prove. Mr. Majid was one of Mr.
Hussein's most feared aides and oversaw the north during the Anfal campaign.

The other defendants include military commanders and senior intelligence
officials.

''These charges should not be addressed to President Saddam,'' Khalil
al-Dulaimi, Mr. Hussein's chief lawyer, said in a telephone interview. ''They
should be addressed to the American and British forces, because they are killing
the Iraqi people and using weapons of mass destruction against the Iraqi
people.''

President Jalal Talabani, a Kurd who for years led militiamen in northern Iraq,
praised the court's decision to bring the Anfal charges, and promised that he
and other government officials would not try to influence the trial.

It has taken years to assemble the evidence for the Anfal case. American
officials say the Dujail crimes were selected as the first ones to try Mr.
Hussein on because that case was not nearly as complicated as some others. It is
also easier in the Dujail case to establish a clear chain of command between Mr.
Hussein and those who carried out the executions, the officials say.

But they say that the Anfal massacres and the suppression of the Shiite uprising
of 1991, which resulted in up to 150,000 deaths, are the two cases that go much
more directly to the heart of Mr. Hussein's murderous rule, and could prove more
cathartic for a vast majority of Iraqis.

The Dujail trial, expected to resume Wednesday with a cross-examination of Mr.
Hussein, is entering its final phase, in which the court will review formal
charges and hear arguments from the defense lawyers.

If a death sentence is handed down to Mr. Hussein, it is unclear whether the
court would carry out the execution before other cases begin or are concluded.
Any death sentence is automatically appealed.

There is no deadline for a decision, but if the appeal is denied, then the
statutes of the tribunal mandate that the defendant must be executed within 30
days. Even the president's office, which is supposed to approve all death
sentences, would be able to do little to delay that, said American legal experts
advising the tribunal.

Many Iraqis who despise Mr. Hussein, especially Shiites and Kurds, have
denounced the tribunal and called for Mr. Hussein's immediate execution, while
some officials, like President Talabani, have said they want Mr. Hussein to stay
alive long enough to face trial on all possible charges.

There are about a dozen investigations under way, all of which may result in
individual sets of charges. The operations of the tribunal and its oversight of
the Dujail case have been tumultuous, plagued by the assassinations of a judge
and lawyers, political pressure from the Iraqi government and power struggles
among the judges.

Questions have been raised about why the tribunal was never set up in an
international venue, where security would not be as great a concern. American
and Iraqi officials have struggled to endow the trial with legitimacy, but many
foreign governments and human rights advocates have continued to view it as a
show court.

The bringing of charges in Anfal brings a new set of problems, they say. If the
trial were to proceed concurrent with the trial on the Dujail killings, then Mr.
Hussein's defense team could be placed at an unfair disadvantage, unless Mr.
Hussein hired more lawyers. The prosecutors and judges do not have that problem;
a separate prosecutor and five-judge panel will oversee Anfal.

With Mr. Hussein needing to focus on final arguments in Dujail, a concern is
''how he could do all that and then simultaneously prepare for a larger and more
complex litigation -- it goes to issues of fairness,'' said Marieke Wierda, a
senior associate at the International Center for Transitional Justice, a New
York-based advocacy group.

The other seven defendants in the Dujail trial are all different than those in
the Anfal case.

Kurdish officials often say that 180,000 people were killed in the Anfal
campaign, but the actual number is closer to 80,000, according to Joost
Hiltermann, the Middle East director of the International Crisis Group, an
advocacy group.

The scope of the trial is generally limited to the eight military operations
from February to August 1988, but the court will also examine evidence starting
from March 1987, when Mr. Hussein chose Mr. Majid as the top official in
northern Iraq.

In the years preceding Anfal, Kurds in Iraqi villages near Iran were forced to
abandon their homes. Those areas were labeled ''prohibited,'' and anyone living
there was deemed to be an Iranian agent or saboteur. The Anfal campaign was
undertaken to deal with those who had moved back or had not moved.

The other defendants in the Anfal case are Sultan Hashem Ahmed, the military
commander of the campaign and the defense minister starting in 2001; Sabir
Abdul-Aziz al-Duri, the director of military intelligence; Hussein Rashid
al-Tikriti, thedeputy of operations for the Iraqi forces; Tahir Tawfiq al-Ani, a
governor of Mosul; and Farhan Mutlak al-Jubouri, the head of military
intelligence in the north.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Raid Juhi announced a genocide charge against Saddam
Hussein yesterday in Baghdad. (Photo by Christoph Bangert/Polaris, for The New
York Times)(pg. A6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
TORTURE (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); JUDGES (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); MEN (75%); FAMILY (74%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); ARRESTS (73%); RELIGION (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (68%); POLITICAL PARTIES (68%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%); RELOCATIONS (62%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%);
QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Kurds; Poison Gases; Biological and Chemical Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) Saddam Hussein; Edward Wong; Raid (Judge) Juha; Ali
Hassan Al- Majid

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Dujail (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THE BEST STRATEGY

SECTION: Section 5; Column 5; Travel Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 212 words



To the Editor: Thanks to Mr. Kurlantzick for laying out the arguments for and
against tourist travel to Myanmar, given its poor human rights record. Although
he did mention Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, he didn't say that she won the Nobel Peace
Prize in 1991 and is now the only imprisoned Nobel Laureate.

We also think it would have been worth noting that the ''at least hundreds of
other political prisoners'' live under inhumane conditions merely for exercising
their right to express divergent political opinions. They never received fair
trials; just harsh and sometimes absurdly long sentences.

Consider three prisoners of conscience whom Amnesty International supports: Myo
Min Zaw, a young student living out a 52-year sentence (initially the sentence
was 38 years, and has since been increased) for protesting poor education and
human rights practices; Dr. Than Nyein was arrested at an opposition party
meeting and has served more than eight years of an original six-year sentence;
the journalist U Win Tin got 20 years for urging a civil disobedience campaign.
Anyone considering travel to Myanmar must take into account its terrible record
of human rights.

Andrea Riquier
Brooklyn, N.Y.

Ms. Riquier is a member of the Amnesty International USA NYC Myanmar Working
Group.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); SENTENCING (90%); NOBEL PRIZES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
AWARDS & PRIZES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%);
WRITERS (73%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (72%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (72%); CIVIL
DISOBEDIENCE (67%); ARRESTS (52%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%)

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI (73%) Andrea Riquier; Joshua Kurlantzick

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (65%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (65%)

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Myanmar

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                              96 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Appeals Court, Reversing Itself, Holds 2 Salvadoran Generals Liable for
Torture in 80's Civil War

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 632 words


A federal appeals court has reversed its own ruling and upheld a $54.6 million
jury verdict against two retired generals from El Salvador who were held
responsible in a 2002 trial for the torture of three Salvadorans during the
country's civil war in the 1980's.

The opinion, issued Wednesday by the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th
Circuit in Atlanta, was a surprising turn in decade-long efforts by American
human rights groups to punish abuses that occurred during the conflict between
the United States-backed security forces and leftist guerrillas in El Salvador.

A three-judge appeals panel acted without prompting from lawyers for either side
to overturn a ruling it issued on Feb. 28. 2005, that nullified the trial
verdict against the two generals, Jose Guillermo Garcia and Carlos Eugenio Vides
Casanova.

The new appeals opinion seems likely to be the decisive step in years of
litigation against the generals. During the war, Mr. Garcia and Mr. Vides
Casanova served as defense minister, the highest post in the military, with
strong support from the United States.

They have been living in South Florida since 1989. In a separate civil trial in
Florida in 2000, they were acquitted of responsibility for the killings of four
American churchwomen by soldiers in El Salvador in 1980.

The three plaintiffs in the second trial, held in West Palm Beach, suffered
lasting injuries from torture by troops under the generals' command.

In its initial ruling, the appeals panel threw out the jury verdict, finding
that the district court had improperly extended the 10-year statute of
limitations that applied in the case. The claims were brought under the Torture
Victim Protection Act, a controversial law that human rights groups have used to
bring notoriously violent foreign leaders to face justice in American courts.

But on June 24, 2005, the appeals judges announced in a letter that they had
made two factual errors in their opinion, incorrectly recording both the date
when the case was first filed -- actually May 11, 1999 -- and the date when
General Vides Casanova stepped down as defense minister -- May 31, 1989.

Using the correct dates and re-examining the trial record, the judges decided to
agree with the district court that the case was filed within the statute of
limitations. The panel concluded that the statute should begin to run in 1992,
when the government and the rebels signed a peace accord that ended the war.

Before that, the judges wrote, ''the very regime against whom the plaintiffs
leveled their accusations remained intent on maintaining its power at any cost
and acted with impunity to so do.'' The three judges were Gerald B. Tjoflat,
Edward E. Carnes, and Anne C. Conway.

Kurt Klaus Jr., who represented both retired generals, said he was dumbfounded
by the reversal. ''I have never, ever heard of such a thing,'' he said. ''I am
so shocked, I feel like quitting my practice and moving to El Salvador to grow
coca and coffee.''

He said he would consult with the former generals to see if they wanted to
pursue further appeals. He said both clients had been left essentially bankrupt
by legal costs.

''In the war against communism, they did what the United States government
wanted them to do and paid them to do,'' Mr. Klaus said.

Mr. Vides Casanova has placed about $270,000 in an escrow account awaiting the
outcome of the appeals, said Moira Feeney, a spokeswoman for the Center for
Justice and Accountability in San Francisco, which represented the defendants.

Neris Gonzalez, a Salvadoran Roman Catholic church worker who testified at the
trial that she endured 12 days of torture, said in a statement that the decision
showed ''that the Salvadoran military bears responsibility for what we, as a
people, suffered.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 10, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about a federal appeals court ruling that
reversed its own decision and upheld a $54.6 million jury-trial verdict against
two retired Salvadoran generals found responsible for torture during the 1980's
civil war misstated the role of the Center for Justice and Accountability, a
human rights law group. It represented the plaintiffs -- the torture victims --
not the defendants.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: APPELLATE DECISIONS (91%); APPEALS COURTS (91%); VERDICTS (91%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); JUDGES
(89%); STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); ACQUITTAL (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
VICTIMS RIGHTS (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) SUITS
AND LITIGATION; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; TORTURE

PERSON: EDWARD E CARNES (79%); GERALD B TJOFLAT (79%) JULIA PRESTON; JOSE
GUILLERMO GARCIA; CARLOS EUGENIOS VIDES CASANOVA

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); EL SALVADOR (96%)

REGION: EL SALVADOR

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Uzbekistan: Opposition Leader On Trial

BYLINE: By ETHAN WILENSKY-LANFORD (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 119 words


The embezzlement trial of Sanjar Umarov, a businessman who is the chairman of
the opposition group the Sunshine Coalition, began in Tashkent, Human Rights
Watch reported. Rights groups say they believe the case is politically motivated
and have expressed concerns that Mr. Umarov was drugged or tortured in custody.
His lawyer, who had earlier said that he had found Mr. Umarov naked and
incoherent in his cell, said his mental and physical health appeared normal.
Surat Ikramov, the director of Independent Group for Human Rights Defenders of
Uzbekistan, said that Mr. Umarov ''explained in court that he could not remember
anything from his arrest on Oct. 23 until early November.''   ETHAN
WILENSKY-LANFORD (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EMBEZZLEMENT (88%);
LAWYERS (87%); POLITICS (85%); ARRESTS (84%) Embezzlement; Politics and
Government

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Sanjar Umarov; Ethan Wilensky-Lanford

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (72%)

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (94%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Uzbekistan

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             104 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Neoconservatism

BYLINE: By Francis Fukuyama.

Francis Fukuyama teaches at the School of Advanced International Studies at
Johns Hopkins University. This essay is adapted from his book ''America at the
Crossroads,'' which will be published this month by Yale University Press.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 62

LENGTH: 4813 words


As we approach the third anniversary of the onset of the Iraq war, it seems very
unlikely that history will judge either the intervention itself or the ideas
animating it kindly. By invading Iraq, the Bush administration created a
self-fulfilling prophecy: Iraq has now replaced Afghanistan as a magnet, a
training ground and an operational base for jihadist terrorists, with plenty of
American targets to shoot at. The United States still has a chance of creating a
Shiite-dominated democratic Iraq, but the new government will be very weak for
years to come; the resulting power vacuum will invite outside influence from all
of Iraq's neighbors, including Iran. There are clear benefits to the Iraqi
people from the removal of Saddam Hussein's dictatorship, and perhaps some
positive spillover effects in Lebanon and Syria. But it is very hard to see how
these developments in themselves justify the blood and treasure that the United
States has spent on the project to this point.

The so-called Bush Doctrine that set the framework for the administration's
first term is now in shambles. The doctrine (elaborated, among other places, in
the 2002 National Security Strategy of the United States) argued that, in the
wake of the Sept. 11 attacks, America would have to launch periodic preventive
wars to defend itself against rouge states and terrorists with weapons of mass
destruction; that it would do this alone, if necessary; and that it would work
to democratize the greater Middle East as a long-term solution to the terrorist
problem. But successful pre-emption depends on the ability to predict the future
accurately and on good intelligence, which was not forthcoming, while America's
perceived unilateralism has isolated it as never before. It is not surprising
that in its second term, the administration has been distancing itself from
these policies and is in the process of rewriting the National Security Strategy
document.

But it is the idealistic effort to use American power to promote democracy and
human rights abroad that may suffer the greatest setback. Perceived failure in
Iraq has restored the authority of foreign policy ''realists'' in the tradition
of Henry Kissinger. Already there is a host of books and articles decrying
America's naive Wilsonianism and attacking the notion of trying to democratize
the world. The administration's second-term efforts to push for greater Middle
Eastern democracy, introduced with the soaring rhetoric of Bush's second
Inaugural Address, have borne very problematic fruits. The Islamist Muslim
Brotherhood made a strong showing in Egypt's parliamentary elections in November
and December. While the holding of elections in Iraq this past December was an
achievement in itself, the vote led to the ascendance of a Shiite bloc with
close ties to Iran (following on the election of the conservative Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad as president of Iran in June). But the clincher was the decisive
Hamas victory in the Palestinian election last month, which brought to power a
movement overtly dedicated to the destruction of Israel. In his second
inaugural, Bush said that ''America's vital interests and our deepest beliefs
are now one,'' but the charge will be made with increasing frequency that the
Bush administration made a big mistake when it stirred the pot, and that the
United States would have done better to stick by its traditional authoritarian
friends in the Middle East. Indeed, the effort to promote democracy around the
world has been attacked as an illegitimate activity both by people on the left
like Jeffrey Sachs and by traditional conservatives like Pat Buchanan.

The reaction against democracy promotion and an activist foreign policy may not
end there. Those whom Walter Russell Mead labels Jacksonian conservatives --
red-state Americans whose sons and daughters are fighting and dying in the
Middle East -- supported the Iraq war because they believed that their children
were fighting to defend the United States against nuclear terrorism, not to
promote democracy. They don't want to abandon the president in the middle of a
vicious war, but down the road the perceived failure of the Iraq intervention
may push them to favor a more isolationist foreign policy, which is a more
natural political position for them. A recent Pew poll indicates a swing in
public opinion toward isolationism; the percentage of Americans saying that the
United States ''should mind its own business'' has never been higher since the
end of the Vietnam War.

More than any other group, it was the neoconservatives both inside and outside
the Bush administration who pushed for democratizing Iraq and the broader Middle
East. They are widely credited (or blamed) for being the decisive voices
promoting regime change in Iraq, and yet it is their idealistic agenda that in
the coming months and years will be the most directly threatened. Were the
United States to retreat from the world stage, following a drawdown in Iraq, it
would in my view be a huge tragedy, because American power and influence have
been critical to the maintenance of an open and increasingly democratic order
around the world. The problem with neoconservatism's agenda lies not in its
ends, which are as American as apple pie, but rather in the overmilitarized
means by which it has sought to accomplish them. What American foreign policy
needs is not a return to a narrow and cynical realism, but rather the
formulation of a ''realistic Wilsonianism'' that better matches means to ends.

The Neoconservative Legacy

How did the neoconservatives end up overreaching to such an extent that they
risk undermining their own goals? The Bush administration's first-term foreign
policy did not flow ineluctably from the views of earlier generations of people
who considered themselves neoconservatives, since those views were themselves
complex and subject to differing interpretations. Four common principles or
threads ran through much of this thought up through the end of the cold war: a
concern with democracy, human rights and, more generally, the internal politics
of states; a belief that American power can be used for moral purposes; a
skepticism about the ability of international law and institutions to solve
serious security problems; and finally, a view that ambitious social engineering
often leads to unexpected consequences and thereby undermines its own ends.

The problem was that two of these principles were in potential collision. The
skeptical stance toward ambitious social engineering -- which in earlier years
had been applied mostly to domestic policies like affirmative action, busing and
welfare -- suggested a cautious approach toward remaking the world and an
awareness that ambitious initiatives always have unanticipated consequences. The
belief in the potential moral uses of American power, on the other hand, implied
that American activism could reshape the structure of global politics. By the
time of the Iraq war, the belief in the transformational uses of power had
prevailed over the doubts about social engineering.

In retrospect, things did not have to develop this way. The roots of
neoconservatism lie in a remarkable group of largely Jewish intellectuals who
attended City College of New York (C.C.N.Y.) in the mid- to late 1930's and
early 1940's, a group that included Irving Kristol, Daniel Bell, Irving Howe,
Nathan Glazer and, a bit later, Daniel Patrick Moynihan. The story of this group
has been told in a number of places, most notably in a documentary film by
Joseph Dorman called ''Arguing the World.'' The most important inheritance from
the C.C.N.Y. group was an idealistic belief in social progress and the
universality of rights, coupled with intense anti-Communism.

It is not an accident that many in the C.C.N.Y. group started out as
Trotskyites. Leon Trotsky was, of course, himself a Communist, but his
supporters came to understand better than most people the utter cynicism and
brutality of the Stalinist regime. The anti-Communist left, in contrast to the
traditional American right, sympathized with the social and economic aims of
Communism, but in the course of the 1930's and 1940's came to realize that
''real existing socialism'' had become a monstrosity of unintended consequences
that completely undermined the idealistic goals it espoused. While not all of
the C.C.N.Y. thinkers became neoconservatives, the danger of good intentions
carried to extremes was a theme that would underlie the life work of many
members of this group.

If there was a single overarching theme to the domestic social policy critiques
issued by those who wrote for the neoconservative journal The Public Interest,
founded by Irving Kristol, Nathan Glazer and Daniel Bell in 1965, it was the
limits of social engineering. Writers like Glazer, Moynihan and, later, Glenn
Loury argued that ambitious efforts to seek social justice often left societies
worse off than before because they either required massive state intervention
that disrupted pre-existing social relations (for example, forced busing) or
else produced unanticipated consequences (like an increase in single-parent
families as a result of welfare). A major theme running through James Q.
Wilson's extensive writings on crime was the idea that you could not lower crime
rates by trying to solve deep underlying problems like poverty and racism;
effective policies needed to focus on shorter-term measures that went after
symptoms of social distress (like subway graffiti or panhandling) rather than
root causes.

How, then, did a group with such a pedigree come to decide that the ''root
cause'' of terrorism lay in the Middle East's lack of democracy, that the United
States had both the wisdom and the ability to fix this problem and that
democracy would come quickly and painlessly to Iraq? Neoconservatives would not
have taken this turn but for the peculiar way that the cold war ended.

Ronald Reagan was ridiculed by sophisticated people on the American left and in
Europe for labeling the Soviet Union and its allies an ''evil empire'' and for
challenging Mikhail Gorbachev not just to reform his system but also to ''tear
down this wall.'' His assistant secretary of defense for international security
policy, Richard Perle, was denounced as the ''prince of darkness'' for this
uncompromising, hard-line position; his proposal for a double-zero in the
intermediate-range nuclear arms negotiations (that is, the complete elimination
of medium-range missiles) was attacked as hopelessly out of touch by the
bien-pensant centrist foreign-policy experts at places like the Council on
Foreign Relations and the State Department. That community felt that the
Reaganites were dangerously utopian in their hopes for actually winning, as
opposed to managing, the cold war.

And yet total victory in the cold war is exactly what happened in 1989-91.
Gorbachev accepted not only the double zero but also deep cuts in conventional
forces, and then failed to stop the Polish, Hungarian and East German defections
from the empire. Communism collapsed within a couple of years because of its
internal moral weaknesses and contradictions, and with regime change in Eastern
Europe and the former Soviet Union, the Warsaw Pact threat to the West
evaporated.

The way the cold war ended shaped the thinking of supporters of the Iraq war,
including younger neoconservatives like William Kristol and Robert Kagan, in two
ways. First, it seems to have created an expectation that all totalitarian
regimes were hollow at the core and would crumble with a small push from
outside. The model for this was Romania under the Ceausescus: once the wicked
witch was dead, the munchkins would rise up and start singing joyously about
their liberation. As Kristol and Kagan put it in their 2000 book ''Present
Dangers'': ''To many the idea of America using its power to promote changes of
regime in nations ruled by dictators rings of utopianism. But in fact, it is
eminently realistic. There is something perverse in declaring the impossibility
of promoting democratic change abroad in light of the record of the past three
decades.''

This overoptimism about postwar transitions to democracy helps explain the Bush
administration's incomprehensible failure to plan adequately for the insurgency
that subsequently emerged in Iraq. The war's supporters seemed to think that
democracy was a kind of default condition to which societies reverted once the
heavy lifting of coercive regime change occurred, rather than a long-term
process of institution-building and reform. While they now assert that they knew
all along that the democratic transformation of Iraq would be long and hard,
they were clearly taken by surprise. According to George Packer's recent book on
Iraq, ''The Assassins' Gate,'' the Pentagon planned a drawdown of American
forces to some 25,000 troops by the end of the summer following the invasion.

By the 1990's, neoconservatism had been fed by several other intellectual
streams. One came from the students of the German Jewish political theorist Leo
Strauss, who, contrary to much of the nonsense written about him by people like
Anne Norton and Shadia Drury, was a serious reader of philosophical texts who
did not express opinions on contemporary politics or policy issues. Rather, he
was concerned with the ''crisis of modernity'' brought on by the relativism of
Nietzsche and Heidegger, as well as the fact that neither the claims of religion
nor deeply-held opinions about the nature of the good life could be banished
from politics, as the thinkers of the European Enlightenment had hoped. Another
stream came from Albert Wohlstetter, a Rand Corporation strategist who was the
teacher of Richard Perle, Zalmay Khalilzad (the current American ambassador to
Iraq) and Paul Wolfowitz (the former deputy secretary of defense), among other
people. Wohlstetter was intensely concerned with the problem of nuclear
proliferation and the way that the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty left loopholes,
in its support for ''peaceful'' nuclear energy, large enough for countries like
Iraq and Iran to walk through.

I have numerous affiliations with the different strands of the neoconservative
movement. I was a student of Strauss's protege Allan Bloom, who wrote the
bestseller ''The Closing of the American Mind''; worked at Rand and with
Wohlstetter on Persian Gulf issues; and worked also on two occasions for
Wolfowitz. Many people have also interpreted my book ''The End of History and
the Last Man'' (1992) as a neoconservative tract, one that argued in favor of
the view that there is a universal hunger for liberty in all people that will
inevitably lead them to liberal democracy, and that we are living in the midst
of an accelerating, transnational movement in favor of that liberal democracy.
This is a misreading of the argument. ''The End of History'' is in the end an
argument about modernization. What is initially universal is not the desire for
liberal democracy but rather the desire to live in a modern -- that is,
technologically advanced and prosperous -- society, which, if satisfied, tends
to drive demands for political participation. Liberal democracy is one of the
byproducts of this modernization process, something that becomes a universal
aspiration only in the course of historical time.

''The End of History,'' in other words, presented a kind of Marxist argument for
the existence of a long-term process of social evolution, but one that
terminates in liberal democracy rather than communism. In the formulation of the
scholar Ken Jowitt, the neoconservative position articulated by people like
Kristol and Kagan was, by contrast, Leninist; they believed that history can be
pushed along with the right application of power and will. Leninism was a
tragedy in its Bolshevik version, and it has returned as farce when practiced by
the United States. Neoconservatism, as both a political symbol and a body of
thought, has evolved into something I can no longer support.

The Failure of Benevolent Hegemony

The Bush administration and its neoconservative supporters did not simply
underestimate the difficulty of bringing about congenial political outcomes in
places like Iraq; they also misunderstood the way the world would react to the
use of American power. Of course, the cold war was replete with instances of
what the foreign policy analyst Stephen Sestanovich calls American maximalism,
wherein Washington acted first and sought legitimacy and support from its allies
only after the fact. But in the post-cold-war period, the structural situation
of world politics changed in ways that made this kind of exercise of power much
more problematic in the eyes of even close allies. After the fall of the Soviet
Union, various neoconservative authors like Charles Krauthammer, William Kristol
and Robert Kagan suggested that the United States would use its margin of power
to exert a kind of ''benevolent hegemony'' over the rest of the world, fixing
problems like rogue states with W.M.D., human rights abuses and terrorist
threats as they came up. Writing before the Iraq war, Kristol and Kagan
considered whether this posture would provoke resistance from the rest of the
world, and concluded, ''It is precisely because American foreign policy is
infused with an unusually high degree of morality that other nations find they
have less to fear from its otherwise daunting power.'' (Italics added.)

It is hard to read these lines without irony in the wake of the global reaction
to the Iraq war, which succeeded in uniting much of the world in a frenzy of
anti-Americanism. The idea that the United States is a hegemon more benevolent
than most is not an absurd one, but there were warning signs that things had
changed in America's relationship to the world long before the start of the Iraq
war. The structural imbalance in global power had grown enormous. America
surpassed the rest of the world in every dimension of power by an unprecedented
margin, with its defense spending nearly equal to that of the rest of the world
combined. Already during the Clinton years, American economic hegemony had
generated enormous hostility to an American-dominated process of globalization,
frequently on the part of close democratic allies who thought the United States
was seeking to impose its antistatist social model on them.

There were other reasons as well why the world did not accept American
benevolent hegemony. In the first place, it was premised on American
exceptionalism, the idea that America could use its power in instances where
others could not because it was more virtuous than other countries. The doctrine
of pre-emption against terrorist threats contained in the 2002 National Security
Strategy was one that could not safely be generalized through the international
system; America would be the first country to object if Russia, China, India or
France declared a similar right of unilateral action. The United States was
seeking to pass judgment on others while being unwilling to have its own conduct
questioned in places like the International Criminal Court.

Another problem with benevolent hegemony was domestic. There are sharp limits to
the American people's attention to foreign affairs and willingness to finance
projects overseas that do not have clear benefits to American interests. Sept.
11 changed that calculus in many ways, providing popular support for two wars in
the Middle East and large increases in defense spending. But the durability of
the support is uncertain: although most Americans want to do what is necessary
to make the project of rebuilding Iraq succeed, the aftermath of the invasion
did not increase the public appetite for further costly interventions. Americans
are not, at heart, an imperial people. Even benevolent hegemons sometimes have
to act ruthlessly, and they need a staying power that does not come easily to
people who are reasonably content with their own lives and society.

Finally, benevolent hegemony presumed that the hegemon was not only well
intentioned but competent as well. Much of the criticism of the Iraq
intervention from Europeans and others was not based on a normative case that
the United States was not getting authorization from the United Nations Security
Council, but rather on the belief that it had not made an adequate case for
invading Iraq in the first place and didn't know what it was doing in trying to
democratize Iraq. In this, the critics were unfortunately quite prescient.

The most basic misjudgment was an overestimation of the threat facing the United
States from radical Islamism. Although the new and ominous possibility of
undeterrable terrorists armed with weapons of mass destruction did indeed
present itself, advocates of the war wrongly conflated this with the threat
presented by Iraq and with the rogue state/proliferation problem more generally.
The misjudgment was based in part on the massive failure of the American
intelligence community to correctly assess the state of Iraq's W.M.D. programs
before the war. But the intelligence community never took nearly as alarmist a
view of the terrorist/W.M.D. threat as the war's supporters did. Overestimation
of this threat was then used to justify the elevation of preventive war to the
centerpiece of a new security strategy, as well as a whole series of measures
that infringed on civil liberties, from detention policy to domestic
eavesdropping.

What to Do

Now that the neoconservative moment appears to have passed, the United States
needs to reconceptualize its foreign policy in several fundamental ways. In the
first instance, we need to demilitarize what we have been calling the global war
on terrorism and shift to other types of policy instruments. We are fighting hot
counterinsurgency wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and against the international
jihadist movement, wars in which we need to prevail. But ''war'' is the wrong
metaphor for the broader struggle, since wars are fought at full intensity and
have clear beginnings and endings. Meeting the jihadist challenge is more of a
''long, twilight struggle'' whose core is not a military campaign but a
political contest for the hearts and minds of ordinary Muslims around the world.
As recent events in France and Denmark suggest, Europe will be a central
battleground in this fight.

The United States needs to come up with something better than ''coalitions of
the willing'' to legitimate its dealings with other countries. The world today
lacks effective international institutions that can confer legitimacy on
collective action; creating new organizations that will better balance the dual
requirements of legitimacy and effectiveness will be the primary task for the
coming generation. As a result of more than 200 years of political evolution, we
have a relatively good understanding of how to create institutions that are
rulebound, accountable and reasonably effective in the vertical silos we call
states. What we do not have are adequate mechanisms of horizontal accountability
among states.

The conservative critique of the United Nations is all too cogent: while useful
for certain peacekeeping and nation-building operations, the United Nations
lacks both democratic legitimacy and effectiveness in dealing with serious
security issues. The solution is not to strengthen a single global body, but
rather to promote what has been emerging in any event, a ''multi-multilateral
world'' of overlapping and occasionally competing international institutions
that are organized on regional or functional lines. Kosovo in 1999 was a model:
when the Russian veto prevented the Security Council from acting, the United
States and its NATO allies simply shifted the venue to NATO, where the Russians
could not block action.

The final area that needs rethinking, and the one that will be the most
contested in the coming months and years, is the place of democracy promotion in
American foreign policy. The worst legacy that could come from the Iraq war
would be an anti-neoconservative backlash that coupled a sharp turn toward
isolation with a cynical realist policy aligning the United States with friendly
authoritarians. Good governance, which involves not just democracy but also the
rule of law and economic development, is critical to a host of outcomes we
desire, from alleviating poverty to dealing with pandemics to controlling
violent conflicts. A Wilsonian policy that pays attention to how rulers treat
their citizens is therefore right, but it needs to be informed by a certain
realism that was missing from the thinking of the Bush administration in its
first term and of its neoconservative allies.

We need in the first instance to understand that promoting democracy and
modernization in the Middle East is not a solution to the problem of jihadist
terrorism; in all likelihood it will make the short-term problem worse, as we
have seen in the case of the Palestinian election bringing Hamas to power.
Radical Islamism is a byproduct of modernization itself, arising from the loss
of identity that accompanies the transition to a modern, pluralist society. It
is no accident that so many recent terrorists, from Sept. 11's Mohamed Atta to
the murderer of the Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh to the London subway bombers,
were radicalized in democratic Europe and intimately familiar with all of
democracy's blessings. More democracy will mean more alienation, radicalization
and -- yes, unfortunately -- terrorism.

But greater political participation by Islamist groups is very likely to occur
whatever we do, and it will be the only way that the poison of radical Islamism
can ultimately work its way through the body politic of Muslim communities
around the world. The age is long since gone when friendly authoritarians could
rule over passive populations and produce stability indefinitely. New social
actors are mobilizing everywhere, from Bolivia and Venezuela to South Africa and
the Persian Gulf. A durable Israeli-Palestinian peace could not be built upon a
corrupt, illegitimate Fatah that constantly had to worry about Hamas challenging
its authority. Peace might emerge, sometime down the road, from a Palestine run
by a formerly radical terrorist group that had been forced to deal with the
realities of governing.

If we are serious about the good governance agenda, we have to shift our focus
to the reform, reorganization and proper financing of those institutions of the
United States government that actually promote democracy, development and the
rule of law around the world, organizations like the State Department,
U.S.A.I.D., the National Endowment for Democracy and the like. The United States
has played an often decisive role in helping along many recent democratic
transitions, including in the Philippines in 1986; South Korea and Taiwan in
1987; Chile in 1988; Poland and Hungary in 1989; Serbia in 2000; Georgia in
2003; and Ukraine in 2004-5. But the overarching lesson that emerges from these
cases is that the United States does not get to decide when and where democracy
comes about. By definition, outsiders can't ''impose'' democracy on a country
that doesn't want it; demand for democracy and reform must be domestic.
Democracy promotion is therefore a long-term and opportunistic process that has
to await the gradual ripening of political and economic conditions to be
effective.

The Bush administration has been walking -- indeed, sprinting -- away from the
legacy of its first term, as evidenced by the cautious multilateral approach it
has taken toward the nuclear programs of Iran and North Korea. Condoleezza Rice
gave a serious speech in January about ''transformational diplomacy'' and has
begun an effort to reorganize the nonmilitary side of the foreign-policy
establishment, and the National Security Strategy document is being rewritten.
All of these are welcome changes, but the legacy of the Bush first-term foreign
policy and its neoconservative supporters has been so polarizing that it is
going to be hard to have a reasoned debate about how to appropriately balance
American ideals and interests in the coming years. The reaction against a flawed
policy can be as damaging as the policy itself, and such a reaction is an
indulgence we cannot afford, given the critical moment we have arrived at in
global politics.

Neoconservatism, whatever its complex roots, has become indelibly associated
with concepts like coercive regime change, unilateralism and American hegemony.
What is needed now are new ideas, neither neoconservative nor realist, for how
America is to relate to the rest of the world -- ideas that retain the
neoconservative belief in the universality of human rights, but without its
illusions about the efficacy of American power and hegemony to bring these ends
about.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
IRAQ WAR (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); ELECTIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (78%); ANNIVERSARIES (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); CONSERVATISM (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(75%); POLITICS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%);
WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (61%); LITERATURE (60%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Politics and
Government; Books and Literature; Terrorism; United States International
Relations

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (58%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%) Francis Fukuyama; George
W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);
AFGHANISTAN (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EGYPT (79%); SYRIA (79%); LEBANON (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             106 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abusive G.I.'s Not Pursued, Survey Finds

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 22


The longest sentence for any member of the American military linked to a
torture-related death of a detainee in Iraq or Afghanistan has been five months,
a human rights group reported Wednesday.

In only 12 of 34 cases has anyone been punished for the confirmed or suspected
killings, said the group, Human Rights First, which is based in New York and
Washington.

Beyond those cases, in almost half of 98 known detainee deaths since 2002, the
cause was never announced or was reported as undetermined.

''In dozens of cases documented here, grossly inadequate reporting,
investigation and follow-through have left no one at all responsible for
homicides and other unexplained deaths,'' it said in the report, based on
military court records, news reports and other sources.

The Pentagon says it conscientiously investigates such deaths.

''Some 250 people have been punished in one way or another,'' Defense Secretary
Donald H. Rumsfeld said last month of the abuse cases.

When asked Wednesday for a status report on investigations and prosecutions in
individual cases of abuse, the Pentagon said it could not offer a comprehensive
compilation because the information was too scattered.

Army lawyers at the Pentagon do not ''have access to the information because
other Army commands have the documents,'' Maj. Wayne Marotto, a spokesman, said.

In Baghdad, a victim's son dismissed the seriousness of the pursuit of those
responsible.

''Justice wasn't done in our father's case by the U.S. forces, because if he was
a criminal, they should have interrogated him fairly and not tortured him
barbarically and then killed him,'' Qusay Mowhoush, the son, said.

His father, Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed Mowhoush, who was suspected of supporting the
anti-American insurgency, died in 2003 when an Army interrogator covered him in
a sleeping bag, sat on his chest and put his hand over his mouth. General
Mowhoush was detained 10 days earlier when he appeared at an American base to
seek the release of his four sons.

The interrogator, Chief Warrant Officer Lewis E. Welshofer Jr., originally
charged with murder, was convicted of negligent homicide in a military trial
last month and was reprimanded, without jail time.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HOMICIDE (90%); TORTURE (90%); MURDER (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
MANSLAUGHTER (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
LAWYERS (75%); POLLS & SURVEYS (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%);
NEGLIGENCE (69%)

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS FIRST (84%) Human Rights First (Orgn)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             108 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 225 words


A front-page article last Saturday profiled Ali Shalal Qaissi, identifying him
as the hooded man forced to stand on a box, attached to wires, in a photograph
from the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal of 2003 and 2004. He was shown holding
such a photograph. As an article on Page A1 today makes clear, Mr. Qaissi was
not that man.

The Times did not adequately research Mr. Qaissi's insistence that he was the
man in the photograph. Mr. Qaissi's account had already been broadcast and
printed by other outlets, including PBS and Vanity Fair, without challenge.
Lawyers for former prisoners at Abu Ghraib vouched for him. Human rights workers
seemed to support his account. The Pentagon, asked for verification, declined to
confirm or deny it.

Despite the previous reports, The Times should have been more persistent in
seeking comment from the military. A more thorough examination of previous
articles in The Times and other newspapers would have shown that in 2004
military investigators named another man as the one on the box, raising
suspicions about Mr. Qaissi's claim.

The Times also overstated the conviction with which representatives of Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International expressed their view of whether Mr.
Qaissi was the man in the photograph. While they said he could well be that man,
they did not say they believed he was.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction; Editors' Note

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CORRECTIONS (77%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); WAR CRIMES (74%); SCANDALS (72%); GENOCIDE (69%)
Correction Stories; Prisoners of War; Photography; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (55%)

PERSON: Ali Shalal Qaissi

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             110 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Memo About the Road to War

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 119 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Challenge for U.S.: Iraq's Handling of Detainees'' (front page, March 24):

What moral authority does the United States have left, now that it is widely
known that it tortures prisoners and detains them indefinitely without due
process?

How can the United States expect any country or culture to take its position
seriously when human rights abuse abounds under the current administration and
military? And, with extraordinary rendition, the United States actually counts
on other regimes to torture its prisoners.

With all the talk about retraining a culture, it seems that the United States
needs to retrain itself in human rights and justice.

Karen Alexander-Brown
Hillsboro, Ore., March 24, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); DUE
PROCESS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%) United States Armament and Defense; United States International
Relations; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Karen Alexander-Brown

STATE: OREGON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             111 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria Says Ex-President of Liberia Has Disappeared

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN; Katharine Houreld contributed reporting from Lagos,
Nigeria, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 890 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 28


The former president of Liberia, Charles G. Taylor, vanished Monday night, two
days after the Nigerian government said it would end his asylum and allow him to
face an indictment by an international court here.

Mr. Taylor, the warlord-turned-president who unleashed a series of civil wars
that engulfed much of West Africa in the 1990's, killing more than 300,000
people, disappeared from the seaside villa where he had been living in exile,
according to a statement released Tuesday by Nigeria's government.

His sudden disappearance was a huge setback for the court, which is trying those
suspected of atrocities in Sierra Leone's decade-long civil war, and a major
embarrassment for the Nigerian president, Olusegun Obasanjo, just as he left for
the United States to meet with President Bush. It was unclear late Tuesday
whether Mr. Taylor fled to escape prosecution or had been abducted.

''Taylor's disappearance is a disgrace,'' said Corinne Dufka, head of the West
Africa office of Human Rights Watch, ''not only for the victims for the brutal
war in Sierra Leone, but also for efforts to establish the rule of law in West
Africa.''

Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, said during a press briefing on
Tuesday that Mr. Taylor's disappearance would not relieve the Nigerian
government of its responsibility to turn him over to the special court in Sierra
Leone. ''We expect the government of Nigeria to fulfill this commitment,'' he
said.

Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, called on all countries in the
region not to harbor Mr. Taylor, a United Nations spokesman said.

The news that the man who terrorized much of this region for more than two
decades might be on the loose inspired dread, anger and awe. On the streets of
Monrovia, Liberia's capital, rumors of a coup or an attack by Taylor supporters,
several of whom hold seats in Liberia's newly elected Parliament, were rampant.

''Many people are frightened,'' said Cholo Brooks, a Liberian journalist, in a
telephone interview from the capital. ''They are worried he might cross over to
Ivory Coast and use it as a base to cause havoc in Liberia.''

In Sierra Leone, Desmond de Silva, the prosecutor of the international court
waiting to try Mr. Taylor, called the disappearance ''an affront to justice.''

''Charles Taylor is a threat to the peace and security of West Africa,'' Mr. de
Silva said in a statement. ''His disappearance now from under the eye of a
regional superpower only heightens that threat and puts the whole region on the
highest alert.''

Human rights advocates and politicians had harsh words for Nigeria's president
for failing to arrest Mr. Taylor despite his long history of eluding capture.
''Mr. Obasanjo is a key and influential player in Africa who should be promoting
justice and stability instead of undermining it,'' said Ms. Dufka, who had urged
Nigeria to tighten security around the house where Mr. Taylor and his entourage
were living.

The development seemed bound to further undermine Nigeria's position as a
regional power broker and enforcer of democratic norms, a role it played in
helping to end the Liberian conflict in 2003 by accepting Mr. Taylor and in
defusing recent crises in Togo and Ivory Coast.

But its influence has been waning as troubles at home have nipped at Mr.
Obasanjo's globetrotting heels. A militant uprising in the oil-rich Niger Delta
has slashed Nigeria's oil output, while sectarian violence killed more than 100
people last month. Speculation that Mr. Obasanjo will run for a third term
despite a constitutional term limit has also heightened political tensions.

Mr. Taylor fled Liberia as a rebel insurgency tried to remove him from power in
2003, taking refuge in Nigeria after Mr. Obasanjo brokered a peace agreement.
Mr. Taylor was already under indictment for his role in Sierra Leone's civil
war, but the Nigerian government said it would turn Mr. Taylor over for
prosecution only if requested by an elected Liberian government.

Liberia's new president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, said in an interview with The
New York Times before her inauguration in January that Mr. Taylor's fate was a
relatively low priority, given the myriad problems facing Liberia and the
fragility of the peace there.

But under intense political pressure on a visit to the United States earlier
this month, including a threat by Congress to withhold aid to Liberia if she did
not act, she asked Nigeria to hand Mr. Taylor over.

Kayode Fayemi, a Nigerian political analyst who has worked with Ms. Johnson
Sirleaf to secure peace in Liberia, said the United States might have made
matters worse for Liberia by pushing the country to deal with Mr. Taylor before
it was ready.

''She was actually literally harassed to do what she did,'' Mr. Fayemi said.
''This is now going to make the situation much more complicated and so much
worse.''

K. A. Paul, an evangelical Christian who has acted as a spiritual adviser and
spokesman for Mr. Taylor, said Tuesday that he had spoken to one of Mr. Taylor's
aides and had been told that Mr. Taylor was in hiding somewhere in West Africa.

Backed by Libya and others, Mr. Taylor incited a civil war in Liberia in 1989,
which spread to neighboring Sierra Leone. He is accused of trading guns with the
rebels seeking to topple Sierra Leone's government.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); POLITICS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); COUPS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); PRESS CONFERENCES (75%);
MISSING PERSONS (73%); RULE OF LAW (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); GENOCIDE (72%)
Asylum (Political); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Lydia Polgreen; Charles G Taylor; Olusegun (Pres)
Obasanjo

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (79%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (57%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (98%); SIERRA LEONE (95%); AFRICA (94%); NIGERIA (94%); WESTERN
AFRICA (94%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria  ; Sierra Leone; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Reaching Out to Ease the Crisis in Sudan

BYLINE: By ABIGAIL SULLIVAN MOORE

SECTION: Section 14CN; Column 3; Connecticut Weekly Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1193 words


ARTHUR MILLER, an African-American deacon from Hartford, delivered an urgent
message at a recent Saturday Mass at St. Mary's Church in Simsbury, a wealthy,
mostly white community.

Help stop the genocide, Mr. Miller urged parishioners.

''This is happening right now, even to this day in the Darfur region of the
Sudan,'' said Mr. Miller, director of the Office for Black Catholic Ministries
in the Archdiocese of Hartford. ''Since I have been talking, two more people
have died.''

At least 200,000 civilians have been killed in the conflict, which started in
2003 when Darfur rebels attacked government targets, claiming the Arab-led
government was neglecting black Africans. Since then, government-backed Arab
militias have waged a campaign of terror in Darfur, driving more than two
million villagers from their homes and livelihoods.

''These people are all at risk for hunger and disease,'' said Susannah Sirkin,
deputy director for Physicians for Human Rights, a national nonprofit
organization in Cambridge, Mass.

Mr. Miller is part of Connecticut's growing grass-roots movement to save
Darfur's people.

At the Capitol, state lawmakers are considering a bipartisan proposal to divest
millions of state pension holdings in businesses invested in oil-rich Sudan. A
statewide alliance, the Connecticut Coalition to Save Darfur, has mushroomed
from a few nonprofit organizations last year to about 30 today, ranging from the
Hartford Stage to the Waterbury branch of the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People.

The coalition has organized speaking events and lobbied Connecticut's
Congressional delegation. It is also supporting the Million Voices for Darfur
campaign, an effort by the national Save Darfur Coalition, an alliance of more
than 100 faith-based, humanitarian and human-rights organizations, to deliver a
million postcards to President Bush and Congress, asking for a multinational
force to protect Darfur's civilians. The Connecticut coalition also is
orchestrating travel to Washington on April 30 for a national rally.

Among the large measures are smaller but compelling efforts. Last month, the
Bushnell Center for the Performing Arts in Hartford showed an exhibition of
drawings by the children of Darfur depicting death and destruction. The
exhibition was sponsored by the World Affairs Council of Connecticut.

Support is also coming from an increasingly diverse array of religious groups
and from students, with Yale University recently deciding to bar current and
future investments of its endowment assets in oil businesses in Sudan and
obligations of the Sudanese government.

In some places, awareness has been slow to dawn.

Ben Brockman, pastor of St. Paul's Episcopal Church in Fairfield, hung a ''Save
Darfur'' banner in February outside his church, facing busy Old Post Road. He
was ''sort of surprised at how little response there was,'' he said.

But, he added, ''I do think more and more people are beginning to notice.''

So does Christopher Allen-Doucot, a social activist from Hartford who speaks
publicly about his private relief mission to Darfur last year.

''Last year I gave several talks at high schools,'' Mr. Allen-Doucot said. ''I
asked them if they knew about tsunami and if they had participated in relief
efforts, and they raised their hands. I asked them about the genocide in Darfur,
and nobody raised their hands.''

''And now that's changing,'' said Mr. Allen-Doucot, who is also a member of the
Save Darfur Coalition.

Last year a State Senate resolution condemning the situation in Darfur failed to
reach a full legislative vote. In February, Connecticut's state treasurer,
Denise L. Nappier, who oversees $22 billion in state pension and trust funds,
called for legislation that would allow her to divest investments in companies
supporting the Sudanese government's effort against Darfur. She was joined by
legislative leaders, college students and other coalition members.

Ms. Nappier said she would first prefer to urge such companies to press the
Sudanese government to end the genocide. If companies failed to comply, Ms.
Nappier said, she would then divest as a last resort.

About $19 million in state funds invested in oil holdings would qualify for
immediate divestment, according to a Yale report that Ms. Nappier said would
help guide her decisions. The report shows oil revenue financing Sudan's
military spending and identifies oil companies and related businesses operating
there. About $180 million invested in telecommunications and various businesses
supporting the oil industry may also be divested, said Bernard L. Kavaler,
director of communication for the treasurer's office.

''We're going to use the clout of our investment dollars to see if we can turn
this around,'' Ms. Nappier said.

If the proposal becomes law, Connecticut would join a handful of states taking
similar action, including New Jersey, Illinois, Louisiana and Oregon.

From the earliest days of the crisis, Darfur has resonated among Connecticut's
Jewish community, who were among the first to draw attention to the situation.

''With the Holocaust, we said, 'Never again,' and we mean it,'' said Laura
Zimmerman, executive director of the Jewish Community Relations Council of the
Jewish Federation of Greater Hartford.

Other faiths have joined in. In New Haven, the Interfaith Cooperative
Ministries, representing 40 or so congregations, including Catholic, Muslim,
Bahai, Jewish and Christian faiths, voted unanimously in January to support
Darfur after attending a presentation about it at Yale. They will participate in
the million-postcard campaign and the national rally.

''It was the most intense and unanimous vote that I've ever heard,'' said Reed
Smith, the ministries coordinator. ''We all knew there was genocide going on,
but we never heard the graphic details, and it was just appalling.''

In Fairfield County, nearly a dozen congregations are sponsoring an April 23
lecture, ''Slavery, Rape and Genocide in Sudan,'' at Congregation Rodeph Sholom
in Bridgeport.

''We can understand and our congregation would have perspective on the issue of
enslavement,'' said Anthony Bennett, pastor of Mount Aery Baptist Church in
Bridgeport and a sponsor of the event. ''Suffering resonates. Unjust suffering
resonates whether in Sudan, in Iraq, Afghanistan or the east end of
Bridgeport.''

At Trinity College, students are pushing the faculty to seek divestment of their
pension investments tied to Sudan. This month about 300 students at the
University of Connecticut held a one-day fast. At Danbury High School, students
recently produced a brief documentary called ''The Promise,'' which shows
photographs both of the Holocaust and of victims of Darfur. The title refers to
the promise of the international community after World War II that genocide
would never be permitted again.

The video has attracted the interest of other high schools and colleges, said
Tim Salem, an assistant vice principal at Danbury who helped with the project
and said he was glad it was getting attention.

''We did make a promise in 1945 and we've never kept it,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arthur Miller, top, speaking at St. Mary's Church in Simsbury
about genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan. Around the state there are efforts
to raise awareness of the tragedy, including an exhibition of drawings by the
children of Darfur in Hartford. (Photo by M. J. Fielder for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (78%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(78%); GENOCIDE (77%); LOBBYING (74%); CHILDREN (73%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (72%);
LEGISLATION (71%); PENSION & RETIREMENT PLANS (71%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(70%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (70%); PERFORMING ARTS CENTERS (69%); FOREIGN
INVESTMENT (65%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (64%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (60%);
EXHIBITIONS (60%) Law and Legislation; Foreign Investments

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%) connecticut coalition to save
darfur (orgn)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (54%) Abigail Sullivan Moore

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (94%)

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (96%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan); Connecticut

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             115 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Waging War With Private Forces

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 178 words



To the Editor:

Ted Koppel's examination of private companies that perform military functions
for the United States does not consider how this outsourcing may be fueling
serious human rights abuses.

As Amnesty International has reported, in Iraq and Afghanistan this increasing
outsourcing of war has created a virtual rules-free zone for private military
companies. Contractors have been linked to shootings of civilians and to sexual
abuse and torture of detainees.

It's difficult to assess the extent of the problem, because the system of
awarding, overseeing and enforcing contracts is shrouded in secrecy and there
has not been mandatory reporting or investigation of crimes committed by
civilian contractors.

The Justice Department has not so far prosecuted the cases referred to it, so
victims in Iraq and Afghanistan have had no access to justice. To extend this
system without fixing its problems would just compound the abuses and reward the
perpetrators.

Mila Rosenthal Director, Business and Human Rights Program
Amnesty International USA
New York, May 23, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
OUTSOURCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); TORTURE (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CONTRACT AWARDS (72%);
SEX OFFENSES (70%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%) Freedom and Human Rights;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Privatization; Mercenaries

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%)
Amnesty International

PERSON: Mila Rosenthal; Ted Koppel

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghan Front Line: Schools Under Fire

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 186 words



To the Editor:

''Afghanistan, Unraveling'' (editorial, June 1) rightly highlights the country's
rapidly deteriorating security situation.

Education is on the front line. I have charted reports of more than 100
incidents of schools being set on fire, mined, rocketed or otherwise attacked in
this year alone.

In Afghanistan last December, school officials showed me threatening letters
received for educating children, especially girls. Some letters were signed by
the Taliban; other attacks are likely the work of local strongmen opposed to
girls' education. As a result, schools have closed and education providers have
been forced to flee some districts entirely.

A majority of primary-school-age girls remain unhappily out of school. It's time
to reprioritize American economic, political and military support, to secure
basic rights for ordinary Afghans.

Whether children, especially girls, can go to school is a key measurement of
Washington's success or failure in Afghanistan.

Zama Coursen-Neff
New York, June 1, 2006

The writer is the senior researcher at the Children's Rights Division, Human
Rights Watch.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TALIBAN (78%); WRITERS (73%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (72%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION (72%); TERRORISM (71%); CHILD WELFARE
(70%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) Education and Schools; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (82%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: Zama Coursen-Neff

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 956 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

Violence Grows in Iraq After Bombing of Mosque
An outpouring of sectarian fury continued to shake Iraq after the bombing of a
major Shiite shrine, leaving at least 138 Iraqis dead and political negotiations
over a new government in shambles.   A1

A day after the bombing, Iraqis woke to a country as close to open civil war as
it has come, expressing shock, assigning blame and setting up makeshift
roadblocks in their neighborhoods.

A1

Roof Collapse Kills 56 in Russia
A roof laden with snow collapsed over a popular vegetable market in an outer
district of Moscow, killing at least 56 people, mostly young men from Central
Asia and the Caucasus.   A3

Old Conflict Reopens in Nigeria
More than 100 people in Nigeria have been killed in the worst violence yet
linked to anger over cartoons depicting the Prophet Muhammad, reigniting old
ethnic and political tensions between the country's Muslims and Christians.   A8


Europe Aid May Bypass Hamas
The European Union is considering making direct payments to the moderate
Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud Abbas, as a way of supporting him while
trying to maintain financial pressure on Hamas, the anti-Israeli militant group
that swept to power in elections last month.   A9

Visa Delays Test U.S. and India
Complaints from three Indian scientists about visa applications for the United
States have stirred a diplomatic tempest just days before President Bush is to
visit India.   A6

U.N. Rights Council Hits Snag
Secretary General Kofi Annan and human rights groups said that a resolution on a
new Human Rights Council for the United Nations fell short of their expectations
but still provided the best option for replacing the discredited Human Rights
Commission. The American ambassador, John R. Bolton, said it should be
renegotiated.   A4

NATIONAL   A12-20

Dubai Company May Delay Move Into U.S. Ports
The Dubai company at the center of a political furor over its plans to take over
some operations at six American ports said that it planned to close the deal
next week but that it would ''not exercise control'' over its new operations in
the United States while the Bush administration tried to calm opposition in
Congress.   A1

Twins in the Classroom
Lawmakers in the Illinois House passed a resolution recommending that school
districts take parental preference into consideration when deciding whether to
separate twins in classrooms.   A1

Alabama, the 2nd Peach State
Alabama legislators have some fences to mend with neighboring Georgia after
state representatives passed a resolution naming peaches Alabama's official tree
fruit.   A12

A Big Gift and a Big Tax Break
Boone Pickens, the often controversial Texas oilman turned investor, took
advantage of a temporary tax break to make a gift that propelled him into the
ranks of the nation's top philanthropists last year.   A12

Bush Raises Money for G.O.P.
President Bush plunged into the 2006 midterm elections, headlining back-to-back
fund-raising events for Republican candidates in Indiana and Ohio, bringing in
at least $1.6 million, party officials said.   A16

Disaster Response Plan
The Bush administration, acknowledging the multitude of Hurricane Katrina
failures, advocated giving federal agencies from the Pentagon to the Department
of Justice a greater role in the nation's disaster response playbook.   A19

Disputes Over Storm Cleanup
Dozens of courthouse disputes and public controversies have erupted recently
over the still-gargantuan task of removing tons of debris in Louisiana and
Mississippi, almost six months after Hurricanes Katrina and Rita hit.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Anthrax Victim Failed To Declare Skins, U.S. Says
Federal authorities say Vado Diomande, the New York City man who has inhalation
anthrax, could have avoided infection had he properly declared the animal skins
he was bringing back from Africa with him, and which are believed to have made
him sick.   B1

In Hot Pursuit of Bicyclists
The New York police have regularly conducted aggressive pursuits of biyclists
participating in the monthly Critical Mass group ride, despite guidelines that
urge caution when chasing cars.   B1

Albany's Plan to Combat Flu
Each county in New York would be charged with formulating its own response plan
in the event of an outbreak of pandemic influenza in the state, according to a
formal plan released by the State Health Department.   B1

FASHION   B8

WEEKEND   E1-30; E31-40

ESCAPES   F1-11

OBITUARIES   A21

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-8

Arakawa Wins Gold; Cohen Falls
Shizuka Arakawa, left, of Japan won her country's first medal at these Olympics,
taking the gold in women's figure skating. The American Sasha Cohen could not
manage her demons, fell on her first jump and ended up stunned to take home even
a silver medal.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

U.S. and the Port Business
In the outcry over who should run America's port terminals, one trend appears to
have been overlooked: companies in the United States began withdrawing from the
business decades ago.   C1

New Fannie Mae Evidence
An internal investigation has uncovered new evidence that senior executives of
Fannie Mae manipulated its accounting in the 1990's to meet earnings projections
so that top executives could receive more than $27 million in bonuses.   C1

Wal-Mart's Health Benefits
Wal-Mart Stores, facing a raft of state legislation that would require it to
increase spending on employee health insurance, said it planned to ease several
longstanding restrictions on who is eligible for the company's benefits.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Reaping what you sow; outrage in Samarra; Francis X. Clines on city
life: the great cormorant calls.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Thomas L. Friedman

Crossword   E5
Weather   A18
TV Listings   E29

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); HAMAS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (79%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(79%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (79%); POLITICS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION
(77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (75%); FRUITS &
VEGETABLES (75%); TAXES & TAXATION (74%); FUNDRAISING (71%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (70%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (70%); SCHOOL DISTRICTS (70%);
PHILANTHROPY (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (51%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (93%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); INDIA (92%); NIGERIA (92%); EUROPE
(92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY,
OCCUPIED (79%); ASIA (79%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(75%); GEORGIA (72%)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             123 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Refugee Crisis Grows as Darfur War Crosses a Border

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN; Michael Kamber contributed reporting from Geneina,
Sudan, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1709 words

DATELINE: ADRE, Chad


The chaos in Darfur, the war-ravaged region in Sudan where more than 200,000
civilians have been killed, has spread across the border into Chad, deepening
one of the world's worst refugee crises.

Arab gunmen from Darfur have pushed across the desert and entered Chad, stealing
cattle, burning crops and killing anyone who resists. The lawlessness has driven
at least 20,000 Chadians from their homes, making them refugees in their own
country.

Hundreds of thousands more people in this area, along with 200,000 Sudanese who
fled here for safety, find themselves caught up in a growing conflict between
Chad and Sudan, which have a long history of violence and meddling in each
other's affairs.

''You may have thought the terrible situation in Darfur couldn't get worse, but
it has,'' Peter Takirambudde, executive director of the Africa division of Human
Rights Watch, said in a recent statement. ''Sudan's policy of arming militias
and letting them loose is spilling over the border, and civilians have no
protection from their attacks, in Darfur or in Chad.''

Indeed, the accounts of civilians in eastern Chad are agonizingly familiar to
those in western Sudan. One woman, Zahara Isaac Mahamat, described how Arab men
on camels and horses had raided her village in Chad, stealing everything they
could find and slaughtering all who resisted.

The dead included her husband, Ismail Ibrahim, who tried to prevent the raiders
from burning his sorghum and millet fields. Like so many others in this desolate
expanse of dust-choked earth, she fled west with her three children, much as
people in Darfur have been forced to do in recent years.

''I have lost everything but my children,'' she said, her face looking much
older than her 20 years. She is now a refugee, with thousands of other displaced
Chadians, in Kolloye, a village south of here.

''We have three bowls of grain left,'' she said. ''When that is gone, only God
can help us.''

The spreading chaos is a result of two closely connected conflicts in the
neighboring countries.

In Darfur, rebels have been battling government forces and the janjaweed, Arab
militias aligned with the government, in a campaign of terror that the Bush
administration has called genocide.

The United Nations Security Council has agreed to send troops to protect
civilians, but they will take months to arrive. In the meantime, President Bush
has said, NATO should help shore up a failing African Union peacekeeping mission
there, but a surge of violence has chased tens of thousands of people from their
homes in recent weeks.

In Chad, the government is fighting its own war against rebels based in Sudan
and bent on ousting Chad's ailing president, Idriss Deby.

The rebels include disgruntled soldiers who defected and tribes tired of being
ruled by members of the president's tribe, the Zaghawa, who represent just a
small percentage of the population but have long dominated politics and the
military.

In a sign of how inseparable the two conflicts have become, President Deby has
accused Sudan of supporting the rebellion against his government, and Sudan has
long suspected members of Mr. Deby's family of supporting Zaghawa-led rebels in
Darfur.

Both sides agreed at a summit meeting in Libya in early February to stop
supporting rebels on each other's territory and to tone down the belligerent
talk. But Chadian rebels have remained on the Sudanese side of the border, and
it is not clear whether Mr. Deby has the capacity to stop members of his clan
from supporting Darfur rebels.

If unchecked by international intervention, this complex and volatile mix of
government forces, allied militias and at least a half-dozen rebel groups in a
remote region awash with weapons will almost inevitably lead to disaster, said
John Prendergast, a senior adviser at the International Crisis Group, a
nonpartisan nonprofit organization, and an expert on the Darfur conflict.

''The principle strategy of all these actors, both state actors and proxy
militias, is to displace people in order to destabilize and undermine the
support base of your opponent,'' he said. ''We are going to see an increasing
spiral of displacement on both sides of the border and an increasingly dangerous
environment for humanitarian workers.''

In Chad, the trouble began in December when rebel groups attacked Adre and two
other strategic border towns. The Chadian Army repelled the rebels, but it
withdrew its troops from garrisons along the border to fortify Adre.

The withdrawal has left a security vacuum into which the janjaweed have rushed.
The once well-traveled road between Adre, a bustling border town, and Kolloye
has become a terrifying gantlet roamed by bandits and Arab militias. Dozens of
villages have emptied; some have been burned. The few aid agencies working in
this lawless region avoid the road, using a circuitous route farther west to
reach Abeche, the regional capital.

In six days of traveling along the frontier, a reporter and photographer for The
New York Times saw just four policemen to keep the peace, equipped only with
horses and armed with battered AK-47's. Outside of Adre, only one military
patrol was visible.

What appeared to be another military patrol just south of Adre, four soldiers
commanded by an aging officer with thick glasses and rheumy eyes, was in fact a
search party for the missing cattle of the commanding officer, Adoum Allatchi
Gaga. His cows had been stolen by raiders across the border. Asked about the
security situation in the region, Mr. Gaga said: ''I don't have any idea. I am
just looking for my cows.''

At the hospital in Adre, the number of gunshot victims in December and January
almost doubled, to about 100 a month, relief officials said, a grim sign of the
growing lawlessness.

In one ward lay Fatime Youma, a 13-year-old girl with a tube draining the
gunshot wound that had punctured her lung.

She was shot, her father explained, by janjaweed who happened upon her and her
16-year-old sister, Zenab, who lay in the next room with a gunshot wound to her
arm.

''I was just looking for firewood with my sister,'' Zenab said softly. ''When
the raiders saw us we ran away but they shot at us.''

Adre's police chief, Mahamat Lony, said he was short of both officers and
weapons.

''We have a very catastrophic situation,'' he said. ''We have a very long
frontier with Sudan, and many heavily armed raiders on the other side. There
have been many incursions, and they attack the population. We have many
displaced, and no one is helping them.''

The man charged with defending Chad's border and protecting refugees and
civilians is Gen. Abakar Youssouf Mahamat Itno, 38, a nephew of President Deby
who was dispatched here the day of the rebel attack.

''Sudan wants to export the war in Darfur to us here,'' General Itno said at his
camp in the hills above Adre. ''They want to use the janjaweed they armed to
terrorize Darfur, to terrorize our population. We will not allow it.''

Even so, he acknowledged his inability to patrol the border areas. ''It is a
long border,'' he said. ''We cannot be everywhere at once.''

That Chadian rebels have found sanctuary in Sudan is beyond doubt. Geneina, the
capital of Western Darfur, resembles a garrison town; armed men from at least
six forces are visible on the streets, as are Arabs in street clothes carrying
AK-47's. Local residents identify them as janjaweed.

In the market in the evening, Chadian Army deserters wearing their distinctive
turbans sit drinking tea, submachine guns beside them. Freshly dug
machine-gunpits surround the police and army stations, and aid agencies are
putting sandbags around their offices. The Chadian rebels have new weapons,
uniforms and vehicles, aid officials in Geneina said, leading many to conclude
that they are getting support from the Sudanese government.

With so much firepower on the Sudanese side of the border, residents in villages
like Ade, south of Adre, have borne almost daily attacks.

''There is no security here,'' said Hisseine Kassar Mostapha, secretary general
of the local government in Ade. ''We are out here completely on our own, with no
one to protect us.''

The lack of security means little assistance from international aid groups. In
Kolloye, 10,000 Chadians, refugees like Ms. Mahamat, live in roofless grass
shelters that give little protection from the frigid night air and no shelter
from the punishing desert sun. Water is scarce and food supplies are low,
villagers said. The only assistance is a mobile clinic run by Doctors Without
Borders that operates three times a week.

One refugee, Kaltam Abdullah, cradled her year-old son in her lap; his head
lolled on his neck, his eyes were glazed and his limbs slender.

''He has had running stomach for 10 days,'' Ms. Abdullah said. ''He is coughing.
But there is no doctor.''

Meanwhile, Sudanese refugees continue to arrive in Chad. Last month there were
1,500 arrivals, up from 1,000 over the previous three months, said Claire
Bourgeois, the deputy representative for the Office of the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees in Abeche. She said all the camps were full except
one, and that it was filling up quickly.

Several camps holding tens of thousands of refugees will be moved further west,
Ms. Bourgeois said, to protect the refugees from the violence. But safety
remains a serious problem, she added, and ''if there is no security, the
humanitarian actors will leave.''

Sudanese refugees who have arrived in recent weeks recount grim tales of
slaughter, rape and plunder.

Ibrahim Suleiman Mahamat, a herder from the Masalit tribe who lived along the
border, said janjaweed had stolen his livestock: 40 cows, 20 goats and sheep, 2
camels and 2 horses. Penniless and terrified, he had little choice but to cross
into Chad with his two wives and six children. Dozens of relatives left behind
plan to join him, he said. Even in the relative safety of the Gaga Refugee Camp,
far west of the border, he said, he does not feel safe.

''We are in a very dangerous situation,'' Mr. Mahamat said. ''What happens if
there is a war in the country you are from and the country you have fled to? We
are nowhere. There is nowhere for us to go.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 2, 2006



CORRECTION: Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Tuesday about
the spread of the refugee crisis in the Darfur region of Sudan referred
incorrectly to the armed groups considered responsible for a campaign of terror
that is a cause of the crisis, which the Bush administration has called
genocide. Those groups are the government forces and allied Arab militias known
as the janjaweed, not the rebels who are battling them.

  Also because of an editing error, the article misstated action taken by the
Security Council concerning efforts to send United Nations peacekeepers to
Darfur. While the council has agreed to begin planning for a possible
peacekeeping force, it has not yet taken up a resolution authorizing such a
force.

Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Tuesday about the spread of
the refugee crisis in the Darfur region of Sudan referred incorrectly to the
armed groups considered responsible for a campaign of terror that is a cause of
the crisis, which the Bush administration has called genocide. Those groups are
the government forces and allied Arab militias known as the janjaweed, not the
rebels who are battling them.

Also because of an editing error, the article misstated action taken by the
Security Council concerning efforts to send United Nations peacekeepers to
Darfur. While the council has agreed to begin planning for a possible
peacekeeping force, it has not yet taken up a resolution authorizing such a
force.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Refugees in Chad must dig for water in a dry riverbed. Relief
services are scant, and may be cut to nothing if violence spreads further.
Gen. Abakar Youssouf Mahamat Itno, the president's nephew, commands troops on
the border.
The government of Chad has sent troops to the Sudan border to fight Sudanese
Arab militias and renegade Chadians threatening the government, but there are
many gaps in patrols. (Photographs by Michael Kamber for The New York Times)(pg.
A11)
 A boy and his sister in a camp in Kolloye, Chad, are among the refugees left
homeless by marauding militias along the border with Sudan. (Photo by Michael
Kamber for The New York Times)(pg. A1)Map of Chad highlighting Adre: Refugees
camped around Adre, Chad, may be moved farther west. (pg. A11)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (93%); WAR & CONFLICT (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MAMMALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CHILDREN
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); US PRESIDENTS (84%);
IMMIGRATION (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); BURN INJURIES (78%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); PEACEKEEPING (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); EXECUTIVES (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (50%) Immigration
and Refugees; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%) Human Rights Watch

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Lydia Polgreen; George W (Pres) Bush; Idriss (Pres)
Deby

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (97%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad; Sudan; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             125 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 6, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Algeria to Free Jailed Islamists Under Amnesty

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 425 words

DATELINE: ALGIERS, March 5


Algeria will complete the release this week, under an amnesty, of 2,629
Islamists jailed during civil strife that lasted more than a decade, the justice
minister was quoted as saying Sunday.

The minister, Tayeb Belaiz, told the government-controlled newspaper El
Moudjahid that 150 former rebels walked free from prisons across the country, in
a first batch of releases on Saturday as part of a drive for national
reconciliation.

The amnesty, approved by the government on Feb. 21, also gave Islamic guerrillas
fighting the authorities six months to surrender and receive a pardon, provided
they were not responsible for massacres, rapes and the bombings of public
places.

Officials estimate about 1,000 guerrillas are still active in Algeria, most of
them members of the radical Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat. The group
is on the American list of foreign terrorist organizations and is believed to
have links with Al Qaeda.

Algeria plunged into brutal civil unrest early in 1992 after the military-backed
authorities canceled a parliamentary election that Islamists were expected to
win.

The country continues to have sporadic riots to protest social problems,
including an acute housing shortage and unemployment.

Hundreds of people went on a rampage on Sunday, looting and burning a state bank
outside Algiers and clashing with security forces after a youth had died in
police custody, residents said.

Several protesters and riot police officers were injured in the clashes, which
followed the death of the young man at a police station in the coastal town of
Zeralda, about 20 miles west of Algiers, they said.

The violence during the period of Algeria's civil strife claimed about 150,000
lives. It also caused $20 billion in economic losses, as a result of a sabotage
campaign by Islamic rebels.

Thousands of Islamic guerrillas have given themselves up since a partial amnesty
in January 2000. The last prisoner releases were in 1999.

The new amnesty offers compensation for victims of the conflict and families of
disappeared people, as well as aid for families of rebels killed in the
fighting. It also provides compensation for people who lost their jobs because
they were believed to be linked to militants.

Under the pardon, the military will be protected from prosecution for any human
rights abuses.

Human rights groups and families say many of the thousands of people who
disappeared were abducted by the security forces. Government officials have said
that many of those who disappeared actually joined the guerrillas.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); AMNESTY (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); RIOTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); PARDONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
PRISONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); ELECTIONS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); RELIGION (75%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); POLICE FORCES (75%); APPROVALS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); LAYOFFS (71%); BOMBINGS (70%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (65%); GENOCIDE (60%);
SHORTAGES (52%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (52%); HOUSING SHORTAGES (52%) Amnesties
and Pardons; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: SALAFIST GROUP FOR PREACHING & COMBAT (83%); AL-QAEDA (56%)
Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat

PERSON: Tayeb (Min) Belaiz

CITY: ALGIERS, ALGERIA (93%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (96%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Algeria; Algeria

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Editors' Note

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 225 words


A front-page article last Saturday profiled Ali Shalal Qaissi, identifying him
as the hooded man forced to stand on a box, attached to wires, in a photograph
from the Abu Ghraib prison abuse scandal of 2003 and 2004. He was shown holding
such a photograph.

As an article on Page A1 today makes clear, Mr. Qaissi was not that man.

The Times did not adequately research Mr. Qaissi's insistence that he was the
man in the photograph. Mr. Qaissi's account had already been broadcast and
printed by other outlets, including PBS and Vanity Fair, without challenge.
Lawyers for former prisoners at Abu Ghraib vouched for him. Human rights workers
seemed to support his account. The Pentagon, asked for verification, declined to
confirm or deny it.

Despite the previous reports, The Times should have been more persistent in
seeking comment from the military. A more thorough examination of previous
articles in The Times and other newspapers would have shown that in 2004
military investigators named another man as the one on the box, raising
suspicions about Mr. Qaissi's claim.

The Times also overstated the conviction with which representatives of Human
Rights Watch and Amnesty International expressed their view of whether Mr.
Qaissi was the man in the photograph. While they said he could well be that man,
they did not say they believed he was.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editors' Note

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); SCANDALS (72%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (54%)

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             131 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 18, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. to Turn Over 16 Saudis From Guantanamo to Riyadh

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 647 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 17


The United States plans to turn over 16 Saudis suspected of terrorist activities
and held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to Saudi Arabian authorities, the Saudi
foreign minister and American officials said Wednesday.

The decision to release the men came after months of wrangling over American
demands for guarantees that they would be treated humanely once in Saudi
custody, but it was not entirely clear what sort of agreement had been reached.

A Saudi official said Saudi Arabia had refused American demands that the men be
allowed visits by American officials or by the International Committee of the
Red Cross. Instead, he said, access would be given to the Saudi Arabian Red
Crescent Society and Saudi human rights groups.

An American official indicated that general assurances had been made by Saudi
Arabia that the detainees would be treated properly and that if the United
States insisted, some American access to the prisoners could be arranged.

These two officials spoke on condition of anonymity to avoid being identified
with the disclosure of diplomatic negotiations.

The Defense Department, which runs the prison camp at Guantanamo, declined to
confirm that the Saudis would be repatriated soon.

Saudi Arabia is one of many countries, including Britain and nations in the
Middle East, that have protested the holding of their citizens at Guantanamo
without charges and with access to the Red Cross and other outsiders sharply
limited.

Of about 490 suspects now held at Guantanamo, 128 are Saudis arrested at various
times and places after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks. Last summer, the
Defense Department announced approval of repatriation of 18 Saudi detainees, but
their release had been delayed by the negotiations over their treatment when
they return home.

The military has sent home 267 detainees from Guantanamo after determining that
they had no further value for intelligence gathering and posed no long-term
security threat. But last month, The New York Times reported that the
administration remained concerned about releasing more because of fear that they
would be tortured or otherwise mistreated in their home countries.

The Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, disclosed the impending
release at a meeting with reporters at his embassy, and he emphasized that
various legal procedures would be carefully followed.

''We receive tomorrow or after tomorrow the first 16 of them,'' he said. In
Saudi Arabia, he added, ''they will be incarcerated and checked, and we'll see
what the proof against them is.''

''If the proof against them justifies trial, they will be put on trial,'' he
added. ''If they are proved guilty, they will be incarcerated. If they are
proved innocent, they will be let out.''

The minister said that his government was relieved that an issue that had been
festering for years had been settled, and that the families of the accused would
be pleased their strenuous protests had been heard.

''It hasn't been easy, but we are glad that it has been solved,'' he said.
''Their families are clamoring for having them back, and they are the first to
have their minds eased, having them home.'' Asked if those released faced a
possible death sentence for their activities, he said their punishment, if any,
''is going to be decided by the courts.''

The 16 Saudis will not be the first released from Guantanamo: 5 were sent home
in May 2003 in an arrangement that some American officials said was part of an
accord with the Saudi and British governments in which the Saudis later freed 5
British citizens and 2 others convicted on terrorism charges.

American officials have said the Saudi record on human rights of prisoners is an
obstacle in releasing Saudis to their own country. The State Department has
found that Saudi authorities use beatings, whippings, sleep deprivation and
other forms of abuse of prisoners.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Saudi foreign minister, Prince Saud al-Faisal, said
repatriated citizens would be tried fairly. (Photo by Michal Cizek/Agence
France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); PRISONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); POWS & MIAS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); APPROVALS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%); MILITARY
BASES (72%); NAVIES (67%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (67%) Terrorism; Freedom and
Human Rights; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (57%); INTERNATIONAL RED
CROSS & RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (57%) Red Cross; Red Crescent

PERSON: Steven R Weisman

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (93%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Saudi Arabia

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             142 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Afghan Spy Chief Is Sentenced to Death

BYLINE: By ABDUL WAHEED WAFA and CARLOTTA GALL; Abdul Waheed Wafa reported from
Kabul for this article and Carlotta Gall from Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 510 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 25


A former Afghan intelligence chief was found guilty of imprisoning and killing
hundreds of Afghans and was sentenced to death by a tribunal in Kabul on
Saturday in the first trial of an Afghan official for war crimes committed the
country's violence-torn Communist period in the late 1970's.

Asadullah Sarwari, 64, the former head of AGSA, the feared Afghan intelligence
service under the first Communist government from 1978 to 1979, was found guilty
of causing the disappearance of hundreds of people, including 35 from one
prominent religious family. That government was overthrown by a coup in 1979
that led to the Soviet invasion of the country.

Mr. Sarwari was acquitted of charges of conspiring against the Islamic
government, the reason for his arrest in 1992, because of a lack of evidence.
Mr. Sarwari, whose family lives in Kabul, has been in prison since 1992. He was
held most of that time by the Northern Alliance.

The trial has been criticized by human rights groups, which had called for a
delay of prosecution on the grounds that the Afghan authorities could not hold a
fair and just trial. The trial had been twice postponed in recent weeks to allow
Mr. Sarwari time to find a defense lawyer, but no lawyer could be found who
would defend him, the presiding judge, Abdul Basit Bakhtiari, said.

About 200 people packed the courtroom of Kabul's primary security court. The
prosecutor said hundreds of people from all over the country had written
complaints accusing Mr. Sarwari of the arrest and disappearance of their fathers
and brothers.

Mr. Sarwari, still without a defense lawyer, denied the charges in a written
statement and also in person in court. He said the witnesses who claimed to have
seen him at their arrest were either mistaken or lying.

''Could I be minister of intelligence, and judge, prosecutor, soldier and
arresting people, all at once?'' he asked.

After several hours of testimony from witnesses and Mr. Sarwari, Judge Bakhtiari
handed down the guilty verdict from a panel of judges, and sentenced Mr. Sarwari
to ''severe punishment -- that is, death.''

The courtroom erupted in applause and calls of ''God is Great!'' The judge said
Mr. Sarwari had the right to two rounds of appeal.

Among the people in court was a woman from Parwan Province, north of Kabul, who
was identified as Wida and who was holding three pictures. ''This was my
brother, a student at university, and the others are my uncles,'' she said, her
voice breaking. ''We don't know what happened to them since 1979.''

The main victims of the case were the Mojadeddi family, a religious family that
lost 35 men. Another 25 members of the family, including women and children,
were imprisoned and were among those who testified Saturday.

Hazrat Ahmad Amin Mojadeddi, 40, came from Pakistan to be a witness. He said he
remembered when he was 14, soldiers raided their house in Qalai Jawad, where the
Mojadeddis had a Sufi monastery. The family was taken to the Interior Ministry.
Thirty-five of the men who were arrested were never seen again.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); VERDICTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
LAWYERS (89%); RELIGION (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); ARRESTS (89%); PRISONS (78%);
EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); COUPS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); JUDGES (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (75%); FAMILY (75%);
TERRORISM (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (73%); ACQUITTAL (72%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Decisions and Verdicts; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

PERSON: Abdul Waheed Wafa; Carlotta Gall; Asadullah Aarwari

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (95%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             143 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 10, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shame of Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 153 words



To the Editor:

Re ''They Came for the Chicken Farmer'' (editorial, March 8):

How can the Bush administration continue to argue that the Guantanamo detention
camp serves our country's interests in any way?

The camp was set up as an offshore penal colony out of reach of United States
laws and unwanted media scrutiny. It has been the site of documented human
rights abuses and torture. And some of the prisoners have been shown to be
guilty only of being in the wrong place at the wrong time.

The prison inflames enemies and alienates allies. It has been condemned by human
rights groups and the United Nations.

Is there any critic, domestic or international, the administration will listen
to? Or is the White House so narcissistic that it will admit that Guantanamo was
a bad idea only after the country has had its credibility destroyed and its
reputation ruined?

Robert J. Inlow
Charlottesville, Va., March 8, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CORRECTIONS (87%); TORTURE (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); NAVIES (74%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: Robert J Inlow; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (74%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             145 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberian Seeks Extradition of Predecessor for Atrocities Trial

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE; Lydia Polgreen contributed reporting from Dakar,
Senegal, for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 17


Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, the president of Liberia, said Friday that she had asked
Nigeria to extradite Charles Taylor, the former Liberian president and guerrilla
leader, to face war crimes charges in Sierra Leone.

Ms. Johnson Sirleaf told the Security Council that she had made a formal request
to President Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria, where Mr. Taylor lives in exile.

Mr. Taylor claimed asylum in Nigeria in August 2003 as part of an
internationally brokered peace settlement ending 14 years of civil war in
Liberia. He was later indicted on 17 counts of war crimes and crimes against
humanity by a United Nations-backed court in Sierra Leone.

Mr. Taylor, 58, a warlord-turned-president, rampaged through his own country and
much of West Africa during the 1990's, unleashing ruthless campaigns of torture,
rape and dismemberment.

Even from exile, he has maintained influence in Liberia, with thousands of young
combatants still loyal to him, Ms. Johnson Sirleaf said, making her plea
''courageous but risky.''

''Please bear in mind that time is of the essence in this regard,'' she said at
a news conference. ''Liberia's peace is fragile. There are many loyalists in our
country to Mr. Taylor, there are many business interests he has. Whatever
decision is taken by the African leadership must ensure that the safety of the
Liberian people and the stability of our nation is not undermined.''

She said Mr. Obasanjo would consult African leaders because they had been
signatories to the deal that sent Mr. Taylor into exile.

She said she also wanted to ''ensure that in any proceedings, there is an
environment that protects all, including the accused's, fundamental human rights
.''

She was not seeking Mr. Taylor's extradition to Liberia, she said, because he
was not under indictment there. If he is sent to Liberia, peacekeepers there
have been authorized by the Security Council to transfer him to Sierra Leone.

Mr. Obasanjo has been under pressure to act on Mr. Taylor but had said he would
await a request from a democratically elected Liberian president. Ms. Johnson
Sirleaf was elected in November and inaugurated on Jan. 16.

She complained that the international community should have acted sooner to help
Liberia free itself from Mr. Taylor's influence.

''We inherited a problem, we are faced with serious pressure, we are a small
country, we have no powers that others have, we have no security forces to
protect our people and the safety of our nation, so we are caught in a situation
that we have to take a major decision that should have been taken long before,
giving us an opportunity to pursue our development agenda,'' she said.

Corinne Dufka, a senior researcher for Human Rights Watch in Dakar, Senegal, who
has followed the Taylor case closely, hailed the move as an ''enormous step
toward advancing justice in West Africa,'' but she said she was troubled by Mr.
Obasanjo's decision to seek the approval of other African leaders.

''Obasanjo must now play his own part in the fight against impunity in West
Africa,'' she said.

Ms. Johnson Sirleaf, who served five years as an assistant secretary general
with the United Nations Development Program, addressed a joint meeting of
Congress on Wednesday and will see President Bush in the White House on Tuesday.

She used her appearance before the Council on Friday to thank the United Nations
for helping Liberia end its debilitating conflicts and hold the election that
put her in office.

The United Nations has a peacekeeping force in Liberia of 16,000 soldiers and
police officers, and Ms. Johnson Sirleaf asked the Council to guarantee its
continuance.

She was praised in speeches by many of the ambassadors, and her speech was
greeted with applause, a rare occurrence in the chamber.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 25, 2006



CORRECTION: An article last Saturday about Liberia's request to Nigeria for the
extradition of Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian president, reversed the
timing of his August 2003 move to exile in Nigeria and the war-crimes indictment
against him by a United Nations-backed court in Sierra Leone on charges of
having committed atrocities in West Africa during the 1990's. He was indicted
before he went into exile, not after.

An article last Saturday about Liberia's request to Nigeria for the extradition
of Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian president, reversed the timing of his
August 2003 move to exile in Nigeria and the war-crimes indictment against him
by a United Nations-backed court in Sierra Leone on charges of having committed
atrocities in West Africa during the 1990's. He was indicted before he went into
exile, not after.

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf of Liberia, center, on her way
to address the United Nations Security Council yesterday. (Photo by Nicholas
Roberts/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); POLITICAL
ASYLUM (78%); TORTURE (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); POLITICS
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); GENOCIDE (72%); PEACE PROCESS (72%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (52%) Politics and Government; Extradition; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS (83%) United
Nations

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (93%) Warren Hoge; Ellen (Pres) Johnson Sirleaf;
Charles Taylor

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (58%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (99%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); NIGERIA (94%); AFRICA (92%); SENEGAL
(79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             150 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gypsies Gain a Legal Tool in Rights Fight

BYLINE: By OTTO POHL

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 912 words

DATELINE: MISKOLC, Hungary


For the Gypsies of Eastern Europe, like Agnes Krappai, life never seems to
improve. She lives in an impoverished section of this Hungarian town, in a house
with no running water. Her neighbor washes a rug in the street, coaxing water
out of a hand-pumped well. ''It's a constant crisis, if there is such a thing,''
Ms. Krappai says.

But now, some leaders of the Gypsies, or Roma, are looking to a new model to try
to achieve equality: the civil rights struggle of black Americans. More and
more, the Roma are going to court to secure their rights, and doing so where
they think it will have the best chance for success -- among the new East
European members of the European Union and those trying to join, which are
seeking to impress Western Europe with strict interpretations of their new
antidiscrimination laws.

The Roma strategy was rewarded in October, when a Bulgarian court for the Sofia
district ruled for them in a school segregation case. ''This is Brown v. Board
of Education in Europe,'' said Dimitrina Petrova, executive director of the
European Roma Rights Center, recalling the 1954 Supreme Court decision that the
official system of ''separate but equal'' school segregation by race was
unconstitutional.

''This is a purely American paradigm,'' said Ms. Petrova, whose group filed the
suit. ''It's not a right if you can't defend it in a court.''

An appeal is under way, but the Bulgarian government has already begun enacting
changes in state education policy, and the Romani Baht Foundation, the Bulgarian
rights group that argued the case, said it planned about 50 more school
segregation cases in the fall.

In 2002, the foundation filed suit against a coffee shop in Stara Zagora,
Bulgaria, for refusing to serve Roma.

The foundation won, and has since filed suits against nightclub owners,
hospitals and other companies, charging that they refuse to hire or serve Roma.

The cases cited antidiscrimination laws enacted to prepare Bulgaria to join the
European Union, which it hopes to do next year.

Some of those working on behalf of the Roma say these efforts offer a model for
helping other groups that face discrimination.

George Soros, the billionaire who is one of the biggest donors to Roma rights
groups, promises that ''a similar effort will be made with the Muslim minority''
of Europe once Roma gains have been secured.

However, European law is based on civil law, meaning that a court decision does
not automatically become the law of the land -- and that court victories
achieved in campaigns of strategic litigation do not necessarily have
far-reaching effects.

Still, Panayote Dimitras, executive director of the Greek branch of Helsinki
Monitor, a human rights group that also operates in the Balkans, said he had
cited court decisions from Eastern Europe in his Roma cases in Greece.

Ms. Petrova said she hoped the gains made in Eastern Europe would reverberate in
Western Europe, where Roma also struggle for their rights.

The Roma efforts go beyond legal challenges. In December, Gyorgy Makula, a young
police officer in Budapest, founded the Roma Police Association in Budapest. He
modeled it on the National Black Police Association, a group founded in Illinois
in 1972 to help black officers around the United States fight racist law
enforcement practices and create a more positive relationship with minority
communities.

For the first time, there is even Roma representation in Brussels. After Hungary
joined the European Union in 2004, it elected two Roma to the union's
Parliament.

Still, there is no unified Roma movement and no leader like the Rev. Dr. Martin
Luther King Jr. to help create one, nor galvanizing figures like Malcolm X or
Rosa Parks.

And not all legal cases succeed. The European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg rejected a case about 18 nonhandicapped Czech Roma children allowed
to enroll only in schools for the handicapped. Estimates are that up to 75
percent of Roma children in the Czech Republic are shunted to special schools.
The case has been resubmitted.

Roma are believed to have migrated from India to Europe up to 1,000 years ago,
bringing nomadic ways, dark skin, insular culture and strange customs that paved
the way for permanent marginalization.

The Nazis considered the Roma racially inferior, grouping them with Jews and the
disabled, and killed half a million in concentration camps in World War II.

Even today, much remains unclear about the Roma. There is no agreement even on
their numbers in Europe. Estimates range from 7 million to 15 million, and 5
percent to 10 percent of the population in many Eastern European countries.

In Hungary, the struggle to desegregate schools has come here to Miskolc, one of
the poorest regions in the European Union. Andras Ujlaky, president of the
Chance for Children Foundation, a Hungarian group that focuses on Roma
schooling, recently visited Roma community leaders here to discuss integration
of a school near the neighborhood of scores of squalid buildings where Ms.
Krappai lives.

Mr. Ujlaky drank instant coffee as he sat on a worn couch in the small, tidy
home of a community leader and discussed plans for children to refuse to enroll
in the all-Roma school nearby.

If the children have trouble transferring, he said, he plans to file a
discrimination suit, hoping to prompt a procedural review that would close the
Roma-only school.

''Now that the law is in place we should use it,'' Mr. Ujlaky said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In Miskolc, 200 Gypsy families live in squalid houses without
running water. Silvia Batyi scrubs her rug. (Photo by Anne Sherwood for The
International Herald Tribune)Map of Hungary highlighting Miskolc: Gypsies in
Miskolc are using a new law to resist segregation.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); SCHOOL DESEGREGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS
(87%); CIVIL PROCEDURE (78%); EXECUTIVES (76%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); SUPREME COURTS (75%);
DISCRIMINATION (75%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (74%); PUBLIC POLICY (74%);
APPEALS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%)

PERSON: GEORGE SOROS (58%) Otto Pohl

CITY: SOFIA, BULGARIA (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (97%); HUNGARY (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%);
EASTERN EUROPE (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); BULGARIA (89%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%);
FINLAND (79%)

REGION: European Union; Bulgaria; Hungary; Europe

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             152 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 20, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Overrules Parts of Law Shielding Colombia's Warlords

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 624 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, May 19


Colombia's highest court on Thursday struck down crucial provisions in a law
governing the disarming of death squad fighters, ending generous concessions
that have shielded warlords from serious punishment for their crimes.

Announced Thursday night, the ruling drew a swift, threatening response on
Friday from the paramilitary leaders, who live on ranches in northern Colombia.
The paramilitary groups, financed by landowners and from the profits of drug
trafficking, have killed thousands in their war against Marxist rebels, leftist
politicians and union members.

''This is a mortal blow to reconciliation in this country,'' Ivan Roberto Duque,
a paramilitary commander, told RCN radio.

The court's decision also raised the specter that the groups might stop
cooperating with a government program that has disarmed more than 30,000
fighters.

''I'm amazed and perplexed,'' said Sabas Pretelt, the interior and justice
minister, who oversaw some of the implementation of the law and is one of its
staunchest defenders. ''I can only have a democratic attitude, but I'm frankly
worried.'' The law, which was approved by Congress last July, has reduced the
amount of violent crime in areas controlled by the groups.

The latest development in the troubled process comes as the government has been
tarnished by revelations that Colombia's intelligence service had collaborated
with death squads to assassinate leftist union activists, provided secret
information to drug traffickers and engineered votes for President Alvaro Uribe
in the 2002 election.

Mr. Uribe, who is running for re-election on May 28, has angrily denied the
allegations, which were made in the magazines Semana and Cambio last month.

The government, though, has come under relentless criticism from United Nations
officials, rights groups and lawmakers here and in Washington. They accuse Mr.
Uribe of bending over backward for the paramilitary groups, saying that in
exchange for laying down their weapons, the groups were essentially rewarded
with the so-called Justice and Peace Law.

Diplomats and human rights groups say there has been no mechanism to guarantee
that the militias and their drug networks are completely dismantled. Commanders
were not required to turn over their vast fortunes or confess to atrocities.
Prison terms for war crimes could also amount to less than three years. The
Constitutional Court, in a 6-to-3 vote, sought to rectify those problems. The
court said that the warlords, who receive reduced sentences for cooperating,
must confess to all their crimes and that if they are found to have lied, they
would risk having full prison sentences reinstated. They must pay full
reparations to victims' families and direct authorities to the buried bodies of
victims.

The court also gave prosecutors more time to investigate paramilitary crimes.
Jose Miguel Vivanco, the Americas director for Human Rights Watch, applauded the
decision. ''The Uribe administration has been on its knees, essentially turning
the country over to drug traffickers and groups that spread terror,'' he said
from Washington.

The paramilitary leaders had proceeded with talks on the assurance that they
would not serve long prison terms or turn over all their wealth. They have also
made clear that they would not cooperate if the government moved to extradite
them to the United States on drug trafficking charges, a provision Mr. Uribe's
government agreed to as long as the paramilitaries cooperated.

''This is very serious, because they are not complying with accords that were
made during negotiations,'' Rocio Arias, a former congresswoman who often speaks
for the paramilitary groups, said in comments published by El Tiempo, Colombia's
leading newspaper.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Alvaro Uribe of Colombia was greeted by supporters at
a campaign rally on Thursday in Manizales, west of Bogota, the capital. (Photo
by JJ Bonilla/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SENTENCING (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (89%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); VERDICTS
(78%); VIOLENT CRIME (78%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); CIVIL WAR (76%);
ASSASSINATION (76%); ELECTIONS (75%); POLITICS (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%);
APPROVALS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%) Decisions and Verdicts; Suits and
Litigation; Law and Legislation; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: ALVARO URIBE (89%) Juan Forero

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (91%)

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Colombia; Colombia

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Thailand: Government Accused Of Torture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 126 words


The government of Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra has responded to a violent
Muslim insurgency in its southern provinces with arbitrary detention and
torture, the human rights group Amnesty International said in a report. Violence
on both sides ''has increased to an extent where it affects almost all areas of
life for local people, both Muslim and Buddhist, restricting their ability to
work, travel, trade and receive education,'' the report said. For two years, the
report said, they have been caught between daily drive-by shootings and bombings
by suspected members of Muslim armed groups, while the authorities' response
''has included arbitrary detention, torture, and excessive lethal force.'' The
government had no immediate comment on the report.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%); SHOOTINGS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%) Torture;
Freedom and Human Rights; Islam

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) Amnesty International

PERSON: Thaksin Shinawatra (Prime Min)

COUNTRY: THAILAND (93%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Thailand

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             162 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Terrorism and Democracy: Two Documentaries Address the Peruvian Example

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section E; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 8


Of all the insurgent groups active in Latin America over the last half-century,
none fitted the description of ''terrorist'' more aptly than Peru's Sendero
Luminoso, or Shining Path. It began armed action in 1980, committed atrocities
for more than a decade and was defeated under a president who was driven from
office in 2000 for abuse of power.

So does Peru's war on terror offer any lessons to the United States?

The American directors of two documentaries being shown at Film Forum in New
York this month believe it does: at the very least, they say, the Peruvian
experience is a cautionary tale because of the price paid by Peru's fragile
democracy in crushing terrorism.

Both directors, Pamela Yates and Ellen Perry, said they made their films with
American audiences in mind. And while neither film explicitly draws parallels
with the American war on terror, the issues raised in Peru -- from antiterrorist
tactics to civil liberties -- have a familiar ring.

That said, the two documentaries are strikingly different.

''State of Fear: The Truth About Terrorism,'' directed by Ms. Yates, which opens
Wednesday for a week, follows up on the work of Peru's Truth Commission, which
concluded that more than 69,000 people were killed in terrorist or
government-sponsored violence in Peru between 1980 and 2000. It also underlines
how the war on terror was used to justify erosion of the country's democracy.

''The Fall of Fujimori,'' directed by Ms. Perry, which runs for two weeks
starting Jan. 18, goes over some of the same ground, but much of it is based on
interviews with Alberto Fujimori, Peru's president from 1990 to 2000, who is
allowed to explain his strategy and claim credit for wiping out the Shining
Path.

Peru's story, though, is not over.

From his exile in Japan, the land of his forefathers, Mr. Fujimori had long
vowed to run again for office in April's presidential elections. As a step in
this direction, in early November he flew to Chile, where he was arrested at the
request of Peruvian authorities. Last week, Peru asked for his extradition to
face an array of charges, from corruption to responsibility for death squads.

The two documentaries are contributing to Peru's re-examination of its recent
past. ''State of Fear,'' applauded by human rights groups at a festival in Lima
in August, is now being broadcast weekly by Peru's government-owned Channel 7 as
a way of reminding people of Mr. Fujimori's excesses. ''The Fall of Fujimori''
was in turn welcomed by Mr. Fujimori's followers at the same festival.

What most distinguishes Peru's experience from the American war on terror is
that Peru's violence was entirely homegrown. Founded by Abimael Guzman, a former
philosophy professor, the Shining Path promised to reverse centuries of
injustice suffered by Peru's Indian population. But to assert its power, it
created a reign of terror, notably in the Ayacucho region of the Andes.

In preparing ''State of Fear,'' Ms. Yates and her producer, Paco de Onis,
attended public hearings of the Truth Commission. They returned to Peru to
interview witnesses and, in some cases, accompanied them to the sites of Shining
Path atrocities. Some in the movie, for instance, were press-ganged into the
Shining Path as children and some were forced to kill their own families.

By the mid-1980's, Peru's armed forces were fighting the Shining Path in the
Andes but, as ''State of Fear'' demonstrates, the result often increased the
violence, with many Indian communities threatened and punished by both armed
groups. And, in practice, military repression helped the Shining Path: by 1990,
it was beginning to threaten the coastal capital of Lima.

It was then that Mr. Fujimori, another former professor, was elected. In April
1992, in the name of fighting terrorism, he closed Congress and assumed
dictatorial powers. Five months later, Mr. Guzman, the Shining Path's leader,
was arrested. But a central argument in ''State of Fear'' is that the arrest
came about, not through military repression, but through old-fashioned police
work.

While Mr. Guzman's arrest proved fatal to the Shining Path, Peru's military
intelligence, under Vladimiro Montesinos, stepped up persecution of suspected
terrorists, using torture and death squads. In ''State of Fear,'' a woman called
Magdalena Monteza described how, on her first day at university, she was
arrested, repeatedly raped and then jailed. Sitting beside her in the interview
was the young girl born of that rape.

In ''The Fall of Fujimori,'' Mr. Fujimori points out that he was overwhelmingly
re-elected for a second term in 1995. ''What were Peruvians willing to do in the
name of peace?'' Ms. Perry wondered in a telephone interview from Los Angeles.
''They allowed military tribunals, they allowed death squads, they knew this was
going on.'' And, she added: ''I'm perplexed that they're going after him on
pre-1995 charges when his re-election was a landslide.''

What eventually undermined Mr. Fujimori was his decision to seek re-election
again in 2000. And despite protests that he violated the constitution, he won.
Then, shortly after his inauguration, a television channel broadcast a videotape
showing Mr. Montesinos bribing a congressman. Within 10 days, Mr. Montesinos had
fled the country and, as more videotapes were shown, Mr. Fujimori's regime began
to unravel.

He called for new elections and distanced himself from Mr. Montesinos. But in
November 2000, as evidence of Mr. Montesinos's corruption mounted, Mr. Fujimori
flew to Japan and faxed his resignation as president. In ''The Fall of
Fujimori,'' he says that his life was in danger and insists that he knew nothing
of Mr. Montesinos's illegal activities.

''Montesinos in my mind is a criminal and a rebel,'' Ms. Perry said. ''Fujimori
is a patriot, a rebel and possibly a criminal. Fujimori and Montesinos are truly
Shakespearean characters.''

Certainly, her film focuses more on its main character than on his record. ''It
gives you a glimpse into the mind of a dictator,'' said Ms. Perry, who has been
nominated for a Writers Guild Documentary Screenplay Award along with her
co-writers, Zack Anderson and Kim Roberts. ''I don't spend 20 minutes talking
about the brutality of the military, but it's all in there subtly.''

In contrast, ''State of Fear'' offers a more comprehensive view of Peru's battle
against terrorism and for democracy. It is also having an unexpected
international impact. In July, it was broadcast in 45 languages on the National
Geographic Channels International. And last month, it provoked a fierce debate
between critics and supporters of the Russian government at a human rights
festival in Moscow.

''They're working on a Quechua version,'' Mr. de Onis said, referring to one of
Peru's Indian languages. ''We showed it at a festival in Nepal in September and
pro-democracy groups there now want a Nepalese version. We're thinking of doing
an Arabic version. They're looking at the film in Northern Ireland. It's amazing
to see the film take on a life of its own.

Ms. Yates added: ''I hope the film helps our own debate on the best way to
defeat terrorism.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A child soldier, left, in ''State of Fear''
Alberto Fujimori, Peru's former president, from ''The Fall of Fujimori.''
(Photos by Left, Vera Lentz
right, Presidential Archives)(pg. E1)
 Indians conscripted to fight in Peru, in the documentary ''State of Fear.''
(Photo by Vera Lentz)(pg. E7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS
(91%); WAR ON TERROR (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); FILM DIRECTORS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ELECTIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%); CORRUPTION (65%); EXTRADITION (62%);
ARRESTS (60%) Motion Pictures; Motion Pictures; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: SHINING PATH (94%) Shining Path (Guerrilla Orgn)

PERSON: Alan Riding; Alberto Fujimori; Ellen Perry; Pamela Yates

CITY: LIMA, PERU (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PERU (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (88%); JAPAN (79%);
CHILE (79%)

REGION: Peru; Peru

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             163 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The African Union Gets It Half-Right

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 295 words


The African Union did the right thing in rejecting Sudan's bid for the rotating
presidency of the organization. Allowing President Omar Hassan al-Bashir of
Sudan to become Africa's face to the world would have sent just about every
wrong message imaginable. Mr. Bashir has presided over the genocide perpetrated
by Sudanese solders and allied militias in Darfur since 2003. He's not exactly
the person anyone would want in nominal command of the 7,000-strong African
Union force that is trying to protect civilians in Darfur. His ascension would
have mocked the group's declared goal of promoting democracy, human rights and
development.

The only question is why the African leaders in Khartoum for the sixth African
Union summit meeting even wasted so much time on the issue, given the really
pressing problems on their agenda. While the African Union usually passes the
presidency on to the host of its regular summit meeting, the main purpose in
founding the organization in 2002 was to avoid the pitfalls of its predecessor,
the Organization of African Unity, which came to be derisively known as a
dictators' club because of its consistent failure to sanction any member. The
African Union, loosely modeled on the European Union, was meant to confront the
continent's failings and problems head-on, and to find African solutions for
them. So accepting Mr. Bashir's bid for the presidency would have been a serious
blow to the union's credibility.

Unfortunately, that credibility is still on probation. Though rebuffed for now,
Mr. Bashir was promised the group's presidency in 2007, and for now the chair
will go to the Congo Republic, hardly a model of human rights. Giving Sudan the
African Union presidency next year will be just as unacceptable as it was this
year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (78%); GENOCIDE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
EUROPEAN UNION (69%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN
UNITY (55%) African Union

PERSON: Omar Hassan Al- (Pres) Bashir

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (58%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (67%)

REGION: Africa; Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             168 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Web Magazine Raises Doubts Over a Symbol Of Abu Ghraib

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DETAINEES;
Pg. 17

LENGTH: 519 words


The online magazine Salon is challenging the identity of a man profiled by The
New York Times in a front-page article on Saturday who says he is the iconic
hooded figure in a published photograph who was abused by Americans at Abu
Ghraib prison in 2003 and 2004.

Salon bases its challenge on an examination of a set of 280 Abu Ghraib
photographs it has been studying for several weeks and an interview with an
official of the Army's Criminal Investigation Command, known as the C.I.D., who
says the man identified by The Times is not the detainee in the photograph.

On Monday, Chris Grey, chief spokesman for the investigations unit, asked about
the challenge, confirmed to The Times in an e-mail message: ''We have had
several detainees claim they were the person depicted in the photograph in
question. Our investigation indicates that the person you have is not the
detainee who was depicted in the photograph released in connection with the Abu
Ghraib investigation.

''As always, we will take this information into consideration in the course of
our investigative duties to determine if there is any credibility to the
person's allegations.''

The man identified by The Times, Ali Shalal Qaissi, often called Haj Ali, was
also interviewed and described as the hooded man forced to stand on a box
attached to electric wires in an article in Vanity Fair and a broadcast on PBS.

Joan Walsh, the editor of Salon, said: ''It is possible that two different
people are pictured. We are not saying that nothing like this happened to Mr.
Qaissi. But the C.I.D. believes there is only one person in the photographs.''

Salon was given the photographs of the abuse at Abu Ghraib by a member of the
military who spent time there and is planning to publish them today along with
the investigation unit's inquiry into them.

Susan Chira, foreign editor of The Times, said: ''We take questions about our
reporting very seriously, and we will carefully investigate Salon's findings. We
attempted to verify the claims of Mr. Qaissi thoroughly. We spoke with
representatives of Human Rights Watch and Amnesty International, who had
interviewed Mr. Qaissi and believed him to be the man in the photographs.''

Amnesty International showed The Times evidence documenting that Mr. Qaissi was
incarcerated at Abu Ghraib during the time the photographs were taken. The Times
also spoke with his lawyers, who said they had the blanket that had draped him,
as shown in the photograph. The Times contacted the military, which said the
Geneva Conventions prevented it from commenting about the identity of anyone in
a photograph. The Times did not contact the Criminal Investigation Command in
the process of reporting the article.

Mr. Qaissi, asked by The Times last night about the challenge to his identity,
insisted that he was the man in the photograph. Salon says the hooded man
identified in the Criminal Investigation Command documents is another prisoner.
Asked about this, Mr. Qaissi said he knew that former prisoner and believed that
he was also photographed in that position. Mr. Qaissi's lawyers made a similar
assertion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ELECTRONIC PUBLISHING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); PUBLISHING (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); PRISONS (77%); ARMIES (77%); LAW
OF WAR (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); LAWYERS (69%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Photography; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: Salon (On-Line Magazine); New York Times

PERSON: Ali Shalal Qaissi; Chris Grey; Susan Chira

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             178 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

European Inquiry Says C.I.A. Flew 1,000 Flights in Secret

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY; Ivar Ekman contributed reporting from Stockholm for
this article, and Brian Knowlton and Mark Mazzetti from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 695 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, April 26


Investigators for the European Parliament said Wednesday that data gathered from
air safety regulators and others found that the Central Intelligence Agency had
flown 1,000 undeclared flights over European territory since 2001.

Sometimes the planes stopped to pick up terrorism suspects who had been
kidnapped to take them to countries that use torture, the investigators added.

The operation used the same American agents and the same planes over and over,
they said, though they could not say how many flights involved the transport of
suspects.

The investigation, by a committee looking into C.I.A. counterterrorism
activities in Europe, also concluded that European countries, including Italy,
Sweden and Bosnia and Herzegovina, were aware of the abductions or transfers and
therefore might have been complicit.

''The European Parliament deplores the fact that the C.I.A. has on several
occasions clearly been responsible for kidnapping and illegally detaining
alleged terrorists on the territory of member states, as well for extraordinary
renditions'' to third countries, wrote Giovanni Fava of Italy, a Socialist
member of the European Parliament who led the committee.

The report, the first of several planned by the Parliament, grew out of three
months of hearings, including testimony by human rights advocates and
individuals who said they had been kidnapped by United States agents and flown
to other countries, including Egypt and Afghanistan, where they were tortured.

As for the question of secret C.I.A. detention centers in Europe, the new report
offered no hard evidence.

Its estimate of 1,000 undeclared flights exceeds the numbers previously
discussed, including those in an analysis by The New York Times late last year
that said the agency operated about 300 flights in Europe between November 2001
and the summer of 2005.

The report's conclusions are likely to heighten trans-Atlantic tensions at a
time when Europe and the United States are already at odds over how to balance
civil liberties with the fight against terrorists.

The inquiry was opened in January after The Washington Post reported that the
C.I.A. had hidden and interrogated suspected members of Al Qaeda at secret
prisons in Eastern Europe.

Mr. Fava said the committee hoped to send a fact-finding mission to Poland and
Romania in September. Both countries have been cited as possible locations for
prisons.

Mr. Fava said the investigation showed that agency planes had made hundreds of
flights and several secret stopovers in Europe, violating a treaty that requires
airlines to declare routes for police missions.

The C.I.A. declined to comment on the specifics, but an agency spokesman
defended the practice of taking suspects to third countries, a process known as
rendition.

''Renditions are an antiterror tool that the United States has used for years,
consistent with its laws and treaty obligations,'' said the spokesman, Paul
Gimigliano. ''The C.I.A does not condone or tolerate torture, transport
individuals to other countries for the purpose of torture or knowingly receive
intelligence obtained by torture.''

Mr. Fava emphasized that it was most likely that some authorities in Europe had
been aware that suspects were being detained on their territories. He pointed to
testimony by a senior prosecutor in Milan, Italy, Armando Spataro, that a C.I.A.
team had abducted a suspect, Abu Omar, in February 2003 in broad daylight before
he was flown to Egypt.

Mr. Fava also criticized Sweden for handing over two Egyptian suspects, Muhammad
al-Zary and Ahmed Agiza, to American agents who flew them to Egypt in December
2001. Their case was brought to light by Swedish television in 2004.

''Sweden has been criticized for this on numerous occasions, and we have taken a
number of steps in order for it not to happen again,'' Barbro Holmberg, the
minister for migration and asylum policy, said.

Mr. Fava said the Parliament found that Bosnian authorities had handed over six
suspects of Algerian origin to C.I.A. agents without assurances that they would
not be tortured, and in defiance of a ruling by the human rights court in Bosnia
and Herzegovina.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); AVIATION TRANSPORTATION LAW (78%); AIR
TRANSPORTATION SAFETY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); AIRLINES (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (60%) Terrorism; Kidnapping; United States International Relations;
Torture; Terrorism

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (52%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (52%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (93%);
EUROPEAN UNION (59%) European Union; Central Intelligence Agency

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (52%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (52%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (52%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (52%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (52%)

PERSON: Dan Bilefsky

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); SWEDEN (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); ROMANIA (79%);
POLAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (58%)

REGION: Italy; Sweden; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Europe

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             179 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 1, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Egypt Renews Emergency Detention Law

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Abeer Allam and Sahar Farag contributed reporting
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 944 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, April 30


President Hosni Mubarak on Sunday pushed through Parliament a two-year extension
of an emergency law, a measure that for almost 25 years has effectively allowed
the Egyptian government to detain prisoners indefinitely and without charge.

In asking Parliament to approve the extension, Prime Minister Ahmed Nazif said
the emergency law would eventually be replaced with a provision focusing
exclusively on terrorism, as the president repeatedly promised during his
campaign for re-election last year. But, Mr. Nazif said, devising a new law will
take time, and Egypt can not afford to wait, with the emergency law set to
expire at the end of May.

''We will never use the emergency law against the Egyptian people,'' he said to
the crowded parliamentary chamber. ''We will use it only to protect the citizens
and face the terror cells that did not quell until now.''

But the extension was widely criticized by political opposition groups, human
rights groups and citizens on the streets of Cairo, who said it demonstrated
that the government was intent on protecting itself, not the people.

Officials had hinted days ago that they would push for renewal, and so could not
credibly claim the decision was in response to three terrorist attacks in Sinai
last week that left at least 18 people dead and many more seriously wounded.

''We are living in a country with no protection from the people who are supposed
to secure us,'' said Dalia Sherif, 26, an unemployed college graduate, as she
walked Sunday through the center of the city.

The extension provided another signal that the government had stalled -- if not
reversed -- the commitment it had made toward increasing freedoms. In recent
days, Egypt, like other countries in the region, has backtracked on such
promises as pressure from the United States has eased.

Throughout his re-election campaign last year, Mr. Mubarak promised he would
promote more political freedom, work to amend the Constitution to give more
power to Parliament, help foster alternative political parties and replace the
emergency law.

''There is a need for a firm and decisive law that eliminates terrorism and
uproots its threats,'' he said in a speech last July. ''A law that protects
national security and ensures stability. A law that provides a legislative
substitute to combat terrorism and replaces the current emergency law.''

Since his lopsided victory, with more than 88 percent of the votes cast, his
government has used its security forces to beat and shoot voters trying to cast
ballots in parliamentary elections for opposition candidates; sentenced an
opposition political leader, Ayman Nour, to five years in prison; delayed local
elections for two years; sought to punish judges who reported fraud at the polls
during past elections; and denied requests to create new political parties.

As if to underscore the point, the authorities on Saturday arrested several
dozen young men from opposition groups who had been posting signs that read ''No
to the emergency law'' and ''Together against extension of the emergency law.''

The emergency law was first passed in 1981 in response to the assassination of
President Anwar el-Sadat, and at its height was used to detain more than 30,000
prisoners indefinitely without charge. Mr. Mubarak has had the law renewed every
three years since -- and human rights groups estimate that there are now
approximately 15,000 prisoners who have not been charged in Egypt's jails.

The law expressly allows the authorities to hold individuals for up to six
months without charging or trying them. But in practice, legal experts said, the
government goes through the motions of technically releasing prisoners after six
months and then rearresting them, without ever having actually let them go. In
Parliament, Mr. Nazif's speech, and his offer of a two-year extension instead of
the customary three years, was widely supported by the majority of legislators
in Mr. Mubarak's governing National Democratic Party. The N.D.P. and its members
have a monopoly on power in Egypt, so it was a foregone conclusion that the law
would be adopted. It passed with a vote of 237 to 91.

''We understand that the emergency law does not completely destroy terrorism,''
Mr. Nazif said. ''But it allows the necessary security measures to combat
terrorism.''

The opposition has found its way in to Parliament -- and the largest bloc
included 88 members of the Muslim Brotherhood who were elected as independents
last year. They stood Sunday in the parliamentary chamber wearing black sashes
that called for an end to the emergency law.

''When I go out in the street, I feel that the stick that security uses to hit
me on the head for expressing my opinion is only there because of the emergency
law,'' said Essam el-Erian, a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood, who was
himself tried before a military judge for his work with the group, which is
technically banned, though tolerated. ''The government lies and uses terrorism
to justify extending the law, but terrorism increased and flourished under the
emergency law.''

3 Suspects in Resort Attacks Killed

  EL-ARISH, Egypt, April 30 (Reuters) -- Egyptian police officers on Sunday shot
dead three men suspected of belonging to a group of Sinai Bedouins who killed at
least 18 people in the Red Sea resort of Dahab last week, police officials said.
The police said they captured four suspects.

The police said a patrol came across two of the men, who threw grenades which
did not explode. The police opened fire and killed them.

In a separate incident, the police killed a suspected member of the group in a
gun battle in another area.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Egyptian legislators from the Muslim Brotherhood yesterday in
sashes reading ''No to the emergency law.'' (Photo by Agence France-Presse --
Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%);
POLITICS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%);
LEGISLATION (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PRISONS (77%); SENTENCING
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (73%); APPROVALS (73%);
ELECTION FRAUD (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (79%); AHMED NAZIF (73%)

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (92%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             185 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

29 Die in South In New Battle With Taliban

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 369 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, May 24


The United States military on Wednesday defended an airstrike earlier this week
on a southern village that killed at least 16 civilians, and a firefight in the
south left at least 24 people suspected Taliban militants and 5 Afghan soldiers
dead, according to the military coalition forces operating in the country.

An American military spokesman, Col. Tom Collins, apologized to the families of
the civilians, who were killed late Sunday and early Monday, saying, ''We never
wanted this to happen.''

But the troops have the right to defend themselves against attackers, he added.
''The ultimate cause of why civilians were injured and killed is because the
Taliban knowingly, willfully chose to occupy homes of these people,'' Colonel
Collins said.

He said the troops did not know there were civilians in the homes when they
called in Air Force A-10 Warthogs to strafe the buildings with large-caliber
bullets.

Human rights advocates criticized the airstrike and the Taliban's tactic of
hiding behind civilians.

''Taliban insurgent forces who take shelter in a civilian area knowing that it's
going to draw hostile fire are violating international law,'' said Sam Zarifi,
head of the Asia division of Human Rights Watch.

Colonel Collins said Tuesday that Taliban rebels now had an experienced cadre of
troops in southern Afghanistan.

''There is a hard-core group of Taliban fighters, certainly numbering in the
hundreds,'' he told reporters in Kabul. ''We know for a fact that in recent
weeks they have grown in strength and influence in some parts of Kandahar,
Helmand and Uruzgan,'' the three southern provinces worst hit by the violence.

The latest assault by suspected Taliban came Tuesday evening in the mountains of
southern Uruzgan Province, after a week of some of the deadliest violence since
the Taliban were ousted in 2001.

The fighting started after a joint patrol of Afghan- and American-led troops was
attacked in a small village in Tirin Kot District, a coalition statement said.
The troops beat back the assault and forced the militants to retreat into the
mountains, where aircraft bombed Taliban positions, said the Afghan military
commander for southern Afghanistan, Gen. Rehmatullah Raufi.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (95%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); AIR FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(67%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%) Taliban

PERSON: Tom (Col) Collins

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             192 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nassau and Suffolk Address Housing Bias

BYLINE: By JOHN RATHER

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 3; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 986 words


TEN months after a report found that little had been done on Long Island to
enforce anti-bias laws in housing, Nassau and Suffolk Counties are edging closer
to an agreement that would toughen local enforcement efforts.

While the final form of the plans is still under discussion, the county
executives, Thomas R. Suozzi of Nassau and Steve Levy of Suffolk, are expected
to submit drafts to their County Legislatures by the end of next month. The
identical bills are expected to take aim at discriminatory practices like racial
steering by real estate agents and to make it easier for people to pursue
complaints of housing bias.

''Everyone wants to get this done,'' said William J. Cunningham, the counsel to
Mr. Suozzi.

Erase Racism, a nonprofit group in Syosset, said in an April report entitled
''Long Island Fair Housing: A State of Inequity'' that enforcement was
''inefficient and lethargic'' and did virtually nothing to deter racial steering
and other housing discrimination. The report said there was a vacuum of
leadership in the two counties in enforcing state and federal fair housing laws.

The report described Long Island as a highly segregated area where 84 percent of
whites lived in virtually all-white neighborhoods while nonwhites were
concentrated in other communities. But it said there were no accurate estimates
for incidents of housing bias.

The group, in collaboration with the Anti-Discrimination Center of Metro New
York, is involved with officials in both counties in negotiating the plans,
which it hopes will foster greater integration.

The president of Erase Racism, V. Elaine Gross, said that the county legislation
would be a model for a regional approach to combating discrimination. ''You
shouldn't have any more rights in one county than in the other,'' she said.

Mr. Levy said statistical evidence showed that Long Island remained as
segregated today as it was 30 years ago. ''When you deny people equal
opportunity in housing, you deny them quality education and, eventually, job
opportunities,'' he said. ''So our desire is to fashion Islandwide legislation
that enhances our ability to break the tradition of racial steering within the
real estate community.''

Mr. Levy, who proposed deputizing county police officers as federal immigration
agents last year in a crackdown on illegal immigrants, said the county's fair
housing initiative would use the same language as federal regulations that
describe bias in terms of race but do not ask about citizenship status. That
assures illegal immigrants the same protection as citizens who encounter housing
bias or racial steering.

Accusations of racial steering on Long Island have been heard for decades, but
real estate agents and brokers generally deny them. The Erase Racism report
recounted the experience of Deborah W. Post, a black professor at the Touro Law
Center who said that a real estate agent showed her houses in Huntington
Station, a racially mixed area, even though she had asked to be shown houses in
Smithtown, which is predominantly white.

Robert Harding, the immediate past president of the Port Washington and
Manhasset Real Estate Board, said that he could not speak for other members of
the group but that he would not tolerate racial steering in his agency.

''I don't think that's a problem in Port Washington,'' he said. ''There's
everything in this town, and everybody is welcomed in this town.''

The executive director of the Long Island Board of Realtors in West Babylon,
Joseph Mottola, was away on business and could not be reached for comment, his
office said.

The New York State Division of Human Rights and the federal Department of
Housing and Urban Development have primary responsibility for enforcing fair
housing laws but have done little, the Erase Racism report said.

While both counties have anti-bias laws and semi-autonomous human rights
commissions, the local commissions have done little investigation and
enforcement for a variety of reasons, including a lack of staff and limited
budgets.

The counties' proposals would seek to strengthen the county rights commissions
and add procedures under which the county attorneys could represent people who
file complaints of housing bias and pursue real estate agents or agencies
engaged in racial steering. The county attorneys could also initiate
investigations and take legal action against building owners and landlords who
repeatedly violated anti-bias laws.

The proposals would also clarify and simplify the steps for filing complaints, a
procedure now so cumbersome, time-consuming and expensive that few complaints
are filed, officials in both counties said.

Other components under discussion would create an enforcement system using
administrative law judges to speed up action on bias complaints, rather than
going through the courts, and increases in fines and penalties for
discrimination abuses to bring them in line with penalties under federal laws.

The county plans will require public hearings and legislative approval before
Mr. Levy and Mr. Suozzi can sign them into law.

In Suffolk, two county legislators who have proposed separate legislation to
strengthen the Suffolk Human Rights Commission have agreed to hold back their
measure while the counties try to reach an agreement. But the legislators, Elie
Mystal, Democrat of Amityville, and Ricardo Montano, Democrat of Central Islip,
said they wanted assurances that the counties were close to taking action. Mr.
Mystal is the first African-American to serve in the Suffolk Legislature; Mr.
Montano is Latino.

''If they aren't doing anything, we're going to proceed with our bill,'' Mr.
Mystal said.

Mr. Montano, a former executive director of the Suffolk commission, said he
would be alert for any signs of delay. ''If you look at the Erase Racism report,
nothing has changed for years, and so obviously we need to do something,'' he
said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ricardo Montano, left, and Elie Mystal, Suffolk County
legislators, say there are waiting to see what the county does on anti-bias
legislation. (Photo by Maxine Hicks for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); COUNTIES (90%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (90%); RACE
& RACISM (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (89%); LEGISLATION
(89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PUBLIC HEALTH &
WELFARE LAW (78%); REAL PROPERTY LAW (78%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (70%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (69%); ILLEGAL
IMMIGRANTS (64%); IMMIGRATION (64%) Housing; Discrimination; Law and
Legislation; Brokers and Brokerage Firms; Housing

PERSON: Steve (County Exec) Levy; Thomas R (County Exec) Suozzi; John Rather

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Long Island (NY); Suffolk County (NY); Nassau County (NY)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

How States Are Aiming to Keep Dollars Out of Sudan

BYLINE: By CARLA FRIED

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; SUNDAY MONEY:
INVESTING; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 1311 words


THE latest American initiatives to put pressure on the government of Sudan are
centered many thousands of miles away from its capital, Khartoum. A handful of
state legislatures in the United States have passed laws that bar their public
pension funds from investing in companies with ties to Sudan, which has been
accused of extensive human rights abuses in a long-running civil war.

The United States State Department has also labeled Sudan a state sponsor of
terrorism.

While a 1997 executive order by President Bill Clinton bars American companies
from conducting business in Sudan -- except for a few technical exceptions, like
a humanitarian mission -- foreign businesses do not fall under that restriction.
But in this age of global asset allocation, it is not uncommon for investors in
the United States to have a link to Sudan through foreign stock holdings. Such
foreign holdings would be the most affected by the recent state legislation.

The New Jersey Legislature passed a law in August that requires its public
pension funds to divest itself of holdings in businesses that have equity
stakes, including investments, facilities or employees, in Sudan. A similar law
went into effect in Illinois last month, requiring its pension funds to be fully
divested of any company with a Sudan tie by July. Oregon has also passed such a
law for its public investment funds, while Louisiana has approved legislation
that permits, but does not require, its public funds to shed investments linked
to Sudan.

In December, the biggest public pension hammer, the California Public Employees
Retirement Plan, or Calpers, took aim at three companies in which it has
invested. The Calpers board voted 9 to 2 to call for the companies, ABB, Alcatel
and Siemens, to cease business operations in Sudan.

A Calpers spokesman said that ''our board believes that an engagement process
with the companies is the best avenue if we are going to effect some change.''
Last week, Calpers reported that the three companies would not sever their Sudan
ties; Calpers is considering its next step.

Phil Angelides, the California state treasurer and a Calpers board member, says
he is prepared to pursue divestment if those companies do not pull out of Sudan.
''The U.S. government has told Americans to have no business in Sudan,'' he
said, ''so why should California invest in companies that are supporting the
regime?''

Spokesmen for the three companies say that leaving Sudan would do more harm than
good. Ron Popper, a spokesman for ABB, for example, said the company had sought
comment from many individuals and organizations within Sudan. ''We have
unanimously heard one message: do not withdraw because the country needs
international investment,'' Mr. Popper said.

The states have left it to their money managers to figure out who belongs on the
divestment list. Money managers have relied on private research firms that scour
publicly available documents, trade journals and news accounts, and that conduct
independent research to compile databases of companies involved in Sudan. Among
the firms providing this research are KLD Research and Analytics, Institutional
Shareholder Services and the Conflict Securities Advisory Group.

For example, KLD started its Sudan Compliance Service last November. Noel
Friedman, managing director of KLD, said that 124 companies were currently on
its Sudan list, including eight American businesses that he declined to name.

The lists, however, are far from definitive. Some companies that appear on them
declare that they do no business in Sudan, and for at least one, 3M, the
involvement was described by the company as aiding the United Nations. A
spokesman at 3M said the United Nations bought 3M's Scotchshield Ultra Safety
and Security Film, used to protect windows.

Steven Schoenfeld, chief investment strategist for quantitative investments at
Northern Trust, is responsible for determining the companies his firm will
exclude from the six ''Sudan free'' index funds it has started for institutional
clients, including the State of Illinois. More than $8 billion of Illinois
pension money has already moved into the six portfolios.

Mr. Schoenfeld's goal is to track closely the performance of traditional indexes
even after he has removed stocks with ties to Sudan. He says his fund that
tracks the MSCI EAFE index, a popular benchmark for developed countries across
Europe and Asia, as well as Australia, will pose his biggest challenge. He said
that more than 25 companies, representing more than 9 percent of the index's
market capitalization, could be booted from the fund.

Among the big names that could be dropped from the portfolio are Royal Dutch
Shell, which represents more than 2 percent of the EAFE index; Total,  the
French energy giant, about 1.5 percent; Toyota, about 1 percent; and Siemens of
Germany and Ericsson of Sweden, both about 0.5 percent.

The six Northern Trust funds are to complete Sudan divestment by the summer.

While Sudan has been in a two-decades-long civil war that has claimed thousands
of lives through fighting and famine, the state initiatives picked up momentum
after Colin L. Powell, then the secretary of state, said in late 2004 that the
United States viewed violence in the Darfur region of western Sudan as genocide.

Agreement over the gravity of the situation in Sudan has not meant a united push
for divestiture. It stalled in the Arizona Legislature and didn't get far in
Maryland. William C. Thompson, the New York City comptroller, has identified 24
stocks in the city pension system's holdings in which the parent company has
some operations in Sudan. A spokesman for Mr. Thompson said his preferred course
-- echoing the stance of Calpers and others -- was discussion with those
companies, not divestment.

Mutual funds that call themselves socially responsible routinely screen out
companies that they regard as having poor records on humanitarian issues and
thus have generally avoided investing in companies with Sudan ties. But Julie
Gorte, director of social research at Calvert Investments, which specializes in
socially responsible funds, says she can still appreciate the complexity of the
issue.

''You have to ask yourself what your goal is with divestment,'' she said.
''What's there if the government falls? Is there a government there that will
take over and be better? If the companies that pull out provide money, goods and
services, is there an understanding that will make the people poorer in the
short run?''

Before the states' recent push, there were other moves to exert pressure. In
2002, Talisman Energy of Canada decided to end its Sudan investment after
American investors steeply discounted its stock. In 2000, many college
endowments and public pension funds, including Calpers, did not participate in
the initial public offering of PetroChina, a subsidiary of the China National
Petroleum Company, because of PetroChina's involvement in oil extraction from
Sudan.

THE nation's largest mutual fund companies have remained on the sidelines so
far. A spokesman for Vanguard said it was ''taking an 'analyze and see' approach
before making any broad policy changes to either our internally or externally
managed funds,'' while a spokesman for Fidelity said the Sudan issue was not
currently a concern.

The $9 million Bull Moose Growth fund, which calls itself a ''terror free''
fund, is an exception. The investment manager relies on a database, maintained
by the Conflict Securities Advisory Group, that tracks public companies with
business ties to countries designated as state sponsors of terrorism; about 450
companies are listed in Conflict Securities' global security risk monitor,
including about 120 with ties to Sudan. The fund's gain of 12.8 percent in 2005
was more than double that of the Standard & Poor's 500-stock index.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The civil war in Sudan has forced many residents, like these
who were helped by relief workers last October, to flee their villages. (Photo
by Lynsey Addario for The New York Times)
 Oil platforms being built in southern Sudan last December. Despite its energy
resources, the country is one of Africa's poorest. (Photo by Karel
Prinsloo/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (91%); PENSION FUNDS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); DIVESTITURES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PUBLIC EMPLOYEE
RETIREMENT SYSTEMS (90%); PERSONAL FINANCE (89%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CIVIL SERVICES (78%); PRIVATELY HELD COMPANIES (77%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); PENSION & RETIREMENT PLANS (77%); APPROVALS (77%); WAR CRIMES
(76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(72%); TERRORISM (71%); GENOCIDE (71%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (70%); BUSINESS
OPERATIONS (63%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (63%) United States International
Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Law and
Legislation; Pensions and Retirement Plans; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

COMPANY: CALIFORNIA PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM (54%); SIEMENS AG (53%)

ORGANIZATION: State Department

TICKER: SIN (SWX) (53%); SIE (LSE) (53%); SIE (FRA) (53%); SIE (BIT) (53%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS525110 PENSION FUNDS (54%); SIC6371 PENSION, HEALTH & WELFARE
FUNDS (54%); NAICS335110 ELECTRIC LAMP BULB & PART MANUFACTURING (53%);
NAICS334513 INSTRUMENTS & RELATED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FOR MEASURING,
DISPLAYING & CONTROLLING INDUSTRIAL PROCESS VARIABLES (53%); NAICS334413
SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS334210 TELEPHONE
APPARATUS MANUFACTURING (53%)

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (57%) Carla Fried

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); NEW JERSEY, USA (92%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; California; New Jersey; Louisiana; Sudan; Oregon

LOAD-DATE: February 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             198 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 20, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Torturers Win

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 757 words


Justice? Surely you jest.

Terrible things were done to Maher Arar, and his extreme suffering was set in
motion by the United States government. With the awful facts of his case
carefully documented, he tried to sue for damages. But last week a federal judge
waved the facts aside and told Mr. Arar, in effect, to get lost.

We're in a new world now and the all-powerful U.S. government apparently has
free rein to ruin innocent lives without even a nod in the direction of due
process or fair play. Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen who, according to all
evidence, has led an exemplary life, was seized and shackled by U.S. authorities
at Kennedy Airport in 2002, and then shipped off to Syria, his native country,
where he was held in a dungeon for the better part of a year. He was tormented
physically and psychologically, and at times tortured.

The underground cell was tiny, about the size of a grave. According to court
papers, ''The cell was damp and cold, contained very little light and was
infested with rats, which would enter the cell through a small aperture in the
ceiling. Cats would urinate on Arar through the aperture, and sanitary
facilities were nonexistent.''

Mr. Arar's captors beat him savagely with an electrical cable. He was allowed to
bathe in cold water once a week. He lost 40 pounds while in captivity.

This is a quintessential example of the reprehensible practice of extraordinary
rendition, in which the U.S. government kidnaps individuals -- presumably terror
suspects -- and sends them off to regimes that are skilled in the fine art of
torture. In terms of vile behavior, rendition stands shoulder to shoulder with
contract killing.

If the United States is going to torture people, we might as well do it
ourselves. Outsourcing torture does not make it any more acceptable.

Mr. Arar's case became a world-class embarrassment when even Syria's torture
professionals could elicit no evidence that he was in any way involved in
terrorism. After 10 months, he was released. No charges were ever filed against
him.

Mr. Arar is a 35-year-old software engineer who lives in Ottawa with his wife
and their two young children. He's never been in any kind of trouble. Commenting
on the case in a local newspaper, a former Canadian official dryly observed that
''accidents will happen'' in the war on terror. The Center for Constitutional
Rights in New York filed a lawsuit on Mr. Arar's behalf, seeking damages from
the U.S. government for his ordeal. The government said the case could not even
be dealt with because the litigation would involve the revelation of state
secrets.

In other words, it wouldn't matter how hideously or egregiously Mr. Arar had
been treated, or how illegally or disgustingly the government had behaved. The
case would have to be dropped. Inquiries into this 21st-century Inquisition
cannot be tolerated. Its activities must remain secret at all costs.

In a ruling that basically gave the green light to government barbarism, U.S.
District Judge David Trager dismissed Mr. Arar's lawsuit last Thursday. Judge
Trager wrote in his opinion that ''Arar's claim that he faced a likelihood of
torture in Syria is supported by U.S. State Department reports on Syria's human
rights practices.''

But in dismissing the suit, he said that the foreign policy and national
security issues raised by the government were ''compelling'' and that such
matters were the purview of the executive branch and Congress, not the courts.

He also said that ''the need for secrecy can hardly be doubted.''

Under that reasoning, of course, the government could literally get away with
murder. With its bad actions cloaked in court-sanctioned secrecy, no one would
be the wiser.

As an example of the kind of foreign policy problems that might arise if Mr.
Arar were given his day in court, Judge Trager wrote:

''One need not have much imagination to contemplate the negative effect on our
relations with Canada if discovery were to proceed in this case and were it to
turn out that certain high Canadian officials had, despite public denials,
acquiesced in Arar's removal to Syria.''

Oh yes, by all means, we need the federal courts to fully protect the right of
public officials to lie to their constituents.

''It's a shocking decision,'' said Michael Ratner, president of the Center for
Constitutional Rights. ''It's really saying that an individual who is sent
overseas for the purpose of being tortured has no claim in a U.S. court.''

If kidnapping and torturing an innocent man is O.K., what's not O.K.?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); DAMAGES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (79%); DUE PROCESS (79%); JUDGES (77%); OUTSOURCING (75%);
ENGINEERING (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CHILDREN (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(70%); TECHNICIANS & TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (70%); WAR ON TERROR (69%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (69%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and Litigation;
Torture; United States International Relations

PERSON: Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush; Maher Arar; David G (Judge) Trager

CITY: OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SYRIA (92%); CANADA (57%)

REGION: Canada; Syria

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             199 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chile Inaugurates First Woman to Serve as Its President

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 641 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, March 11


Michelle Bachelet, a Socialist, pediatrician and former political prisoner and
exile, was sworn in on Saturday as the first woman to be president of Chile, the
culmination of its long and painful journey from repression and dictatorship to
democracy.

Ms. Bachelet, 54, was elected to a four-year term in January, winning 53.5
percent of the vote in a runoff. Her accession to power here is also a
milestone: though six other women have served as presidents of Latin American
countries, Ms. Bachelet, a single mother of three, is the first on the continent
to be elected who is not the widow of a political leader and has built a career
on her own.

Ms. Bachelet is the daughter of an air force general who was jailed for treason
and died in prison after Gen. Augusto Pinochet took power in an
American-supported coup in 1973. She and her mother were also detained in 1974,
and Ms. Bachelet was tortured.

In a country where the Roman Catholic Church wields great power, Ms. Bachelet is
also openly agnostic, and when she took her oath of office she promised rather
than swore to uphold the Chilean Constitution.

She also has promised a government that focuses on social equality and respect
for human rights. Her immediate priorities, she indicated as a candidate, are a
more just distribution of income and reform of the country's pension system,
which is increasingly unpopular here.

But even before her inauguration at the Chilean Congress building in Valparaiso,
Ms. Bachelet has already fulfilled another of her campaign promises: sexual
equity in appointments to government posts. She has appointed a cabinet of 10
men and 10 women, and designated the governors of the country's 12 regions on
the same basis.

On Wednesday, on International Women's Day, Ms. Bachelet said she intended to
extend the principle to all official nominations.

''I've given clear instructions, and here I take advantage to do a commercial,''
she said. ''Chile is going to be the first country that will have, in public
sector decision making positions, total parity'' between men and women.

Only one of Ms. Bachelet's appointments has stirred real controversy, and that
was for familiar ideological reasons. For her choice as the deputy defense
minister for the air force, she selected Raul Vergara Meneses, a former military
officer who was one of her father's cellmates when he died and who later, while
in exile in Nicaragua in the 1980's, was a commander in the Sandinista air force
in Nicaragua.

Right-wing parties that supported the Pinochet dictatorship and have expressed
suspicions that Ms. Bachelet intended to steer the country leftward have
protested loudly. But Ms. Bachelet has held firm, and Mr. Vergara Meneses has
defended himself by noting that he may be the only member of the Chilean Air
Force with real combat experience.

About 30 leaders from Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as from Africa
and Oceania, were here for the inauguration, which was held 16 years to the day
after General Pinochet relinquished power.

The United States was represented by Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who
arrived late Friday after saying that Washington was looking forward to an
''excellent relationship'' with the Bachelet government.

Ms. Rice is scheduled to meet with several Latin American leaders and met
Saturday with Bolivia's new populist president, Evo Morales, who took office in
January.

Mr. Morales is an ally of the Bush administration's most vocal critic in the
region, President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela, who is also here but will not meet
with United States officials.

Mr. Morales, a onetime head of Bolivia's coca growers' union, has complained of
what he called ''threats and intimidation'' by the United States against his
government after Washington announced it was cutting $500,000 in military aid to
Bolivia.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michelle Bachelet, a onetime political prisoner, was sworn in
yesterday as Chile's president. Eduardo Frei, leader of the Chilean Senate,
adjusted her sash of office while her predecessor, Ricardo Lagos, applauded.
(Photo by Ivan Alvarado/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); AIR
FORCES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); GENDER
EQUALITY (78%); PRISONS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); POLITICS (78%);
APPOINTMENTS (78%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); SINGLE PARENTS (75%); DEFENSE &
MILITARY POLICY (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); TREASON (74%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (70%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (69%); RELIGION (67%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (52%) Women; Armament, Defense and Military Forces; Appointments and
Executive Changes; Freedom and Human Rights; Political Prisoners; Politics and
Government

PERSON: MICHELLE BACHELET (93%) Larry Rohter; Michelle (Pres) Bachelet; Raul
Vergara (Deputy Min) Meneses

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); NICARAGUA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Chile; Latin America; Chile

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             200 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic Is Found Dead In Cell, U.N. Officials Say

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and GREGORY CROUCH; Nicholas Wood contributed
reporting from Vranje, Serbia, for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; DEATH OF MILOSEVIC: THE FORMER
LEADER; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1361 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 11


Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of Yugoslavia and architect of a decade
of war that took more than 200,000 lives and tore the country apart, was found
dead in his cell at the United Nations detention center here on Saturday
morning, the United Nations war crimes tribunal said.

The tribunal said in a statement that guards had found Mr. Milosevic, 64, dead
in his bed, apparently of natural causes, while they were on their regular
rounds. But the time of his death was unclear, and the Dutch police and a
coroner began a full investigation. An autopsy is scheduled to be performed
Sunday in the Netherlands.

Leaders in the region and in Western Europe immediately expressed regret that he
would never be convicted for his role in the disintegration of Yugoslavia and in
three wars in the region during the 1990's.

Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch in New York who has often
attended the trial, said it was ''a terrible setback first and foremost for the
victims of horrific crimes in the former Yugoslavia, and because it deprives the
tribunal of a chance to render a verdict on his true role.''

''That verdict would be a crucial piece of the record of what happened and who
is accountable.''

He added: ''But Milosevic's death does not undo the legacy of the trials
completed already and those that will be completed. The four years of this trial
are a loss, but it does not undo more than a decade of work in establishing
reference points and responsibilities.''

Mr. Milosevic had been in poor health for years, and his heart ailment and high
blood pressure repeatedly caused delays in his war crimes trial here on charges
of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes in Bosnia, Croatia and
Kosovo. He refused to enter any plea, and he insisted on acting as his own
lawyer, only later accepting any help from his court-appointed lawyers and often
clashing with their advice. His long courtroom diatribes, often tuned to play
well to a Serbian audience back home rather than the court itself, took up whole
sessions.

He was the first former head of state to stand trial for genocide before an
international tribunal, and its proceedings, which began in February 2002, had
already produced the longest war crimes trial in modern history. His death came
as the trial was drawing to a close: he was in the final weeks of his defense,
and his concluding statement was expected in late April or May. The judges'
verdict was expected by the end of this year.

Mr. Milosevic had complained in recent weeks that his health was worsening, and
he pressed the court to allow him to seek treatment at the Bakoulev Scientific
Center for Cardiovascular Surgery in Moscow, where his wife and son live. But
the court denied his request, saying full medical care was available in the
Netherlands and any doctor could come to The Hague to treat him. The Russian
Foreign Ministry criticized the court's decision on Saturday after Mr.
Milosevic's death.

One of Mr. Milosevic's legal advisers, Zdenko Tomanovic, said Saturday that in
recent days, Mr. Milosevic said that someone was trying to poison him. Mr.
Tomanovic said he wanted the autopsy to take place in Moscow rather than in The
Hague.

''I insist on this request, especially bearing in mind Mr. Milosevic's claims
that there were attempts to poison him in the prison,'' he said. ''And
yesterday, I also informed the Russian Embassy on behalf of Mr. Milosevic about
his claims that his health was willfully destroyed.''

The tribunal denied the request for an autopsy in Moscow. A tribunal official
said Saturday, however, that two pathologists from Serbia and two Dutch doctors
would participate in the autopsy here.

Florence Hartmann, the spokeswoman for the chief prosecutor at The Hague,
cautioned that it was too early to rule out suicide as a cause of death. ''We
really have to wait for the autopsy results,'' she said.

Mr. Tomanovic insisted that Mr. Milosevic did not kill himself. ''I saw his body
lying in his cell, and I'm sure that's not true,'' he said.

One of Mr. Milosevic's court-appointed lawyers, Steven Kay, said in an interview
with the BBC that he did not think that Mr. Milosevic took his own life. ''We
were working on the last stretch,'' he said. ''He was determined to see this
through.''

Mr. Kay added: ''He has a history of suicide in his family -- both his parents
-- but as far as he was concerned, his attitude to me was quite the opposite
from that. He was determined to keep fighting his case.''

The death was the second major blow for the court in a matter of days. On March
5, Milan Babic, a convicted former politician who had testified against Mr.
Milosevic and was cooperating with prosecutors in other cases, hanged himself in
his holding cell in The Hague.

Since the Security Council created the tribunal in 1993, it has indicted 161
people. Proceedings have been completed against 85 people, and close to 60 are
in custody or awaiting proceedings.

But six senior figures, including the Bosnian Serb wartime leader Radovan
Karadzic and his top commander, Gen. Ratko Mladic, are still being sought. Carla
Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor at The Hague, has complained that cooperation
from Serbia, the dominant Yugoslav republic, has stalled.

In a statement released by her office on Saturday, Ms. Del Ponte said: ''The
death of Slobodan Milosevic a few weeks before the completion of his trial will
prevent justice to be done in his case. However, the crimes for which he was
accused, including genocide, cannot be left unpunished. There are other senior
leaders accused of these crimes, six of them still at large.''

Her office said she would hold a news conference on Sunday.

The European Union insisted Saturday that the death in no way relieved Serbia of
its responsibility to hand over war crimes suspects. After a meeting of European
foreign ministers in Austria, Foreign Minister Ursula Plassnik of Austria warned
that Belgrade must continue to aid the effort ''to come to terms with the legacy
of the Balkan wars,'' The Associated Press reported.

The Serbian foreign minister, Vuk Draskovic, who was also at the meeting, said
his country would continue on its course of reform. ''I am not ready to
establish a link between the destiny of Milosevic and the destiny of Serbia,''
he said, noting that Mr. Milosevic had ordered the assassination of many
opposition figures, including himself, The A.P. said. He added, ''I can say only
that it is a pity that he did not face justice.''

Across the Balkans, Mr. Milosevic's death prompted strong emotion, from dismay
among those who saw themselves as the victims of his repressive rule, to the
sorrow of the now dwindling core of Serbian Socialist Party supporters, for whom
Mr. Milosevic was still the nominal party leader.

In Vranje, one of the few towns in Serbia still dominated by the Socialist
Party, supporters lowered the Serbian flag to half staff and placed black bands
across photographs on office walls.

''Too bad for the guy,'' said Zoran Ivanovic, a 41-year-old laborer who lives in
Vranje. ''He was a big Serb. Maybe he made a few mistakes, like not accepting
Yugoslavia be turned into a confederation, and perhaps avoiding war. But those
charges of genocide, that's baseless.''

Among those who had worked to bring Mr. Milosevic to trial, there was a profound
note of disappointment on Saturday.

Ms. Hartmann, Ms. Del Ponte's spokeswoman, expressed frustration that at least
in a legal sense, Mr. Milosevic would not go down in history as a convicted war
criminal. ''This is bad for proving the real responsibility of Mr. Milosevic,''
she said. ''There is a presumption of innocence, and now we will not get a
conviction.''

But Richard C. Holbrooke, a former American ambassador to the United Nations who
was also a negotiator of the Dayton peace accord for Bosnia, said that amid the
disappointment, there was still justice.

''The trial was too long, but the trial was the verdict,'' he told the BBC on
Saturday. ''The Serb people came to understand the truth that he was not a
nationalist, but an opportunist. A kind of rough and imperfect justice was
served.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Members of the Serbian Socialist Party hung a portrait of
Slobodan Milosevic in Vranje in southern Serbia after hearing the news of his
death. (Photo by Filip Horvat/Polaris)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CORONERS COURTS & OFFICES (77%); AUTOPSIES
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); POISONINGS (75%); HISTORY
(73%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (73%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (70%); HYPERTENSION
(63%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Suicides and Suicide
Attempts; Poisoning and Poisons

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Gregory Crouch; Slobodan Milosevic; Zdenko Tomanovic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); CROATIA (92%); MONTENEGRO
(92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (88%); UNITED
STATES (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia
and Montenegro; Croatia

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             201 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Justice for Gypsies

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 154 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Separate and Unequal for Gypsies'' (editorial, March 11):

As a Romani woman from the Czech Republic and an educator, I've been going
through a grieving process since the decision by the European Court of Human
Rights on the case of Czech Roma (also known as Gypsies) who have been
discriminated against by the school system.

I continue to see evidence of the same damaging prejudice and segregation -- not
to mention the pervasive curricular ethnocentrism -- as I teach and carry out
research in Czech institutions this year.

Seeing the issue covered so eloquently in an internationally circulated
newspaper gives me and other Roma much-needed hope.

Perhaps the problem will soon be recognized enough to register on the radar
screens of the governments in question. Meanwhile, I am thankful that my son
won't have to go to school anywhere in post-Communist Europe.

Petra Gelbart
Prague, March 11, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); EDUCATION
SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (87%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%) Education and
Schools; Discrimination; Gypsies

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (84%) European Court of Human
Rights

PERSON: Petra Gelbart

CITY: PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC (57%)

COUNTRY: CZECH REPUBLIC (93%); EUROPE (90%)

REGION: Czech Republic

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             202 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congo Warlord Handed to International Court

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 407 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 18


A Congolese militia leader accused of abducting children and turning them into
soldiers and sex slaves has become the first suspect to be delivered to the new
International Criminal Court, the chief prosecutor announced Saturday.

The former warlord, Thomas Lubanga, arrived at the court's detention center in
The Hague late Friday after being flown here on a French military plane, the
prosecutor said. Mr. Lubanga had been imprisoned since last year in Congo, whose
authorities handed him over to the court for trial.

''He has been accused of conscripting and enlisting children under the age of 15
into armed groups and using them in hostilities,'' the prosecutor, Luis
Moreno-Ocampo, said at a news conference. The crimes involved were ''extremely
serious,'' he said. ''Throughout the world, children are being trained to become
machines of war.''

Mr. Lubanga is scheduled to appear at a court hearing on Monday, the start of a
new phase in the history of the I.C.C. The court, the first permanent
international war crimes court, was founded in The Hague in 2002 over the
objections of the United States.

Mr. Lubanga, 45, was the founder and leader of the Union of Congolese Patriots,
one of the most dangerous militias in the Congo's northeastern Ituri district.

Mr. Moreno-Ocampo said that investigators had worked for months in the region
almost surreptitiously because armed groups were still active in the area ''and
they could kill our witnesses.'' He said that further charges against the
militia leader were still being prepared, but much evidence was already
available, including photographs from camps where children as young as 7 were
being trained to become soldiers.

According to Unicef, the United Nations children's aid agency, an estimated
30,000 children, most of them abducted, have been used by armed groups in Congo
as fighters, messengers, cooks and sex slaves.

Mr. Lubanga's case will be one in a series of cases against militia leaders in
Congolese-Rwandan border region, the prosecutor said.

The militias have been financed and supplied by a number of countries, including
Uganda and Rwanda, in a fight over a region rich in minerals and timber.

''We think this is an important first step and we urge the prosecutor to go
further and higher, up to the political actors who were manipulating these
militias for their own ends,'' said Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights
Watch, based in New York.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); WAR
CRIMES (91%); CHILDREN (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); SLAVERY (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%);
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); WITNESSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); CHILD WELFARE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(63%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (63%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Children and Youth; Sex Crimes

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Thomas Lubanga

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (93%); RWANDA (92%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE
(92%); FRANCE (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); UGANDA (79%)

REGION: Congo

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             204 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Wrong Man: Deception, Mistaken Identity and Journalistic Lapses

BYLINE: By Byron Calame

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; THE PUBLIC EDITOR; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1510 words


BAD mistakes happen even at the best newspapers, and public editors should
usually watch for patterns rather than single out a specific incident. But when
a Times front-page article highlighting the sensitive detainee-abuse aspect of
the Iraq war turned out to be fatally flawed, it seemed to me that a closer look
at the journalistic practices involved was warranted.

The March 11 article profiled a man who said he was the hooded Abu Ghraib
prisoner famously photographed about two years ago, standing on a box with wires
attached to his extended hands. The article included an interview with the man,
Ali Shalal Qaissi, a one-time neighborhood mayor under the government of Saddam
Hussein and now a self-styled activist for prisoners' rights in Iraq. He had
been invoking that symbol of the torture at Abu Ghraib in helping to push
lawsuits on behalf of the prisoners.

It turned out that The Times had the wrong man. And clear evidence of the error
had existed in an unnoticed 2004 Times story.

To the credit of The Times -- and to the benefit of readers -- editors did not
allow the embarrassment to impede a timely and very open exploration of the
mistake. When the online magazine Salon quickly disputed Mr. Qaissi's story
after the article ran in The Times, the paper immediately reported on the
challenge on March 14 and promised its own investigation. In a front-page story
published a week after the original article, The Times reviewed the mistaken
identity and Mr. Qaissi's life in recent years. And an extensive Editors' Note
the same day acknowledged the original article's shortcomings.

This openness, however, didn't involve fully exploring some journalistic
practices that raised questions in my mind about the handling of the story.

Searching out what has already been published about a subject -- ''checking the
clips'' in newsroom parlance -- is part of the blocking and tackling of
journalism. When someone claiming to be the person behind such a powerful symbol
is going to be displayed on Page 1 of The Times, extraordinary care is
necessary. And the absence of any intense competitive or deadline pressure left
time for extra care.

Embarrassingly, evidence to prevent the whole mess was in The Times's archives.
In an article on May 22, 2004, the paper had correctly identified the man in the
photograph as Abdou Hussain Saad Faleh. Ethan Bronner, deputy foreign editor,
wrote to me in an e-mail that editors had done several searches of the paper's
archives using various keywords. He said editors now realize that one search --
using the terms ''Abu Ghraib,'' ''box'' and ''hood'' -- missed the crucial May
2004 article because it didn't contain the word ''hood.''

My test of the same three search words last week, however, turned up two Times
articles from last year reporting that the man in the famous photograph had been
called ''Gilligan'' by guards at Abu Ghraib. Mr. Qaissi, according to the March
11 story, had been nicknamed ''Clawman.'' The contradictory nicknames, it seems
to me, should have spurred more intensive search efforts and raised an overall
caution flag.

Mr. Bronner disputes the value of the two stories with ''Gilligan'' references.
He said editors had come across at least one of them in their searches, but
hadn't considered it significant. Among other things, he said, it wasn't clear
then that Mr. Qaissi had only one nickname.

Another issue for me emerged after the original article was published. Two human
rights organizations came to dispute the article's assertion that researchers
for both organizations ''believe'' Mr. Qaissi was the man in the iconic
photograph. And the eventual Editors' Note acknowledged that ''while they said
he could well be that man, they did not say they believed he was.''

But in The Times's March 14 story on the Salon challenge, Susan Chira, the
foreign editor, reiterated the original article's assertion that researchers at
two human rights organizations had said they believed Mr. Qaissi was the man in
the photograph. However, no one at the paper had actually checked back with
either researcher at that point, according to Mr. Bronner. That checking should
have been done to prevent the continued use of flawed information.

One other issue bothers me about this mess. The Times's decision to treat Mr.
Qaissi's claims as credible was ''influenced'' by the awareness of similar
earlier reports in Vanity Fair and on PBS that had gone unchallenged, Mr.
Bronner acknowledged to me. But those reports weren't mentioned in The Times
until they were invoked in the March 14 story and the Editors' Note. Readers of
the original story, I believe, deserved to know that secondary sources were
influencing The Times's acceptance of Mr. Qaissi's claims.

Talking to The Times

  Improving openness to reader feedback at The Times was a major recommendation
of the paper's Credibility Group nearly a year ago. So this seems like an
appropriate time for the readers' representative to assess the effort.

There clearly was room for improvement. ''The Times makes it harder than any
other American newspaper for readers to reach a responsible human being,'' the
report of the Credibility Group, which was set up to explore ways of increasing
reader confidence in the paper, warned last year. ''Making it easier for the
public to approach Times people has numerous benefits.''

My focus will be on the technology that's been put in place to help readers
communicate with both individual reporters and the various departments of The
Times. As for the human dimension, Bill Keller, the executive editor, continues
to encourage staffers to respond to legitimate questions and criticisms, but
they aren't required to answer every e-mail.

Some readers may have already discovered the system launched last month that
channels e-mails to Times reporters through the bylines on their articles
online. Except for a mid-February post on the Public Editor's Web Journal, there
has been little public promotion of the new system or guidance for its use.

So here's a tech moment.

To send an e-mail to a reporter, click on the highlighted byline on an online
article. That will lead to a page that offers the option of sending that
reporter an e-mail. Reporters can opt out of the system, but I'm told almost
none have. Freelance reporters are not part of the system, so their bylines are
never highlighted.

What happens to your e-mail? A reporter gets a once-a-day notification if any
e-mail has arrived and can review the list anytime to decide what response is
warranted for each message.

When it comes to contacting a department or a specific editor, however, the
results of my review are quite mixed. I sent a single e-mail to the addresses
used by 14 offices and departments at 1 p.m. on March 16, advising them that I
was checking response times and asking to be notified when the message was
received.

The good news for readers is that some of the most important offices responded
within minutes or hours. The office that handles corrections and comments about
news responded after only 13 minutes. The executive editor's office responded at
4:56 p.m. that day. The first response to the e-mail arrived at 1:09 p.m. from
The Times's Web site, and the Sunday Magazine and Book Review also responded in
a timely fashion.

The nine departments or offices that hadn't responded were queried Thursday.
Several said their e-mail in-boxes are checked daily, so they assumed my message
never got to them. The spam filter got some blame, but at least nobody claimed
the dog had eaten my e-mail. If my e-mail, with its Times address, disappeared,
readers have some reason to worry about getting through to offices and
departments such as sports or business.

It's not clear how much things have changed since the Credibility Group issued
its report almost a year ago. The report noted that a subcommittee had ''tested
the e-mail channels that the paper has set up for reader feedback (with dismal
results, we regret to say).'' The group recommended then that one person in the
newsroom be made responsible for handling all the reader e-mail going to
departments, but that hasn't been done so far.

This situation cries out for attention. Better monitoring of these departmental
e-mail boxes is essential -- now.

Readers who need e-mail addresses for these departments and offices can find
them in a couple of places. One is the Information Directory that appears nearly
every day in the print paper. Another list can be found by going to the front
page of nytimes.com and clicking on the ''Member Center'' and then ''Contact
Us'' on the next screen; clicking ''News Department'' will give you the list of
departments and offices.

Here's a final tip for any readers who may be desperate to get an e-mail address
for an individual editor. Some editors -- and reporters -- show up in a
directory of staffers who voluntarily list their e-mail addresses. To get it,
send an e-mail, completely blank except for the address, to staff@nytimes.com;
the staff directory will be e-mailed to you.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); JOURNALISM (89%); NEWS REPORTING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); ELECTRONIC
PUBLISHING (78%); IRAQ WAR (77%); TORTURE (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); EVIDENCE (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); PRISONS (71%); INTERNET
& WWW (70%); SUITS & CLAIMS (69%); LITIGATION (68%) Prisoners of War; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; News and News Media  ; Computers
and the Internet; Electronic Mail

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) New York Times

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) Byron Calame; Ali Shalal Qaissi

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             214 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 29, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqis' Accounts Link Marines To the Mass Killing of Civilians

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr. and MONA MAHMOUD; An Iraqi reporter contributed
reporting from Haditha for this article, and David S. Cloud and Mark Mazzetti
from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ:
INVESTIGATION; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1822 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 28


Hiba Abdullah survived the killings by American troops in Haditha last Nov. 19,
but said seven others at her father-in-law's home did not. She said American
troops shot and killed her husband, Rashid Abdul Hamid. They killed her
father-in-law, Abdul Hamid Hassan Ali, a 77-year-old in a wheelchair, shooting
him in the chest and abdomen, she said.

Her sister-in-law, Asma, ''collapsed when her husband was killed in front of her
eyes,'' Ms. Abdullah said. As Asma fell, she dropped her 5-month-old infant. Ms.
Abdullah said she picked up the baby girl and sprinted out of the house, and
when she returned, Asma was dead.

Four people who identified themselves as survivors of the killings in Haditha,
including some who had never spoken publicly, described the killings to an Iraqi
writer and historian who was recruited by The New York Times to travel to
Haditha and interview survivors and witnesses of what military officials have
said appear to be unjustified killings of two dozen Iraqis by marines. Some in
Congress fear the killings could do greater harm to the image of the United
States military around the world than the Abu Ghraib prison scandal.

The four survivors' accounts could not be independently corroborated, and it was
unclear in some cases whether they actually saw the killings. But much of what
they said was consistent with broad outlines of the events of that day provided
by military and government officials who have been briefed on the military's
investigations into the killings, which the officials have said are likely to
lead to charges that may include murder and a cover-up of what really happened.

The name of the Iraqi who conducted the interviews for The Times is being
withheld for his own safety, because insurgents often make a target of Iraqis
deemed collaborators.

Haditha, a sand-swept farming town flecked with date palms on the upper
Euphrates River, is in one of Iraq's most dangerous areas, ridden with
insurgents in the heart of Sunni-dominated Anbar Province.

Three months earlier, 20 marines from a different unit were killed around
Haditha over a three-day span. Fourteen were killed by a bomb that destroyed
their troop carrier. Six others, all snipers, were ambushed and killed on a foot
patrol. Insurgents appeared later to rejoice and boast about the sniper ambush,
releasing a video over the Internet that appeared to show the attack and the
mangled and burned body of a dead American serviceman.

Haditha is under the control of insurgents that include Tawhid and Jihad, a name
that has been used by the terrorist organization of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, said
Miysar al-Dulaimi, a human rights lawyer who has relatives in Haditha and who
returned there two days after the killings and spoke to witnesses and neighbors.
Mr. Dulaimi said that outside their bases, the Americans controlled almost
nothing.

''People are so scared,'' he said. ''They have lost confidence in the Americans.
If the Americans show up in the neighborhood the insurgents will come and take
away people they accuse of being stooges of the Americans.''

But just over six months ago, 24 people in the Subhani district of Haditha faced
a different death, witnesses and survivors say.

The killings began after 7:15 a.m., as the neighborhood was stirring awake, when
insurgents detonated a roadside bomb in Subhani that killed Lance Cpl. Miguel
Terrazas of El Paso, Tex., as his patrol drove through the area.

According to one United States defense official, who declined to be identified
because details of the investigation are not supposed to be revealed, most of
the subsequent killings are believed to have been committed by a handful of
marines led by a staff sergeant who was their squad leader, although other
marines are also under investigation.

In the home Ms. Abdullah escaped from, she said American troops also shot and
killed a 4-year-old nephew named Abdullah Walid. She said her mother-in-law,
Khumaysa Tuma Ali, 66, died after being shot in the back. Two brothers-in-law,
Jahid Abdul Hamid Hassan and Walid Abdul Hamid Hassan, were also killed, she
said.

In addition to Ms. Abdullah and Asma's baby, two others survived. One,
9-year-old Iman Walid Abdul Hamid, said she ran quickly, still clad in her
pajamas, to hide under the bed with her younger brother, Abdul Rahman Walid
Abdul Hamid, when she saw what was happening.

''We were scared and could not move for two hours. I tried to hide under the
bed,'' she said, but both her and her brother, Abdul Rahman, were hit with
shrapnel.

Abdul Rahman, 7, said very little about that day. ''When they killed my father
Walid, I hid in bed,'' he said.

Hiba Abdullah assumed the two children had died, but she said they were later
found at a local hospital.

One Haditha victim was an elderly man, close to 80 years old, killed in his
wheelchair as he appeared to be holding a Koran, according to the United States
defense official, who described information collected during the investigation.
An elderly woman was also killed, as were a mother and a child who were ''in
what appeared to be a prayer position,'' the official said.

Some victims had single gunshot wounds to the head, and at least one home where
people were shot to death had no bullet marks on the walls, inconsistent with a
clearing operation that would typically leave bullet holes, the official added.

Senator John W. Warner, a Virginia Republican who leads the Armed Services
Committee, pledged Sunday to hold hearings on the Haditha killings as soon as
the military investigation is concluded.

''I'll do exactly what we did with Abu Ghraib,'' he said on the ABC News program
''This Week,'' referring to hearings. He added that there were serious questions
of ''what was the immediate reaction of the senior officers in the Marine
Corps.''

Rep. John Murtha, a Pennsylvania Democrat and former marine who has become a
fierce critic of the Iraq war, said he had no doubt marines killed innocent
civilians in Haditha and tried to cover up the deaths. Marine Corps officials,
he said on the same television program, have told him that troops shot one woman
''in cold blood'' who was bending over her child begging for mercy.

In all, 19 people were killed in three separate homes in Haditha, and 5 were
killed after they approached the scene in a taxi, survivors and people in the
neighborhood said.

Hiba Abdullah said that after the killings in her father-in-law's home, the
American troops moved to the house of a neighbor, Younis Salim Nisaif. She said
he was killed along with his wife, Aida, and Aida's sister, Huda. She said five
children were also killed at that home, all 3 to 14 years old.

There was one survivor, Safa Younis Salim, 13, who in an interview said she
lived by faking her death. ''I pretended that I was dead when my brother's body
fell on me and he was bleeding like a faucet,'' she said. She said that she saw
American troops kick her family members and that one American shouted in the
face of one relative before he was killed.

Military officials declined Sunday to comment on details of the killings
described by survivors. ''The investigations are ongoing, therefore any comment
at this time would be inappropriate and could undermine the investigatory and
possible legal process,'' said Lt. Col. Sean Gibson, a Marine spokesman.

David P. Sheldon, a defense lawyer advising a marine under investigation in the
case, said what was publicly known about the case ''raises a disturbing picture,
but I think the situation was very confusing.'' He added that ''the insurgent
pressure in that part of Iraq has been particularly virulent'' which caused ''a
very stressful environment.''

Three days before a roadside bomb attack that preceded the Nov. 19 killings,
another marine from the same unit had been killed when a bomb detonated under
his vehicle in Haditha. It was the first combat death that the unit, the Third
Battalion of the First Marine Regiment, had suffered on that deployment to Iraq.

Neighbors said that in the third home assaulted on Nov. 19, four brothers were
killed by American troops. The wife of one of the brothers, who would identify
herself only as the widow of a brother named Jamal, said the four victims were
all between the ages of 20 and 38.

The troops forced women in the home to leave at gunpoint, the widow said.
Afterward, she said the women heard gunshots coming from the home, but the
troops forbade them from returning. Eventually, she said, they went inside and
found the bodies of Jamal and three brothers, Marwan, Jassib and Kahatan.

Mr. Dulaimi, the human rights lawyer who traveled to Haditha two days after the
killings, said neighbors told him the father of the four victims and owner of
the home was Ayad Ahmed al-Gharria, who does odd jobs and has a shop in Haditha.
The neighbors, Mr. Dulaimi said, told him the troops killed Marwan first. The
three other brothers were killed after they came to see what was happening, he
said.

Five more Iraqi men died that day after they approached the American troops in a
taxi, according to people in the neighborhood. Four were students and the fifth
was the driver of the taxi, and all were between the ages of 18 and 25, they
said.

After the killings, Mr. Dulaimi said Haditha clerics and elders led a protest
march on the American base near a dam on the Euphrates. From the city's mosques,
Mr. Dulaimi said, clerics condemned the killings and said the Americans
''promise they will bring peace and security to this country, but what has
happened is they are spreading panic, fear and terror among the people.''

One person from the neighborhood, Salim Abdullah, said relatives from two of the
families had taken compensation payments of as much as $2,500 per victim from
American officials who later visited. Relatives of other victims have not taken
payments, he said.

The United States defense official said the payments were also a focus of
investigators trying to determine whether the killings were improperly covered
up. On ''This Week,'' Representative Murtha suggested that the decision to make
payments was strong evidence that Marine officers up the chain of command had
knowledge of the events. ''That doesn't happen at the lowest level,'' he said.
''That happens at the highest level before they make a decision to make payments
to the families.''

The Marines also face an inquiry into the killing of an Iraqi man on April 26
near Hamandiyah, west of Baghdad. A preliminary inquiry found ''sufficient
information'' for a criminal investigation, the Marines said. Representative
Murtha said a marine fired an AK-47 rifle so there would be spent cartridges
near the body, making it look as if the victim had been firing a weapon.

A spokesman for the First Marine Division, Lt. Lawton King, said several marines
suspected of involvement in the incident had been put in the brig at Camp
Pendleton, Calif., or restricted to the base.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); WITNESSES (87%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%); TERRORISM (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%);
INFANTS & TODDLERS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); BOMBINGS (73%); BURN INJURIES (73%);
MURDER (58%); INTERNET VIDEO (50%) United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense

PERSON: Hiba Abdullah; Richard A Jr Oppel; Mona Mahmoud; Miguel (Lance Cpl)
Terrazas

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Anbar Province (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             215 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1476 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Canadian Terror Inquiry Links Six to Local Mosque
At least 6 of the 17 people arrested by Canadian authorities in a sweeping
counterterrorism operation, including the group's suspected leader, regularly
attended the same store-front mosque in a middle-class Toronto suburb, fellow
worshippers said.   A1

Search for Justice at Mass Grave


The victims in a mass grave in Ash Sham, Iraq, American and Iraqi officials say,
died in Saddam Hussein's suppression of a Shiite uprising in early 1991.
American forensic experts who came here after the 2003 invasion see their
investigation as a way to hold Mr. Hussein accountable for what many Iraqi human
rights experts say was the most merciless action in his 24 years in power.   A1

Bomber Kills 4 in Afghanistan
A suicide bomber exploded his car on the main street of Kandahar, Afghanistan,
narrowly missing the governor and a Canadian military convoy, but killing four
civilians and wounding at least 12 others, officials said.   A13

Israeli Ready to Resume Talks
Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of Israel said he was prepared to meet the
Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, to seek a resumption of negotiations based on
an international peace plan.   A6

Iran Threat Against U.S.
Iran's supreme religious leader warned that oil shipments from the Persian Gulf
would be disrupted if the United States made a ''wrong move'' toward his country
over its nuclear program. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice dismissed the
threat.   A8

20 Die in Insurgents' Trap
In a brutal killing in Iraq, gunmen set up a fake checkpoint north of Baghdad,
stopped two minibuses and killed 20 passengers, including students on their way
to final exams.   A12

Peru's Ex-President Re-elected
Sixteen years after his presidency ended in economic collapse and heightened
guerrilla violence, Alan Garcia was elected president again in one of Latin
America's most astonishing political resurrections.   A13

Cardinal Condemns Tiananmen
Cardinal Joseph Zen Ze-kiun, the highest official of the Roman Catholic Church
in China, used the anniversary of the Tiananmen Square killings to criticize the
Chinese government and called for a full and open review of the massacre. It is
the latest sign that the Vatican may not be willing to compromise on human
rights to establish diplomatic relations with China.   A13

New Data on Milosevic Death
As the family of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader, and the United
Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague spar over whether his death in prison
was avoidable, newly released medical information provided new details about his
death, his ailments and his stormy relationship with his court-appointed
doctors.   A12

NATIONAL   A14-17

Questions on Abortion Shape Many Local Races
With South Dakota passing the country's most restrictive state abortion law and
a sense among some advocates on both sides of the debate that the Supreme Court
could leave the abortion question to the states, tough questions about abortion
rights are being raised in local races across the country.   A14

Jerry Brown, Lawman
The perennial anti-establishment mayor of Oakland, Jerry Brown, is running for
attorney general of California, a state where hot-button issues like immigration
and gay marriage are constantly simmering for law enforcement officials and
politicians alike.   A1

Teachers Make House Calls
In an elite tweak on home schooling but also a throwback to the days of
education by governess or tutor, growing numbers of families are choosing the
ultimate in private school: hiring teachers to educate their children in their
own homes. Unlike the more familiar home-schoolers of recent years, many say
they have no argument with ordinary education; it just does not fit their
lifestyles.   A1

Strict Medicaid Rules Planned
The Bush administration plans to issue strict standards requiring more than 50
million low-income people on Medicaid to prove they are United States citizens
by showing passports or birth certificates and a limited number of other
documents.   A14

AIDS Epidemic Has Many Faces
June 5 is the sobering anniversary of AIDS, a disease that once made a young
nurse all but adopt her dying patients, ravaged a small Cape Cod town,
devastated and inspired the art world and infected hundreds of thousands in
India, including a prostitute who now teaches others about the dangers of the
disease.   A16

ARTS   E1-8

A Dark Side of Plastic Surgery
Cosemetic surgery is fast becoming a national pastime, with viewers devoted to
reality programs that promote plastic surgeons as fairy godmothers to ordinary
Americans. But cosmetic procedures can sometimes cause extreme harm, and that is
the subject of an hourlong documentary ''Plastic Disasters,'' premiering tonight
on HBO.   E3

Scrambling Publishing's Rules
With some authors, like Mark Z. Danielewski, left, publishing their books
online, allowing readers to download them and add notes and comments, one of the
hottest debates among publishers, editors and writers is what the future of
books will be in a world with the Web and other new technologies.   E1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Indian-Americans Lobby For Aid to Nuclear Program
Indian-Americans in the United States have mounted an intensive drive to support
President Bush's plan to aid India's civilian nuclear program, focusing much of
their lobbying on lawmakers from the New York metropolitan region, home to the
highest concentration of Indian-Americans in the nation.   A1

Masks' Role at Ground Zero
Evidence that exposure to the toxic smoke and ash at ground zero has made many
people sick is mounting. And attention is now focusing on the role of air
filtering masks, or respirators, that cost less than $50 and could have shielded
workers from some of the toxins.   A1

Conspiracy Theorists Gather
More than 500 people who believe the government was complicit in the terrorist
attacks of Sept. 11 gathered for a conference at a hotel in Chicago. In colleges
and chat rooms on the Internet, this band of disbelievers has been trying for
years to prove that 9/11 was an inside job.   B1

Hunt for Teenager and Boy
Police officers and scores of volunteers scoured the Bronx for a 13-year-old
girl who investigators said kidnapped a 3-year-old boy from a tattoo parlor on
Saturday afternoon and disappeared into the throngs on Fordham Road.   B1

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-8

Jeter May Miss Red Sox Series
Derek Jeter, the Yankees' captain, leading hitter and star shortstop, bruised
his right thumb as the Yankees fell, 11-4, to the Baltimore Orioles at Camden
Yards. He may not be available when they open a four-game series with the Boston
Red Sox at Yankee Stadium with first place at stake in the American League East.
D1

Two Teams Look to Finals Debut
The Dallas Mavericks and the Miami Heat, both first-time N.B.A. finalists, are
decidedly different teams. But they both represent the new order of the N.B.A.,
teams that were established in the 1980's, teams that despite their common arena
sponsor name, are a set of mismatches.   D6

A Win in the Last Laps
Jamie McMurray was four laps from breaking a 124-race Nascar Nextel Cup winless
streak at the Neighborhood Excellence 400 in Dover, Del, but Matt Kenseth
stormed past him on the next lap to win.   D2

Vying for New York's Tracks
A committee is expected to ask for bids on Belmont Park, Aqueduct and Saratoga
Race Course. Until its franchise expires in 2007, the tracks are run by the New
York Racing Association, which is plagued by scandals and mismanagement.   D8

OBITUARIES   A21

Vince Welnick

The Grateful Dead's last keyboard player, his age was given in various sources
as 51 or 55. A21

BUSINESS DAY   C1-8

Maxim's Hotel Deal
Dennis Publishing, the parent company of Maxim, the men's magazine, is expected
to announce that it has signed a deal with a real estate developer to build the
Maxim Hotel and Casino, a $1.2 billion destination with 2,300 rooms and a
60,000-square-foot casino.   C1

Developing Cancer Drugs
For several years biotechnology companies have garnered most of the attention at
the nation's largest cancer meeting with new so-called targeted drugs that were
in general less toxic than traditional chemotherapy. But this year, the most
significant data on targeted drugs is coming from the traditional big
pharmaceutical companies.   C1

Hearst's Higher Profile
Hearst, the media company, has developed a new 46-story headquarters on Eighth
Avenue and 57th Street in Manhattan during a time when the company is gaining a
higher profile, running media assets that include newspapers like The San
Francisco Chronicle and The Houston Chronicle and scores of magazines.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A18-19

Editorials: The drug benefit -- a report card; divide and conquer the voters; a
move to save coral reefs; Mr. Hevesi's blunder.

Columns: Bob Herbert, Paul Krugman.

Bridge   E6
Crossword   E4
Metro Diary   B2
TV Listings   E8
Weather   B8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(90%); RELIGION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (79%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(77%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); PEACE PROCESS
(74%); FORENSICS (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (66%); ABORTION
(60%); ABORTION LAWS (60%); ANNIVERSARIES (60%); ECONOMIC CRISIS (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (72%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (57%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (55%); EHUD
OLMERT (55%)

CITY: TORONTO, ON, CANADA (88%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN
(79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (65%)

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (88%); INDIAN OCEAN (69%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); CANADA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (93%); AFGHANISTAN
(92%); ISRAEL (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); HOLY SEE (79%); PERU (79%); LATIN AMERICA
(77%); GULF STATES (77%)

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Ahead of World Cup, U.S. Warns Germany About Sex Trafficking

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 645 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 5


On the eve of the World Cup in Germany, the State Department's big concern is
not over whether the American soccer team has a prayer of getting past the Czech
Republic and Italy, but rather over the flood of prostitutes expected into
Germany from Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa.

The United States, in its annual report on forced labor and trafficking in
persons, called Germany, which has legalized prostitution, ''a source, transit
and destination country'' for sex workers, the more so during the soccer
tournament.

''Due to the sheer size of the event, the potential for human trafficking
surrounding the games remains a concern,'' the State Department said in its
report. It called on the German government to increase police enforcement during
the games.

The warning to Germany was a rare slap at a close American ally.

The report did not include Germany in a list of 14 more serious offenders that
the State Department says make little effort to control serious problems with
trafficking in persons.

Some groups criticized the report, noting that most of the countries cited as
the worst offenders -- which can lead to economic sanctions -- are not American
allies. They include Iran, North Korea, Myanmar, Sudan, Venezuela, Syria, Cuba
and Zimbabwe. The only countries on the list that are close American allies are
Saudi Arabia and Belize.

India, Mexico and China were on a separate ''watch list'' for the second year,
prompting complaints that the State Department was trying not to alienate them.

''What we want is for the United States to implement this law without any
political considerations at play,'' said Jessica Neuwirth, president of Equality
Now, an international women's rights organization.

In 2000, Congress passed the Trafficking Victim Protection Act, which set out
new penalties for slave traffickers and required the State Department to publish
an annual report on slave trafficking worldwide. The sanctions are subject to
the president's discretion.

Germany legalized prostitution in 2002, and German brothels have been gearing up
for the confluence of legal sex and the World Cup, which is expected to bring
3.5 million tourists to the country for the monthlong tournament, which begins
Friday. Berlin, Cologne and Hamburg have all expanded their red light districts
for the tournament, and sex-trade entrepreneurs have opened mobile brothels.

The American World Cup team is staying in walking distance from Hamburg's red
light district, known in Germany as the Sinful Mile.

German officials, while defending the country's policy of legalized
prostitution, say they nonetheless do not condone human trafficking, and have
intensified efforts to rein in the flow of prostitutes into their country in
advance of the World Cup. But Rep. Christopher Smith of New Jersey, the chairman
of the House subcommittee on global human rights, said that Chancellor Angela
Merkel needed to do more.

''It's within her power to initiate some moves to protect these women,'' he
said.

The fight against human trafficking is ''a great moral calling of our time,''
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said Monday.

The report says that between 600,000 and 800,000 people, most of them women and
children, are trafficked across international borders every year. It cited Saudi
Arabia, which it said ''does not fully comply with the minimum standards for the
elimination of trafficking and is not making significant efforts to do so.'' In
Uzbekistan, the report said, ''the majority of convicted traffickers received
prison sentences of less than 10 years, were granted amnesty, and thus served no
time in prison.''

Countries that fail to crack down can be subject to a variety of economic and
security sanctions. Since 2003, when the sanctions provision took effect, only
two countries -- Venezuela and Equatorial Guinea -- have been cited.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 10, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Tuesday about a State Department report on human
trafficking, in which Germany was warned that its laws permitting prostitution
could compound the problem during the World Cup, misstated the number of
countries subjected to economic and security sanctions by the United States for
failing to crack down on human trafficking since 2003, when the sanctions
provision took effect. It is three, not two. (Besides Venezuela and Equatorial
Guinea, Cambodia has been cited.)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SOCCER (91%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); SPORTS
& RECREATION (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS (90%); FIFA WORLD CUP
(90%); ANNUAL REPORTS (89%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (89%); TOURNAMENTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); DECRIMINALIZATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); FORCED LABOR (76%); WOMEN (76%); SLAVERY (76%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (65%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (63%) Prostitution; World Cup (Soccer); Soccer; Women;
United States International Relations; Labor; Slave Labor  ; Prostitution;
Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: State Department

PERSON: ANGELA MERKEL (78%); CHRIS SMITH (50%) Helene Cooper; Angela
(Chancellor) Merkel; Christopher (Rep) Smith

CITY: HAMBURG, GERMANY (92%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); GERMANY (95%); CHINA (92%); AFRICA (92%); CZECH
REPUBLIC (92%); ASIA (92%); EUROPE (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (88%); INDIA (79%); SUDAN (79%); MYANMAR (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%);
KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SYRIA (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (73%)

REGION: Germany; Hamburg (Ger); Iran; North Korea; India; Mexico; China; Belize

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             219 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Supports Broad Powers Of Detention

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1051 words


A federal judge in Brooklyn ruled yesterday that the government has wide
latitude under immigration law to detain noncitizens on the basis of religion,
race or national origin, and to hold them indefinitely without explanation.

The ruling came in a class-action lawsuit by Muslim immigrants detained after
9/11, and it dismissed several key claims the detainees had made against the
government. But the judge, John Gleeson of United States District Court for the
Eastern District of New York, allowed the lawsuit to continue on other claims,
mostly that the conditions of confinement were abusive and unconstitutional.
Judge Gleeson's decision requires top federal officials, including former
Attorney General John Ashcroft and Robert S. Mueller III, the F.B.I. director,
to answer to those accusations under oath.

This is the first time a federal judge has addressed the issue of discrimination
in the treatment of hundreds of Muslim immigrants who were swept up in the weeks
after the 2001 terror attacks and held for months before they were cleared of
links to terrorism and deported. The roundups drew intense criticism, not only
from immigrant rights advocates, but also from the inspector general of the
Justice Department, who issued reports saying that the government had made
little or no effort to distinguish between genuine suspects and Muslim
immigrants with minor visa violations.

Lawyers in the suit, who vowed to appeal yesterday's decision, said parts of the
ruling could potentially be used far more broadly, to detain any noncitizen in
the United States for any reason.

''This decision is a green light to racial profiling and prolonged detention of
noncitizens at the whim of the president,'' said Rachel Meeropol, a lawyer for
the Center for Constitutional Rights, which represented the detainees. ''The
decision is profoundly disturbing because it legitimizes the fact that the Bush
administration rounded up and imprisoned our clients because of their religion
and race.''

A spokesman for the government, Charles S. Miller, would not respond to those
assertions, saying only that the Justice Department was ''very pleased that the
court upheld the decision to detain plaintiffs, all of whom were illegal aliens,
until national security investigations were completed and plaintiffs were
removed from the country.'' He said the government was reviewing the rest of the
opinion to decide whether to appeal the rulings Judge Gleeson made to allow the
plaintiffs' other claims to proceed.

In his 99-page ruling, Judge Gleeson rejected the government's argument that the
events of Sept. 11 justified extraordinary measures to confine noncitizens who
fell under suspicion, or that the attacks heightened top officials' need for
government immunity to combat future threats to national security without fear
of being sued.

But his interpretation of immigration law gave the government broad discretion
to enforce the law selectively against noncitizens of a particular religion,
race or national origin, and to detain them indefinitely, for any unspecified
reason, after an immigration judge had ordered them removed from the country.

''The executive is free to single out 'nationals of a particular country' and
focus enforcement efforts on them,'' the judge wrote. ''This is, of course, an
extraordinarily rough and overbroad sort of distinction of which, if applied to
citizens, our courts would be highly suspicious.''

Yet, he continued, the Supreme Court has repeatedly held that Congress and the
executive branch, in exercising their broad power over naturalization and
immigration, can make rules that would be unacceptable if applied to American
citizens.

In the judge's view, the government has the right to detain people indefinitely
as long as their eventual removal is ''reasonably foreseeable.'' If that
interpretation stands, it could apply to millions of noncitizens, including
tourists removable for visa violations, said Gerald L. Neuman, a law professor
at Columbia who is an expert in human rights law and was not involved in the
case.

''It doesn't seem to limit the motives the government has to have in being slow
in removing them; it could even be just basic neglect,'' he said.

But Professor Neuman cautioned that ''it's only a district judge's decision.''

''The decision encourages the government to behave this way without fear of
financial liability,'' he said, but it does not carry the weight of a ruling by
an appellate court. ''This interpretation is attackable even among other judges
in Brooklyn, let alone Lower Manhattan.''

But David Cole, a law professor at Georgetown University and a co-counsel in the
lawsuit, said the ruling was the only one of its kind and made New York ''an
equal protection-free zone'' because the government can detain immigrants
wherever it chooses.

''What this decision says is the next time there is a terror attack, the
government is free to round up every Muslim immigrant in the U.S., based solely
on their ethnic and religious identity, and hold them on immigration pretexts
for as long as it desires,'' he said. ''We saw after 9/11 what the government
did in an era of uncertainty about how far it can go. Judge Gleeson has
essentially given them a green light to go much further.''

The class-action lawsuit, Turkmen v. Ashcroft, is the first and largest of
several brought by immigrants held after 9/11. The named plaintiffs in the case
include former detainees who came back to the United States this year for
depositions and were required to be in the custody of federal marshals at all
times. Among them were Hany Ibrahim, a deli worker, and his brother, Yasser, a
Web designer, Egyptian Muslims who said then that putting themselves back in the
hands of the government they were suing was an act of faith in America.

Yesterday, Yasser Ibrahim, who had lived in New York for three or four years on
an expired tourist visa and was delivered in shackles to the Metropolitan
Detention Center in Brooklyn soon after Sept. 11, said through his lawyers that
he was shocked and very disappointed by the judge's decision.

''I can't believe the court would allow this to happen,'' he said.'' I am
frightened for other Muslims in the United States, who could face the same
discrimination and abuse that I suffered.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (94%); RELIGION (91%); JUDGES (91%); LITIGATION (91%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); IMMIGRATION LAW (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(89%); LAWYERS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (87%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); IMMIGRANT
DETENTION CENTERS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); DISCRIMINATION
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CLASS ACTIONS (77%); RACE & RACISM
(77%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (73%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); RACIAL PROFILING (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%)
Terrorism; Islam; Suits and Litigation; Immigration and Refugees; Freedom and
Human Rights; Decisions and Verdicts; Suits and Litigation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(55%)

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (76%) Nina Bernstein; John (Judge) Gleeson; John (Atty
Gen) Ashcroft; Robert S III Mueller

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             225 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trial for 80's Chemical Attacks on Kurds Tests Scientists

BYLINE: By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1747 words

DATELINE: GHENT, Belgium


For 18 years, Dr. Aubin Heyndrickx has tended the sealed jars containing strands
of hair and scraps of clothing he gathered from a dead woman's body.

Collected in Halabja, one of many Kurdish towns in northern Iraq that were
attacked with chemical weapons by Saddam Hussein's army in 1988, the jars have
been stored in a blue plastic drum in his lab ever since, waiting.

Now, as prosecutors prepare to try Mr. Hussein in Baghdad on charges of genocide
against the Kurds, Mr. Heyndrickx, who has retired as director of the toxicology
lab at the State University of Ghent, would like the material to be analyzed.
''May I insist these proofs are mentioned at the trial?'' the doctor asks.

He is one of a small group of doctors, scientists and Middle East experts who
have studied chemical weapons use by Iraq against its Kurdish citizens in the
1980's. They are dusting off evidence and trying to collect new data in an
effort to define the scope of a distant tragedy that is only now coming under
scrutiny in court.

But proving that the victims died from chemical weapons is a daunting task: all
the firsthand evidence was gathered nearly 15 years ago, and many records have
been lost or destroyed. The attacks occurred in remote areas where little
testing was available.

''Unfortunately, we'll never know how many people were killed or exposed,'' said
Dr. Joanne al-Talabani, who for the past three years has visited the area to
study the long-term health problems of Kurdish children exposed in the attacks,
including scarred lungs and eyes as well as birth defects. ''There are no
medical records from that time -- none. Most people can't remember: they were
delirious, running, in shock.''

The study of chemical weapons is an arcane, imperfect corner of forensic
science, where lab results and doctors' physical exams yield hints of exposure,
but rarely direct legal proof. Chemical weapons break down quickly in the
environment or in the body, and scientists are unsure what, if any, tracks they
should look for nearly 20 years after the fact.

Mr. Hussein is already on trial in Baghdad in another case, involving the
execution of 148 Shiite men and youths after an abortive assassination attempt
against him in Dujail in 1982. That trial, which began eight months ago, moved
into closing arguments on June 19, with the prosecution demanding the death
penalty for Mr. Hussein.

Iraqi prosecutors have said they expect the so-called Anfal case -- the term,
meaning ''spoils'' in Arabic, was the code name for the Iraqi military's attacks
on the Kurdish villages -- to begin this summer or in early autumn. The formal
indictment focuses on attacks in 1988 that are suspected of killing 50,000
Kurdish villagers, though Kurdish leaders say that perhaps three times as many
Kurds died in the attacks.

The Anfal trial, which includes the chemical weapons charges, ''will be the most
important public reckoning, but in court you can't just say, 'I know it
happened,' '' said Alastair Hay, a professor of chemical pathology at the
University of Leeds in England who has studied soil samples from Kurdistan.
''You need solid, irrefutable scientific evidence. But it's very difficult to
establish something like nerve-gas exposure at this stage. I can't tell you how
frustrating this is, since nothing concrete has ever appeared.''

An American-led team of forensic specialists working for the Iraqi court spent
weeks examining one mass grave of victims at Hatra, near Mosul, a northern city.
But those deaths, including women and children, were the result of gunfire at
the grave site, not chemical weapons.

Almost all experts now contend that Mr. Hussein's armies used chemical weapons
against Kurdish civilians: mustard gas and probably two nerve agents, tabun and
sarin. C.I.A. documents refer to chemical weapons use, and former top Iraqi
military officers have confirmed the suspicion, said Joost Hiltermann, a former
senior researcher at Human Rights Watch whose exhaustive book on the topic is
scheduled to appear in 2007. Mr. Hussein has repeatedly denied the allegation.

Iraq's use of chemical weapons, banned by the 1926 Geneva Convention, against
Iranian soldiers during the Iran-Iraq war of 1980-88 was confirmed in a series
of United Nations verification reports. Iran is still monitoring 30,000 people
who were exposed.

But it is more complicated to tally the effect of such banned weapons against
the Iraqi Kurds. Estimates of the number of victims range from the thousands to
the hundreds of thousands.

''Twenty years later it is difficult to prove on the basis of physical evidence,
but the total picture in my eyes doesn't leave any doubt that it occurred,''
said Dr. Jan Willems, a retired professor of environmental medicine at Erasmus
Hospital in Brussels. He said he examined several Kurdish patients who had
traveled to Europe shortly after gas attacks in 1988, displaying burns
associated with mustard gas.

Testimonials are plentiful: Iraqi Kurds have consistently described how, in
1998, Mr. Hussein's warplanes delivered bombs filled with sweet-smelling gases
to put down the Kurdish insurgency, with harrowing results.

Shorsh Haji, a researcher who now lives in London, still recalls the night of
Feb. 22, 1988, when the bombardment went on for two hours near his home in the
Jafati Valley; he assumed it was conventional weapons. When he emerged in the
morning, he discovered otherwise. ''People on the streets were coughing,
vomiting, their eyes were weeping,'' Mr. Haji said. ''Some had blisters on their
legs and under their arms.''

''A family of five down the road had died instantly,'' he said.

The United Nations did not investigate charges of chemical use against the Kurds
in those early days, when it would have been far easier to prove, because it was
regarded as an internal Iraqi conflict, Mr. Hiltermann said.

The world viewed with some skepticism testimonials from Kurdish guerrillas. At
the time, Mr. Hussein was an ally of the United States, and the components of
his chemical arms were often supplied by European businessmen.

On the medical side, proof of the attacks is scant because Kurds were afraid to
go to local Iraqi hospitals, where doctors had been told not to treat them, said
Dr. Talabani, who emigrated in 1977 and is now a pediatrician with the British
National Health Service.

Those who slipped over the border to Iran for diagnosis and treatment often
destroyed their medical records documenting chemical exposure before returning,
for fear it would open them to persecution, the doctor said. Also, while Iran
quickly sent hundreds of its soldiers to hospitals in Belgium and Austria, which
helped prove attacks there, only a very few Kurds got out for evaluation.

In the days after an attack, mustard gas exposure is relatively easy to
document. Used extensively in World War I, it causes unusual blistering burns of
the skin as well as severe irritation of the eyes and lungs. Breakdown products
of the gas can be detected for weeks in the urine, making recent exposure simple
to prove in a sophisticated lab.

The use of nerve agents like tabun and sarin, the chemical used in the Tokyo
subway attacks in 1995, is far trickier to prove because these gases are
short-lived and deadlier. ''Mustard leaves lots of physical evidence,'' Mr.
Hiltermann said. ''With sarin, people die or get better fast, so it's very
difficult to prove.''

Despite charges by Kurdish groups of mass killings by chemical weapons in 1988,
the only specific physical proof is four soil samples collected in 1992, from
two bomb craters near the Kurdish village of Birjinni, by a team from Middle
East Watch and Physicians for Human Rights that included Mr. Hay.

After meticulous testing at the Porton Down Naval Laboratory in England, two
samples were found to contain degradation products of mustard gas, and two
showed breakdown products of sarin. Other attempts to analyze soil samples after
the fact have all turned up negative.

''We looked in the bomb crater itself -- in one case under a piece of shell --
where concentrations were higher,'' Mr. Hay said.

The long-term health problems of patients from the area offer indirect evidence
of chemical weapons use. But survivors tend to have vague conditions, like
chronic bronchitis or pain, that have many other possible causes. Mustard gas
causes breathing problems, but no studies have been performed to define the link
between exposure to nerve gases and long-term health problems, experts said.

Dr. Talabani said that more than 300 patients she has been studying, who were
exposed in childhood, seemed to have an ''extremely high incidence of illness.''
She determined exposure according to the history patients relayed: a history of
chemical burns indicated exposure to mustard gas, while lack of coordination or
seizures after an airstrike indicated a nerve agent.

''Unfortunately little is known because this is the first group studied,'' Dr.
Talabani said. ''There are very severe breathing problems, skin problems and eye
problems, such as corneal scarring that has already required transplants.''

Over the years, a large number of former Iranian soldiers and a smaller number
of Kurds who say they were exposed to chemical weapons have been seen at
European hospitals with a broad range of medical complaints. There are no blood
tests that serve as markers for chemical exposure, though scientists like Mr.
Hay say such ''tracks'' could be discovered with research.

''Diagnosis was based on clinical history and signs and symptoms,'' Mr. Willems
said.

Because of the lack of hard data and the imprecise testing, there is some
disagreement about how many people were affected and what chemical compounds
were used.

Dr. Heyndrickx says he believes that the Iraqi Army used cyanide and biological
toxins as well as mustard gas and sarin, making him somewhat of a maverick in
the field, since most other scientists feel that the evidence doesn't support
this claim.

Still, he was one of the few Western experts in Halabja just after the attack,
and the samples in his lab, particularly the clothing, could still provide
valuable clues if they were properly sealed and stored, Mr. Hay said.

''People now tend to say it's obvious that Saddam committed crimes, but for
legal and international standards we need to have evidence,'' said Mr. Haji, the
researcher, whose testimony has been accepted by the court. ''Only then can
people who were exposed be compensated.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Two victims in Halabja of one of the 1988 Anfal attacks by
Iraqi forces. (Photo by Ramazan Ozturk/Sipa Press)
 Dr. Aubin Heyndrickx holds a hair sample from a woman who died after an attack
in Halabja, Iraq, in 1988. (Photo by Richard Harbus for The International Herald
Tribune)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); SCIENCE NEWS (89%); FORENSICS (78%); ARMIES (77%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); TOXICOLOGY (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%);
INDICTMENTS (76%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (76%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (76%);
PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%); TERRORISM (72%); TOXICOLOGY
LABORATORIES (71%); MEDICAL RECORDS (69%); CONGENITAL DISORDERS (50%);
ASSASSINATION (50%) Kurds; Biological and Chemical Warfare  ; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Terrorism

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (89%) Elisabeth Rosenthal; Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); BELGIUM (88%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Halabja (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             230 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 19, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; NEWS SUMMARY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1173 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Top Qaeda Members Said Killed in U.S. Airstrikes
Two senior Qaeda trainers and the son-in-law of Al Qaeda's No. 2 leader, Ayman
al-Zawahiri, were among those killed in the American airstrikes in remote
northeastern Pakistan last week, two Pakistani officials said.   A1

36 Bodies Found in Iraq


The bodies of 36 massacred Iraqis were found in two villages north of Baghdad,
Iraqi officials said. Many of the dead were identified as police recruits from
the largely Sunni Arab city of Samarra.   A3

Nod to Darwin From Vatican City
The official Vatican newspaper published an article this week labeling as
''correct'' the recent decision by a judge in Pennsylvania that intelligent
design should not be taught as a scientific alternative to evolution.   A12

Kim Jong Il Traveled to China
Chinese and North Korean state media simultaneously announced that the North
Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, had completed an eight-day clandestine visit to
China that was notable for his focus on China's booming economy and for the
enigmatic air of secrecy that enshrouded his every move.   A8

U.S. Abuse Is Called Deliberate
Human Rights Watch asserted that the Bush administration had undertaken a
deliberate strategy of abusing terror suspects during interrogations, in ways
the advocacy group said had undercut broader American interests.   A5

West Assures Russia on Iran
The United States and Europe, seeking Russia's help in bringing Iran's nuclear
activities before the United Nations Security Council for review, have assured
Russian officials that they are not pressing for sanctions against Iran right
now.   A8

Syria Frees Political Prisoners
Two of Syria's most prominent political prisoners have been freed after five
years behind bars, another signal that President Bashar al-Assad is trying to
mollify domestic critics as he faces increased pressure from a United Nations
investigation into the assassination of the former prime minister of Lebanon.
A3

Abbas Defends Hamas Inclusion
The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, said if he was unable to carry out his
program after the legislative elections, he would resign. Mr. Abbas also,
defended the inclusion in the election of the militant Islamic faction Hamas,
which refuses to give up its armed wing.   A10

Rice Shakes Up Foreign Aid
Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice plans to set up a new office under her
direct supervision to oversee the disparate agencies and bureaus that dispense
$19 billion in foreign aid each year.   A10

U.N. Clash Kills 4 in Ivory Coast
Clashes between protesters and United Nations peacekeepers left four people dead
in western Ivory Coast as tensions mounted and youth leaders called for mass
protests to push the United Nations and French peacekeepers from the country.
A10

NATIONAL   A14-20

Exception Needed in Laws On Abortion, Justices Say
The Supreme Court reaffirmed the need to include an exception for medical
emergencies in a law that restricts teenagers' access to abortion and told a
lower court to reconsider its ruling that struck down a New Hampshire law that
failed to include such an exception.   A1

Cisneros Investigation to Close
After more than a decade, the prosecutor in the case of former Housing Secretary
Henry G. Cisneros is finally closing his operation with a report accusing
Clinton administration officials of thwarting an investigation into whether Mr.
Cisneros evaded income taxes.   A1

Bombing Witness to Be Freed
The planned release of Michael J. Fortier, who played a role in the Oklahoma
City bombing but testified against Timothy J. McVeigh and Terry L. Nichols, has
raised concerns in Oklahoma about any future threats he might pose.   A16

Briefings Unlawful, Report Says
A legal analysis by the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service concludes
that the Bush administration's limited briefings for Congress on the National
Security Agency's domestic eavesdropping program are ''inconsistent with the
law.''   A19

Democrats Work Against Alito
With little chance of stopping Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr.'s confirmation to the
Supreme Court, Senate Democratic leaders urged their members to vote against him
in an effort to lay the groundwork to campaign against his decisions on the
court.   A19

Congressional Democrats introduced a lobbying overhaul that they said exceeds
Republican proposals.   A19

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Drug Labels Face Overhaul
Prescription drug labels will soon undergo a major revision, a move drug
regulators hope will reduce the number of injuries and deaths caused by medical
errors.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Child Welfare Leader Disciplines Six Workers
Six New York City child welfare workers were suspended or reassigned for their
roles in the failed investigations that led to the death of 7-year-old Nixzmary
Brown. The head of the city's child welfare agency also announced a
reorganization aimed at improving the oversight of frontline abuse
investigators.   A1

Tax Cuts Help the Well-Off
Governor Pataki says his budget proposal would bring relief across the economic
spectrum. But the fine print shows that 24 percent of his tax cuts, credits and
rebates would go to New Yorkers who earn $200,000 or more, while more than half
would go to the roughly 10 percent who earn more than $100,000.   B1

Restaurant Catalog Updated
The New York City health department began offering a more detailed and easily
searchable Web site cataloging the results of thousands of restaurant
inspections, available at www.nyc.gov/html/doh.   B2

Brooklyn Plan Prompts Suit
A coalition of community groups sued the Empire State Development Corporation,
charging that it wrongfully approved the demolition of six buildings on the site
of the proposed Atlantic Yards development in Brooklyn.   B1

Neediest Cases   B6

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-6
HOUSE & HOME   F1-10
THURSDAY STYLES   G1-8
ARTS   E1-10

OBITUARIES   A21

Jim Gary
An internationally noted sculptor in metal, he was 66.   A21

BUSINESS DAY   C1-26

Market Turmoil in Japan
A securities fraud investigation of Livedoor, a Japanese Internet services
company, resulted in a near-national panic as investors have collectively
withdrawn billions of dollars of their money from the Tokyo stock market over
the last two days.   A1

Livedoor has made headlines in Japan in recent years for its attempts at hostile
takeovers and its aggressive expansion through acquisitions.   C1

Outlook Hurts Apple's Stock
Apple Computer reported that its profit nearly doubled in the first quarter,
thanks to brisk holiday sales of iPod music players. But its outlook for the
second quarter fell well below Wall Street's expectations, causing its stock to
fall as much as 7 percent in after-hours trading.   C1

Changes in Pay Disclosure
Under a proposal by the Securities and Exchange Commission, companies would have
to make more of their executives' pay packages public.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: The assisted-suicide decision; Alice in Lobbyland; women's place,
revisited; New Jersey's new governor.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge E8
Crossword  E4
Public Lives  E10
Weather  D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HAMAS (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (79%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (76%); ELECTIONS (75%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (75%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); CREATIONISM (75%); JAIL SENTENCING (74%);
ABORTION LAWS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
POLICE FORCES (71%); SUPREME COURTS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); JUDGES
(69%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (68%); INVESTIGATIONS (66%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(64%); ABORTION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (78%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (77%); KIM JONG IL (72%); BASHAR
AL-ASSAD (56%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (93%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S
REPUBLIC OF (92%); SYRIA (92%); HOLY SEE (90%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(79%); EUROPE (79%); LEBANON (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             231 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Army Interrogator Is Convicted of Negligent Homicide in 2003 Death of Iraqi
General

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 810 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 22


A senior Army interrogator was convicted late Saturday of negligent homicide in
the death of an Iraqi general after he shoved the general head-first into a
sleeping bag, sat on his chest and put his hands over his mouth.

A six-officer jury at Fort Carson, Colo., found the interrogator, Chief Warrant
Officer Lewis E. Welshofer Jr., guilty of the charge, which carries a maximum
sentence of three years in a military prison. He was also found guilty of
negligent dereliction of duty. He was acquitted of murder and assault charges.
Sentencing is scheduled for Monday.

Army prosecutors contended that Mr. Welshofer, 43, a chief interrogator with the
Third Armored Cavalry Regiment in Qaim, Iraq, suffocated Maj. Gen. Abed Hamed
Mowhoush after wrapping him in the sleeping bag and sitting on him during an
interrogation session on Nov. 26, 2003. Prosecutors said Mr. Welshofer knew his
interrogation techniques were potentially lethal and against Army standards.

Defense lawyers countered that Mr. Welshofer, a 19-year Army veteran, did
nothing illegal and was using a technique that his commander had approved for
use on uncooperative prisoners. They also said that General Mowhoush, 57, whom
the lawyers said weighed more than 250 pounds, died from an irregular heart
rhythm caused by heart disease and stress.

The widely publicized incident has drawn attention from human rights groups as
one of the worst instances of abuse against detainees in American custody in
Iraq, and because General Mowhoush had been beaten shortly before his death by a
team that included one or more C.I.A. contract workers.

The case also underscores the confusion among military interrogators and their
superiors over the use of aggressive interrogation techniques in the summer and
fall of 2003, when the insurgency in Iraq was rapidly gaining momentum and
ferocity, and top Pentagon officials and commanders in Iraq were demanding
better intelligence with which to attack the militants.

Testimony at Mr. Welshofer's court-martial last week confirmed that a team of
Iraqis had beaten the general two days before he died, but the C.I.A.'s
involvement remained largely unaddressed.

At one point, a defense lawyer, Frank Spinner, questioned a witness whose
identity was so secret that he was shielded from reporters and others in the
courtroom by a green tarp suspended from the ceiling, The Associated Press
reported. The witness said that when he spoke to Mr. Welshofer on the day before
General Mowhoush died, he was alarmed when Mr. Welshofer told him he thought the
Army's interrogation guidelines were being broken every day.

''And you didn't report it to the C.I.A.?'' Mr. Spinner asked. He then stopped
himself and quickly apologized to the judge.

Mr. Welshofer and his lawyers argued that the Army had provided no guidance for
authorized and unauthorized techniques. ''It was not clear on what we were to
do,'' Mr. Welshofer testified last Thursday, The Rocky Mountain News reported.

Mr. Welshofer said he received an e-mail message from his unit's commanders
saying that there were no rules for interrogations yet, and that top officers
were ''tired of taking casualties and that the gloves were coming off.'' He said
he never received memorandums from Sept. 14 and Oct. 12, which first authorized
the use of ''stress positions'' but called for the prior approval of Lt. Gen.
Ricardo S. Sanchez, the top general in Iraq at the time.

As a result, Mr. Welshofer said he escalated his tactics over the course of
several interviews to frighten the general, who was providing little useful
information. Mr. Welshofer and another interrogator designed the sleeping bag
technique as a last resort, believing it would create a claustrophobic effect on
a prisoner, Mr. Spinner said in a telephone interview on Sunday. A small hole
was cut in the bottom of the sleeping bag to allow the detainee to breathe.

General Mowhoush was considered a prized intelligence prospect. He had been
commander of air defenses in western Iraq under Saddam Hussein, and military
intelligence officials believed he was a suspected leader and financier of the
insurgency there, providing money and housing for fighters coming in from Syria.
General Mowhoush had surrendered to military authorities two weeks before his
death, saying he wanted to secure the release of his four sons in American
custody.

But the military prosecutor, Maj. Tiernan Dolan, said Mr. Welshofer abused
General Mowhoush, treating him ''worse than you would treat a dog,'' The A.P.
reported.

An Army spokesman, Paul Boyce, said in an e-mail message on Sunday that more
than 500 investigations had examined allegations of detainee mistreatment. Thus
far, he said, allegations against at least 251 military members have been
addressed in courts-martial, nonjudicial punishment and other administrative
penalties.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chief Warrant Officer Lewis E. Welshofer Jr.'s court-martial
came after an Iraqi general died during interrogation. (Photo by Jerilee
Bennett/The Gazette of Colorado Springs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEGLIGENCE (91%); HOMICIDE (91%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (90%); SENTENCING (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MANSLAUGHTER (90%); LITIGATION (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAWYERS
(89%); WITNESSES (89%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%);
TESTIMONY (85%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); SENTENCING
GUIDELINES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMINAL ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%);
MILITARY COURTS (78%); JURY TRIALS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%);
CORRECTIONS (78%); DEATHS (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); ACQUITTAL
(72%); PRISONS (71%); APPROVALS (67%); HEART DISEASE (66%); MURDER (58%)
Decisions and Verdicts; Courts-Martial; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

PERSON: Eric Schmitt; Lewis Jr (Warrant Officer) Welshofer

CITY: COLORADO SPRINGS, CO, USA (79%)

STATE: COLORADO, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             232 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Cambodian Leaders to Face Trial

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1052 words

DATELINE: KANTORK, Cambodia


Twenty-seven years after the Khmer Rouge leadership was driven from power, some
of its top figures may soon be put on trial for causing the deaths of nearly
one-fourth of the Cambodian population.

Under an agreement between the United Nations and the government here, a special
authority is preparing a courtroom and hiring staff and technical experts. In
February, the head of a United Nations administrative team is expected to arrive
and set up shop. Both Cambodia and the United Nations are selecting judges and
prosecutors for an international tribunal.

Diplomats and analysts who have been skeptical during nearly a decade of
negotiations and delays now expect to see some measure of judicial accounting
for the 1.7 million people who lost their lives from 1975 to 1979.

''From a technical point of view, we are almost there,'' said Craig Etcheson, an
expert on the Khmer Rouge who has been studying evidence that will be used at
the trial. ''I guess it's what you might call a rolling start.''

At a military headquarters here on the southwestern outskirts of Phnom Penh, not
far from a killing field where thousands of bodies were buried, a large, empty
building filled with dust and sunlight is being furnished as a courthouse.

There are still, as always, possibilities for delay, and nobody is rushing to
take the plastic slipcovers off the 540 blue chairs in the hearing room. At one
point, for example, an infestation of termites in the roof of the National
Assembly building caused months of delay in the approval of a trial format.

But most of the $56.3 million budget has now been secured and sometime soon the
clock is expected to start ticking on a three-stage time frame: a year for
investigations, a year for the trial and a year for appeals.

The tribunal will target a small pool of senior figures and not seek to indict
the many thousands of people involved in carrying out the Khmer Rouge's policies
of forced hardships and summary executions.

The top leader, Pol Pot, died in 1998. A half dozen of his subordinates are most
often mentioned as likely defendants; two of them are in custody and the others
are living freely among Khmer Rouge survivors.

Although Cambodia's current leadership includes a number of former
middle-ranking Khmer Rouge officials, experts say there is no reason to believe
that Prime Minister Hun Sen was culpable.

''We have investigated that back and forth and up and down, and there's just no
evidence that he was involved in any prosecutable crimes during the period of
jurisdiction for the tribunal,'' said Mr. Etcheson. ''He looks clean.''

Experts say the evidence against the likely defendants is substantial, though
mostly indirect.

A private organization, the Documentation Center of Cambodia, has compiled a
trove of tens of thousands of documents, interviewed hundreds of witnesses and
identified thousands of mass graves.

The center has set aside rooms in its headquarters for prosecutors and defense
lawyers to study its archives and is putting together a rapid-response team to
provide any requested materials.

''We are ready,'' said the center's director, Youk Chhang.

Sean Visoth, the tribunal's Cambodian coordinator, said that at its peak it
would employ a staff of 200 Cambodians and 100 foreigners designated by the
United Nations.

Under the mixed structure of the tribunal, his deputy will be a representative
of the United Nations, Michelle Lee, who was due to arrive here in February.

Mr. Visoth, who survived the Khmer Rouge years doing hard labor, said the trial
has three goals: to offer justice to the victims and survivors, to prevent
similar atrocities in the future and to give the younger generation a clear
picture of what happened.

Interviews and polls in recent years have shown that most people are eager for a
trial, although, according to David Chandler, a leading authority on Cambodia
history, ''There is no real concept of accountability in Cambodia.''

In interviews with rural people, the notion of justice often seems to be equated
with revenge, and a proverb is sometimes cited: ''Do not answer hatred with
hatred.''

In a village near here, a woman making rice cakes by the side of the road,
Phoung Vuthy, 53, laughed when she heard those words.

''Don't tell me that stuff,'' she said. ''I hate them. I lost my husband and
never had a chance to have children. I want to see them punished.''

Her sister, Phoung Im, who said she was about 71, said: ''We want to see a trial
now. When will the Khmer Rouge be put on trial? I heard there will be a trial.
When? When?''

But even now, as the process gets under way, it remains controversial among
advocates of justice and human rights. The years of wrangling between the United
Nations and the Cambodian government has produced an awkward hybrid format that
raises questions about the quality of justice on offer.

Unlike the United Nations tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, this
one will include local judges and prosecutors who, critics say, are ill trained
and subject to political manipulation.

Under a complicated ''supermajority'' formula, the Cambodian officials will be
in the majority but their international counterparts will have veto power over
any disputed decisions.

A recent wave of convictions of Mr. Hun Sen's political opponents on libel and
related charges has highlighted the role of the courts in Cambodia as a
political arm of the prime minister.

''Clearly the way the judiciary is being used as an instrument against critics
now is a real problem,'' said Brad Adams, the Asia director for Human Rights
Watch, the New York-based monitoring group. ''It shows the problems for the
trials and the problem for the United Nations to be mixed up with these
people.''

There is no real answer to the question of whether to proceed with a flawed
formula, experts say. Only the outcome will show whether the process did more
good than harm in its handling of one of the great atrocities of the last
century.

''Some people want a perfect trial,'' said Youk Chhang of the Documentation
Center on a recent visit to the building where the aging Khmer Rouge leaders may
be made to answer for their actions.

''But this is what we have, and let's make the best of it,'' he said.
''Sometimes you have to be optimistic for a change.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot, shown, at far left in a 1975
photo with some of his followers, died in 1998. But many of his cohorts remain
two have been arrested, while the others still live freely. (Photo by Heng
Sinith/European Pressphoto Agency)
 A courthouse has been built near Phnom Penh and judges are being selected for
an international tribunal. (Photo by Tang Cchin Sothy/Agence France-Presse --
Getty Images)Map of Cambodia highlighting Kantork: Khmer Rouge leaders will be
tried in Kantork, near Phnom Penh.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); JUDGES
(73%); APPROVALS (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (71%); BUDGETS (69%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (62%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Seth Mydans; Pol Pot (1925-98)

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%)

REGION: Cambodia; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             233 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1033 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Hamas a Surprise Winner In Palestinian Elections
The radical Islamic party Hamas scored an overwhelming and unexpected victory in
Palestinian legislative elections, taking 76 out of the 132 seats, deposing the
former ruling Fatah party, which won only 43 seats. The results give Hamas the
right to form the next government, ending more than 40 years of domination by
Fatah.   A1

Hamas's victory threw President Bush and his aides on the defensive,
complicating the administration's policy of trying to promote democracy as an
antidote to the spread of terrorism in the Arab world.

Mr. Bush said the results spoke to the failures of the Palestinian Authority
president, Mahmoud Abbas, to root out corruption, not to any flaws in the Bush
administration's policy.   A11

The elections were met with a mixture of jubilation and consternation in much of
the Arab world, and for some it raised the concern that, in winning, Hamas would
almost certainly have to change.   A11

European leaders, whose countries are major financial donors to the Palestinian
Authority, registered disquiet verging on hostility toward Hamas's triumph.
A11

Strife at World Economic Forum
A magazine article calling on nations to boycott Israel because of its treatment
of Palestinians has provoked a tempest at the World Economic Forum's annual
meeting, prompting the organizers to pull the magazine from its shelves and
issue an apology.   A11

U.S. and China Back Plan for Iran
President Bush and the Chinese government both declared their full support for a
Russian proposal to allow Iran to run civilian nuclear facilities as long as
Russia and international nuclear inspectors are in full control of the fuel.
A3

Unmet Pledges to Rebuild Iraq
Because of unforeseen security costs, haphazard planning and shifting
priorities, the American-financed reconstruction program in Iraq will not
complete scores of projects that were promised to help rebuild the country, a
federal oversight agency reported.   A8

The American military said it had released five Iraqi women, half those held in
its prisons, but said the release had been previously scheduled and was
unrelated to demands made by the kidnappers of the American journalist Jill
Carroll.   A8

More Energy Woes for Georgia
Energy shortages struck Georgia anew as a wind storm toppled a major power
transmission line and Russia's gas monopoly failed to restore the flow of
natural gas to the country after pipelines were sabotaged last weekend, energy
officials said.   A4

Groups Protest U.N. Proposal
Human rights organizations and the Congressional Human Rights Caucus protested a
decision by the United States to back a measure introduced by Iran denying two
international gay rights groups a voice at the United Nations.   A4

NATIONAL   A14-21

Poll Finds Mixed Support For Domestic Spy Program
Americans are willing to tolerate eavesdropping without warrants to fight
terrorism, but are concerned that the aggressive antiterrorism programs
championed by the Bush administration are encroaching on civil liberties,
according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.   A1

President Bush declared again that his administration's program for
eavesdropping without warrants was well within existing law, and said efforts in
Congress to write legislation expressly giving him authority for such a program
were unnecessary and dangerous.   A20

Lobbyist Inquiry Takes a Turn
The investigation into Jack Abramoff, the disgraced Republican lobbyist, took a
new turn when the Justice Department said the chief prosecutor in the inquiry
would step down next week because he had been nominated to a federal judgeship
by President Bush.   A21

Kerry Calls for Filibuster
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, left, called for a filibuster of the
Supreme Court nomination of Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr. More than 60 senators have
already vowed to support him, and the leaders of both parties said they expected
to hold the full vote on Tuesday.   A14

Officials Discover Drug Tunnel
Drug smugglers have dug one of the longest, most sophisticated tunnels
discovered in recent years along the Mexican border, and the American and
Mexican authorities have hauled nearly two tons of marijuana out of it since it
was found, officials said.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Bloomberg Wants to Speed Rebuilding at Ground Zero
Mayor Bloomberg used his State of the City speech to call for a drastic change
in the World Trade Center development plan so the project can finally move
forward.   A1

Children Displaced
Hundreds of New York City children who had been in contact with child welfare
workers have been placed in foster care or under court supervision since the
death of 7-year-old Nixzmary Brown.   B1

Neediest Cases   B6

ESCAPES   F1-12

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-6

OBITUARIES   B7

WEEKEND   E1-30; E31-40

Disputed Author Confronted

In an extraordinary reversal of her defense of the author whose memoir she
catapulted to the top of the best-seller list, Oprah Winfrey rebuked James Frey,
the author of ''A Million Little Pieces,'' on her television show for lying
about his past and portraying the book as a truthful account of his life.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Banks and Health Care
Banks, credit unions and money management firms are positioning themselves to
become central players in the business of health care in anticipation of health
savings accounts, which are the centerpiece of President George W. Bush's plans
on health care.   A1

Boston Scientific Warned
A day after winning a $27 billion takeover battle for the medical device maker
Guidant, Boston Scientific received a broad warning from federal health
regulators that is likely to temporarily prevent the company from introducing
new products and could result in a fine.   C1

Profits Rise at Microsoft
Microsoft said its quarterly profit rose 5 percent, roughly matching Wall
Street's forecasts, as the high cost of launching the Xbox 360 game console was
offset by strong sales of servers and software tools.   C7

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: In the Mideast, a giant step back; the state of the mayor; on
Oprah's couch; justice and junkets.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E38
TV Listings   E28
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL FATAH (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY
(90%); HAMAS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (86%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (79%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
POLITICS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%);
ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY (75%); RELIGION (73%); POLLS & SURVEYS (72%); BOYCOTTS
(71%); JOURNALISM (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); NATURAL GAS & ELECTRIC UTILITIES (69%); NUCLEAR ENERGY
(69%); CORRUPTION (69%); NATURAL GAS (68%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (68%); WRITERS
(66%); ENERGY SHORTAGES (64%); LGBT RIGHTS (60%); ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION &
DISTRIBUTION (60%); GAYS & LESBIANS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%); WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (82%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (93%); IRAQ (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); CHINA (92%);
ISRAEL (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 10, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Death Penalty Asked for Beslan Raider, Reviving a Debate

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 653 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 9


A senior prosecutor on Thursday asked a court in southern Russia to sentence to
death the only attacker known to have survived the siege of Middle School No. 1
in Beslan in September 2004. The request rekindles a contentious debate in
Russia over capital punishment.

The deputy prosecutor general, Nikolai I. Shepel, made the request as he summed
up the case against the defendant, Nurpashi Kulayev, after an emotionally
wrought trial. Mr. Shepel said the gravity of the terrorist siege, which ended
with the deaths of 331 hostages, warranted a penalty of death, despite a
government moratorium on executions that has been in place since 1996.

His appeal came only two days after President Vladimir V. Putin reiterated his
personal opposition to the death penalty but said he would move cautiously in
seeking its final abolition by the Parliament -- years after Russia committed to
doing so.

''The court's decision should have a sobering effect on those who want to go
down the path of terrorism, so that they know their only future is an unmarked
grave,'' Mr. Shepel said in his remarks, shown on television.

The bloody siege in Beslan by Chechen militants, along with other terrorist
attacks, has prompted some officials here to call for the restoration of capital
punishment, at least for crimes as serious as terrorism. But such a step would
contradict not only Russia's international commitments but also a Constitutional
Court ruling in 1999 that declared the death penalty unconstitutional as long as
jury trials were not universal.

Since that ruling, jury trials have been established in most regions, but they
are used inconsistently. Mr. Kulayev is being tried before a panel of judges,
for example.

Mr. Kulayev had admitted taking part in the attack on Beslan, in which the
attackers rounded up more than 1,000 hostages at the school. But he denied
responsibility for any of the deaths, most of which occurred when the siege
ended on the third day in a convulsion of explosions and gunfire.

His trial, which began last summer, has provoked anger and grief among survivors
and relatives of the Beslan victims, who wanted the trial to address broader
issues.

On Thursday, with the prosecution wrapping up its case against Mr. Kulayev,
several relatives announced a hunger strike, protesting that the trial was
neither objective nor thorough. ''The true culprits have not been named,'' said
one, Ella Kesayeva, according to Interfax.

A verdict could be announced within days.

Russia's moratorium on capital punishment stems from an agreement President
Boris N. Yeltsin made in 1996 as a condition for joining the Council of Europe,
an organization of 46 nations that oversees legal, political and human rights
issues. Government executions have reportedly not been carried out since then,
and in 1999, Mr. Yeltsin commuted the death sentences of 716 prisoners.

But Russia did not submit legislation erasing the death penalty from its
criminal code by 1999, as it had promised, and it is the only member of the
European group that still has the death penalty on the books.

In an interview with Spanish journalists on Tuesday, Mr. Putin said he would
defer to Parliament on the issue, but spoke against capital punishment, as he
had before. ''Any punishment has several goals,'' he said. ''They include
correction and retribution. There is no correction in the case of the death
penalty, only retribution.''

Even so, polls suggest that a majority of Russians favor the death penalty, as
do some legislators, and that has stalled its abolition in Parliament. The
Communist leader, Gennadi A. Zyuganov, said Thursday that the Beslan attack
underscored the need for capital punishment.

Ella A. Pamfilova, Mr. Putin's human rights adviser, said government leaders
needed to defy popular opinion on certain issues. ''As for the death penalty,''
she told Interfax, ''our society is already cruel enough.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Nurpashi Kulayev, shown last year at the start of his trial, is
the only attacker of the Beslan school siege in 2004 known to have survived.
(Photo by Eduard Kornienko/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (93%); TERRORISM (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SENTENCING (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); JURY TRIALS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL
LAW (78%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (67%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%) Capital Punishment; Terrorism; Hostages;
Children and Youth

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (78%) Steven Lee Myers; Vladimir V (Pres) Putin; Nurpashi
Kulayev

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia); Beslan (Russia); Russia

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             237 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 27, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Militant Inmates Riot and Seize Control of Cellblock in Afghan Prison

BYLINE: By SULTAN M. MUNADI and CARLOTTA GALL; Sultan M. Munadi reported from
Pul-i-Charkhi for this article, and Carlotta Gall from Islamabad, Pakistan.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: PUL-I-CHARKHI, Afghanistan, Feb. 26


Prisoners in Afghanistan's main high-security prison, among them people accused
of being members of the Taliban and Al Qaeda, rioted and seized control of one
cellblock on Saturday evening, battling with guards through the night, the
Afghan authorities said Sunday.

Up to 5 prisoners were killed and 31 wounded as police guards opened fire to
stop them from escaping when the violence began, a health worker at the prison
said, based on information from the prison doctor. Sporadic gunfire could be
heard outside the prison on Sunday.

The Afghan authorities moved in about 300 soldiers and seven tanks to surround
the prison, near Kabul, the capital. The prison houses about 2,000 inmates,
including 70 women. The prisoners include ordinary criminals and about 350
prisoners thought to be fighters for the country's ousted Taliban movement or
for Al Qaeda. There are also three Americans, two former soldiers, Jonathan K.
Idema and Brent Bennett, who were found guilty of running a private jail in
Afghanistan, and a free-lance cameraman, Edward Caraballo, who was convicted
with them.

Prison officials blamed Taliban and Al Qaeda prisoners for starting the riot,
which began with a protest by prisoners over being required to wear uniforms.
''They broke the locks of their cells and broke through a wall to the female
section and entered the women's cells,'' said Muhammad Qasem Hashemzai, the
deputy justice minister. The women, some of whom have children with them, did
not seem to have been harmed, he said.

Prisoners could be seen behind the barred windows of Cellblock 1 on Sunday. They
were hanging the light-blue new prison clothes out the windows on metal
bedsteads and setting fire to them. Bullet holes pocked the windows of the
cellblock from the shooting on Saturday night. The prisoners were shouting,
''Long live Islam, long live the prisoners, death to Bush, death to Karzai,'' a
reference to President Hamid Karzai.

The prison in Pul-i-Charkhi, a large pentagon-shaped prison built in the 1970's,
became notorious during the Soviet occupation of Afghanistan when tens of
thousands of opponents were imprisoned and executed and buried in mass graves
nearby.

The prisoners at Pul-i-Charkhi are demanding to speak to Sebaghatullah
Mojadeddi, the chairman of the Peace and Reconciliation Commission, which
negotiates the release of Taliban prisoners from American military custody, said
Gen. Abdul Salaam Bakhshi, director of the prison.

They also demanded to speak with the head of the Supreme Court, Vice President
Ahmed Zia Masud, the leader of Parliament and observers from the United Nations
and its Human Rights Commission, he said.

''We are trying to negotiate,'' Mr. Hashemzai said. ''They are not very well
organized -- everyone is saying a different thing.'' He added: ''We want to
solve the problem with negotiation. Otherwise, if we attack them, many of them
will be killed.''

Afghan officials have sometimes struggled to maintain control of the prisoners
here. In December 2004, prisoners said to have been linked to Al Qaeda -- an
Iraqi and several Pakistanis -- overpowered their guards and tried to escape.
Four prisoners and four police officers were killed in the ensuing battle, and
the police barely prevented the group from breaking into the cell of the
American prisoners. Last month, seven prisoners accused of ties to the Taliban
escaped during visiting hours.

This time prisoners broke up their metal beds and used the bars to smash windows
and break out of their cells, General Bakhshi said. Then, police officers at the
scene said, the inmates escaped from the cellblock and charged at the main gate,
police officers said.

''We started shooting in the air first and they didn't care, then we had to
shoot toward them directly,'' said one police officer, who did not want to be
identified because he was involved in the shooting. ''It was very dark and we
didn't know if any of them were killed or wounded. We didn't know how many
rushed us, but we knew it was out of control.''

Hamidullah, 30, a health worker who was working in the prison late Saturday
night, said he had been in contact with the prisoners and had given first aid
kits and other supplies to one of the prisoners, a doctor.

''I didn't see any killed or wounded myself, but the prison doctor and some
others are treating the wounded,'' Hamidullah said. The dead and wounded remain
inside the cellblock, he said.

U.S. Defends Prison Practices

  KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 26 (AP) -- The American military on Sunday defended
its detention of about 500 inmates at its main base in Afghanistan, saying they
are treated humanely and provided the ''best possible living conditions.''

On Sunday, The New York Times reported that the inmates were held at the Bagram
air base, north of Kabul, some for as long as two or three years without access
to lawyers or the chance to hear the allegations against them.

Col. James R. Yonts, the American military spokesman in Kabul, would not confirm
or deny whether inmates were held for up to three years, saying the secretary of
defense sets the criteria for detention. But he added that all those held were
at one time ''enemy combatants'' and that their status was regularly reviewed.

''We hold them for two reasons: to question them and get intelligence from them,
or because they've committed violence against the coalition or the people of
Afghanistan,'' he said in an e-mailed response to questions.

''We regularly review the status of the detainees, and if a detainee has no
intelligence value and if we believe he will no longer attack the coalition or
forces of the central government, we will release him. We regularly release
detainees.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Afghan soldiers surrounded the Pul-i-Charkhi prison near Kabul
yesterday after some inmates took over part of the prison on Saturday night.
(Photo by Musadeq Sadeq/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS (92%); PRISONS (91%); RIOTS (91%); TALIBAN (91%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); SHOOTINGS (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(89%); JAIL SENTENCING (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); ARSON (76%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); ARMED FORCES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); VERDICTS (72%);
FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); SUPREME COURTS (64%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (64%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); RELIGION (50%)
Demonstrations and Riots; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisons and Prisoners; Prison Escapes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (94%) Taliban (Afghan Group); Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (58%) Sultan M Munadi; Carlotta Gall

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Pul-I-Charkhi (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             238 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Amnesty Report On 14,000 Finds Prisoner Abuse Continues in Iraq

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 502 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 6


Amnesty International accused the United States and its allies on Monday of
committing widespread abuses in Iraq, including torture and the continued
detention of thousands of prisoners without charge or trial.

The accusations could fuel the debate over the treatment of detainees that
flared after the publication of graphic photographs showing prisoners at Abu
Ghraib prison in Baghdad being mistreated by American guards. More recently,
British forces in Iraq have been criticized after videotapes showed British
soldiers beating Iraqi youths after demonstrations in southern Iraq.

In its report, ''Beyond Abu Ghraib: Detention and Torture in Iraq,'' Amnesty
International also said the level of abuse by Iraqi forces since the transfer of
power in June 2004 was increasing.

The United States and its allies, the report said, have ''established procedures
which deprive detainees of human rights guaranteed in international law and
standards.''

''The record of these forces, including U.S. forces and their United Kingdom
allies, is an unpalatable one,'' it said. In particular, coalition forces deny
''detainees their right to challenge the lawfulness of their detention before a
court.''

Hassiba Hadj-Sahraoui, the deputy director of the group's Middle East and North
Africa program, described the way prisoners are detained as ''arbitrary and a
recipe for possible abuse.''

At the end of November 2005, the report said, quoting coalition figures, more
than 14,000 prisoners were held in Iraq: about 4,850 in Baghdad, 7,365 at Camp
Bucca (near Basra, in southern Iraq), and more than 1,100 in the north, at
Sulaimaniya.

Responding to the report, the United States military said all its detainees were
treated in accordance with international conventions and Iraqi law, The
Associated Press reported.

A British Foreign Office spokesman, speaking in return for anonymity under
departmental rules, also denied the allegations. He said British forces in Iraq
were currently holding 43 Iraqi prisoners under United Nations resolutions
permitting detention of people deemed threatening to the security of coalition
or Iraqi personnel.

All 43 were visited by the Red Cross and by Iraqi government officials, had
their cases reviewed every month and had access to their lawyers and families,
the spokesman said. Britain has some 8,000 soldiers in Iraq, mainly in the
south. The Amnesty International report took particular issue with conditions in
detention facilities run by Iraqis.

''Many cases of torture and ill treatment of detainees held in facilities
controlled by the Iraqi authorities have been reported since the handover of
power in June 2004,'' the report said. ''Among other methods, victims have been
subjected to electric shocks or have been beaten with plastic cable. The picture
that is emerging is one in which the Iraqi authorities are systematically
violating the rights of detainees in breach of guarantees contained both in
Iraqi legislation and in international law and standards.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (79%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); LEGISLATION (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); LAWYERS (74%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Recordings (Video); Photography

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%) Amnesty International

PERSON: Alan Cowell

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (88%); LONDON, ENGLAND (72%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); NORTHERN AFRICA
(79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 804 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

Victim in Torture Photos Tells of Prison Conditions
Ali Shalal Qaissi, who two years ago was an anonymous prisoner at Abu Ghraib in
Iraq, tells of his six-month stay there and the story behind the scandalous
picture of him standing hooded atop a cardboard box and attached to electrical
wires.   A1

The American ambassador to Iraq is urging Iraq's political leaders to hold a
conference to broker a grand coalition.

A8

Payroll Bankrupts Palestinians
The need to pay overdue and current salaries has left the Palestinian Authority
''bankrupt'' despite recent donations of about $70 million from international
donors, the government's economic minister said.   A6

American Hostage is Killed
An American who was among four Christian activists kidnapped last year in Iraq
has been killed, a State Department spokesman said. The F.B.I. verified that a
body found Friday morning in Iraq was that of Tom Fox, 54. The spokesman said he
had no information on the other three hostages.   A8

U.N. Delays Human Rights Vote
The United Nations extended its deadline for seeking approval of a new human
rights council that is opposed by the United States but backed by rights groups
and a majority of the 191 member states.   A8

Pakistan Bans Deadly Passion
Kite flying has been banned from a popular spring festival in Pakistan, after a
spate of injuries and deaths from kite dueling, a popular game where kites are
flown on a thin metal wire or a thick string, coated with glass or chemicals, to
better attack opponent's kites.   A7

NATIONAL   A9-13, 16

Push for Lobbying Law Is Losing Momentum
The drive for a tighter lobbying law, which just two months ago was a major
priority on Capitol Hill, is losing momentum, a victim of shifting political
interests, infighting among House Republicans and a growing sense among
lawmakers of both parties that wholesale change may not be needed after all.
A1

Port Deal Hinders Bush Agenda
President Bush's inability to hold sway over his party on the Dubai port deal
suggests that he faces trouble keeping Republicans together on his major policy
initiatives this year, lawmakers and aides said.   A10

Interior Secretary Resigns Post
Gale A. Norton, who as interior secretary has been a key player in the Bush
administration's efforts to exploit natural resources on federal lands,
announced that she was resigning.   A16

Ex-Aide Arrested for Stealing
A former top White House aide was arrested in the Maryland suburbs on charges
that he stole merchandise from a number of retailers, the police in Montgomery
County, Md., said. The former aide, Claude A. Allen, 45, was President Bush's
top domestic policy adviser until resigning last month.   A11

Religion Journal   A13

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Spacecraft Orbits Mars
The most sophisticated spacecraft ever sent to Mars slipped into orbit, while
tense controllers monitored from Earth.   A11

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Gotti Avoids Conviction As Jury Deadlocks Again
For the second time in six months, after more than a dozen witnesses, including
reformed mobsters, a Manhattan jury failed to reach a verdict in the case of
John A. (Junior) Gotti, the son of the storied Mafia boss who shares his name.
A1

Shakeup at Newark Airport
The head of security at Newark Liberty International Airport, which has been
plagued by screening lapses and poor morale, was removed from his position by
the federal government.   B1

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-6

With a Sigh, U.S. Advances
Less than 24 hours after facing the humiliation of first-round elimination, the
United States players approached their game with South Africa realistically.
With Roger Clemens pitching, the United States beat the overmatched South
Africa, 17-0, to advance to the second round of the World Baseball Classic.   D6


ARTS   B7-16

OBITUARIES   C14

John Profumo
England's secretary of war in the government of Harold Macmillan, who was forced
to resign when his relationship with a young prostitute emerged, he was 91.
C14

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

From Clubhouse to Boardroom
Corporations are under pressure to appoint experienced and independent board
members, but golf handicaps and club memberships still play a role.   A1

Perils of Online Real Estate
The growing popularity of real estate listings on the Internet has created an
opportunity for unscrupulous sellers to try and resell dilapidated houses for
inflated prices.   A1

A Bid for London Exchange
The London Stock Exchange, Europe's biggest stock market, rejected an informal
$4.1 billion takeover bid from Nasdaq, but the exchange is considered an
attractive target for a rich-enough bidder.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: About that rebellion; Ambien in the driver's seat; separate and
unequal for Gypsies; how about a fresh helping of secrecy?

Columns: Maureen Dowd, John Tierney.

Bridge   B12
Crossword   B14
TV Listings   B16
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NEWS BRIEFS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); TORTURE (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); LOBBYING (88%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(79%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); SCANDALS (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (70%); APPROVALS (70%); POLICE FORCES (70%);
RELIGION (69%); ARRESTS (63%); SPACE EXPLORATION (61%); RETAILERS (60%); NATURAL
RESOURCES (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (92%); MARS (64%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); PAKISTAN (92%)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             240 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 60 words


Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the State Department's
criticism of Iraq in its annual report on human rights abuses misstated the
timing of comments by Baktiar Amin, a former Iraqi human rights minister, who
said that some violations in his country included systematic torture. He made
the observation on Feb. 6, 2005 -- not last month.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (87%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COUNTRY: IRAQ (90%)

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             241 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Congo Warlord Faces Hague Court

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 20


It was a brief session but a momentous occasion at the International Criminal
Court on Monday, when a former Congolese warlord, the first person to stand
trial before the new institution, faced the judges.

The man, Thomas Lubanga, 45, has been accused of kidnapping children as young as
7 and turning them into soldiers, messengers, cooks and sex slaves during
fighting in the long-troubled Ituri region of Congo.

He was ''the founder and leader of one of the most dangerous militias in
Ituri,'' the chief prosecutor, Luis Moreno-Ocampo, said at a weekend news
conference. Ituri, he said, was one of the regions where children had been
trained ''to become machines of war.''

Mr. Lubanga, who arrived in The Hague on Friday after more than a year in a
Kinshasa prison, looked surprised as he walked into a new wood-paneled court,
facing an array of court officers in gowns and a public gallery filled with
diplomats and journalists.

He was asked to stand as the presiding judge, Claude Jorda of France, went
through the formalities of identifying him and informing him of his rights. Mr.
Lubanga gave his occupation as ''politician.''

For the 350 people who work at the new institution, the 30-minute hearing, for
all its businesslike tone, opened a new chapter in international law. Created by
the Rome Treaty of 1998, the International Criminal Court aims to deal with war
crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide.

Unlike temporary tribunals, like the court that dealt with Nazi crimes at
Nuremberg, and those addressing war crimes in Yugoslavia, Rwanda and Sierra
Leone, this court is the world's first permanent and independent forum for
judging large-scale abuses. Its prosecutors have also been investigating the
mass killings in Uganda and Darfur, in Sudan, since 2002.

The International Criminal Court has said it will deal only with the top leaders
and it will seek out cases that a national court is unwilling or unable to
investigate. It became involved in Ituri after President Joseph Kabila asked the
court to investigate war crimes in the region.

The prosecutor said Mr. Lubanga's hearing was only the start of cases linked to
the years of militia violence in Ituri, which has killed thousands and produced
more than 600,000 refugees. At least five militia armies have fought to control
the region, much coveted for its gold deposits. A Human Rights Watch report said
some had ties to or were supported by neighboring states, notably Rwanda and
Uganda.

Civilians suffered widely at the hands of the warring groups, which carried out
massacres, torture, rape, extortion and mutilation, and used children as cannon
fodder and sex slaves.

Mr. Lubanga set up his group as long as five years ago, but international
pressure to arrest him and other Ituri warlords grew after nine United Nations
Bangladeshi peacekeepers were killed by unknown men in February 2005. He was
arrested a month later.

A trial date for Mr. Lubanga has not been set. The prosecution said it might
expand the charges, which must be reviewed and confirmed by judges. The next
hearing is set for June 27.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Thomas Lubanga, of Congo, at a hearing yesterday at the
International Criminal Court in The Hague. He is the first to face trial in the
court. (Photo by Ed Oudenaarden/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); JUDGES (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); SLAVERY (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); ARMIES (77%); TORTURE (77%);
CIVIL WAR (76%); JOURNALISM (75%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); REFUGEES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); ARMED
FORCES (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (94%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Thomas Lubanga

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (96%); NETHERLANDS (93%); RWANDA
(92%); UGANDA (92%); BANGLADESH (79%); SUDAN (79%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: Congo (Formerly Zaire); Hague (Netherlands); Ituri Province (Congo);
Congo (Formerly Zaire)

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             242 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Chile: Pinochet-Era Officers Indicted

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 104 words


A judge indicted a retired general and 12 other retired army officers on
homicide charges in one of the most notorious cases of human rights violations
during Gen. Augusto Pinochet's 1973-90 dictatorship in Chile. The judge, Victor
Montiglio, ordered the arrest of the men, who served in regiments visited by the
so-called Caravan of Death, in which 75 jailed dissidents were killed by a
military party that toured the country in a helicopter in the weeks immediately
after the 1973 coup led by General Pinochet. The 13 retired military men are
suspected of taking part in the executions. The indictments cover 42 of the
victims.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (91%); HOMICIDE (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ARRESTS (88%); COUPS (87%); ARMED FORCES (86%);
ARREST WARRANTS (86%) Freedom and Human Rights; Decisions and Verdicts

PERSON: Augusto (Gen) Pinochet; Victor (Judge) Montiglio

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%)

REGION: Chile

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             251 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bush Takes On The Brothels

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF; John Tierney is off today.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 770 words


I'm guessing that President Bush's foreign policy will stand up about as well to
the assessments of future historians as a baby gazelle to a pack of cheetahs.

Yet there is one area where Mr. Bush is making a historic contribution: he is
devoting much more money and attention to human trafficking than his
predecessors. Just as one of Jimmy Carter's great legacies was putting human
rights squarely on the international agenda, Mr. Bush is doing the same for
slave labor.

We don't tend to think of trafficking as a top concern, so Mr. Bush hasn't
gotten much credit. But it's difficult to think of a human rights issue that
could be more important than sex trafficking and the other kinds of neo-slavery
that engulf millions of people around the world, leaving many of them dead of
AIDS by their early 20's.

My own epiphany came in 1989, when my wife and I lived in China and covered the
crushing of the Tiananmen Square democracy movement. Arrests of dissidents were
front-page news, but no one paid any attention as many tens of thousands of
Chinese women and girls were kidnapped and sold each year by traffickers to
become the unwilling wives of peasants.

Since then, I've seen the peddling of humans in many countries: the 8-year-old
Filipino girl whose mother used to pull her out of school to rent to pedophiles;
the terrified 14-year-old Vietnamese girl imprisoned in a brothel pending the
sale of her virginity; the Pakistani teenager whose brothel's owner dealt with
her resistance by drugging her into a stupor. The U.N. has estimated that 12.3
million people worldwide are caught in forced labor of one kind or another.

In an age of H.I.V., sex trafficking is particularly lethal. And for every
political dissident who is locked up in a prison cell, hundreds of teenage girls
are locked up in brothels and, in effect, sentenced to death by AIDS.

In 2000, Congress passed landmark anti-trafficking legislation, backed by an
unlikely coalition of evangelical Republicans and feminist Democrats. Even
today, the Congressional leaders against trafficking include a conservative
Republican, Senator Sam Brownback, and a liberal Democrat, Representative
Carolyn Maloney.

But the heaviest lifting has been done by the State Department's tiny office on
trafficking -- for my money, one of the most effective units in the U.S.
government. The office, led by a former Republican congressman, John Miller, is
viewed with suspicion by some career diplomats who fear that simple-minded
conservative nuts are mucking up relations with countries over a peripheral
issue.

Yet Mr. Miller and his office wield their spotlight shrewdly. With firm backing
from the White House (Mr. Bush made Mr. Miller an ambassador partly to help him
in his bureaucratic battles), the office puts out an annual report that shames
and bullies foreign governments into taking action against forced labor of all
kinds.

Under pressure from the report, Cambodia prosecuted some traffickers (albeit
while protecting brothels owned by government officials) and largely closed down
the Svay Pak red-light district, where 10-year-olds used to be openly sold.
Ecuador stepped up arrests of pimps and started a national public awareness
campaign. Israel trained police to go after traffickers and worked with victims'
home countries, like Belarus and Ukraine. And so on, country by country.

Some liberals object to the administration's requirement that aid groups declare
their opposition to prostitution before they can get anti-trafficking funds. But
in the past, without that requirement, U.S. funds occasionally went to groups
promoting prostitution. And in any case, the requirement doesn't seem to have
caused many problems on the ground (partly because aid groups sometimes
dissemble to get money). In Zambia, India and Cambodia, I've seen U.S.-financed
programs work closely with prostitutes and brothel owners when that is needed to
get the job done.

Moreover, Ambassador Miller and his staff aren't squeamish prudes. Mr. Miller is
sympathetic to the Swedish model: stop punishing prostitutes, but crack down on
pimps and customers. He says that approach seems to have reduced more forced
prostitution than just about any other strategy.

The backdrop is a ridiculously divisive debate among anti-trafficking activists
about whether prostitution should be legalized. Whatever one thinks of that
question, it's peripheral to the central challenge: vast numbers of underage
girls are forced into brothels against their will, and many die of AIDS. On that
crucial issue, Mr. Bush is leaving a legacy that he and America can be proud of.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%);
HISTORY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (89%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (89%); CONSERVATISM (88%); CHILDREN (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); FOREIGN POLICY (78%); AIDS & HIV
(78%); LIBERALISM (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); FORCED LABOR (76%); WOMEN
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (76%); SEX OFFENSES (74%);
CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); CORRECTIONS (72%); PRISONS
(69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (67%); SENTENCING (64%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (64%);
RELIGION (50%) Prostitution; Children and Youth; Prostitution

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); JIMMY CARTER (58%); SAMUEL BROWNBACK (58%); CAROLYN
MALONEY (58%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush; John (Amb) Miller

COUNTRY: CHINA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Cambodia; Ecuador; Israel

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             253 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Israel Raids West Bank Towns, Killing 6

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 818 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, May 14


In one of the bloodiest days in the West Bank in recent weeks, Israeli troops on
Sunday killed at least six Palestinians, including an Islamic Jihad leader
accused of orchestrating a suicide bombing last month.

In the larger of two raids, Israeli forces stormed into the village of Qabatiya
in the northern West Bank and surrounded a house where the Islamic Jihad leader,
Elias Ashkar, was holed up, the Israeli military said.

After heavy exchanges of gunfire, an Israeli bulldozer flattened the house, and
Mr. Ashkar's body was found inside. The military said he was behind the April 17
suicide bombing of a Tel Aviv restaurant that left 11 people dead, including a
16-year-old American, Daniel Wultz, who died Sunday of his wounds.

Mr. Ashkar had also coordinated other major attacks, according to the Israeli
military. Islamic Jihad has carried out almost all of the suicide bombings
against Israel since early last year, and most of the bombers have come from the
northern West Bank.

The Israelis killed at least five Palestinians in Qabatiya. Most were members of
Islamic Jihad, but one was a civilian, according to Palestinian security
officials and medical workers.

In the neighboring town of Jenin, Israeli troops fatally shot a Palestinian
security official, Palestinian security forces said.

Also Sunday, Israel's high court narrowly upheld a controversial law intended to
block Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip from living in Israel
with spouses who are Arab citizens of the country.

By a vote of 6 to 5, the court rejected the contention that the law violated the
civil rights of Palestinians and Arab citizens of Israel. A majority of the
court sided with Israeli authorities, who have argued that allowing young
Palestinians to move into Israel through marriage poses an unacceptable security
risk.

''This law prevents family reunification based simply on the nationality of one
spouse,'' said Abeer Baker, a lawyer for Adalah, a legal center representing the
couples seeking to live together in Israel.

Hundreds, perhaps thousands, of couples may be kept apart by the law, Ms. Baker
said. However, precise figures are difficult to come by, she said, because many
such couples do not want to be identified for fear of legal problems.
Palestinians who have already been granted residency or become citizens would
not be affected, according to civil rights lawyers.

Of Israel's seven million citizens, more than a million are Arabs. The vast
majority of the Arab Israelis have family and other ties to some of the
estimated 3.8 million Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza.

However, since the Palestinian uprising began in 2000, Israel has made it
increasingly difficult for Palestinians to enter Israel.

The amended Citizenship Law upheld by the justices on Sunday has been criticized
by human rights groups since it was approved in 2002, at the height of the
uprising.

Critics contend that the amended law is intended not only for security, but also
to limit the number of Arabs living in Israel.

Over many years, thousands of Palestinians have been granted residency in Israel
as part of family reunification, including marriages. Of this group, about 25
people have been involved in terrorism, according to Israeli authorities.
Government lawyers argued that the law was more relevant than ever now that the
Palestinian Authority was controlled by Hamas, the radical Islamic group that
has carried out many of the suicide bombings against Israel.

''The Palestinian Authority is an enemy government, a government that wants to
destroy the state and is not willing to recognize Israel,'' Justice Michael
Cheshin said this year during arguments in the case.

Justice Cheshin said that if the couples wanted to be together, they could live
in the West Bank rather than in Israel.

In a dissent that was part of Sunday's ruling, the chief justice, Aharon Barak,
said, ''This violation of rights is directed against Arab citizens of Israel.''

Human rights lawyers argued that Israel already had laws that allow the
government to revoke the residency of anyone suspected of involvement in
terrorism.

Under the amended law, only Palestinian men over the age of 35 and women over
the age of 25 may apply to be with a spouse in Israel. Most Palestinians tend to
marry at earlier ages. However, even the Palestinians who meet the age
requirements are often denied, according to lawyers handling citizenship cases.

In another development Sunday, the Israeli military said its naval forces
intercepted a boat in the Mediterranean Sea, off the coast of Gaza, and found
several hundred pounds of military-grade explosives. The Palestinians on the
boat were detained for questioning, the military said.

Early this month, Israel found more than a half-ton of explosives in the same
area, saying they had been dumped in the sea by a fishing boat that then managed
to escape.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Medics attended to the body of a Palestinian killed during an
Israeli raid in Jenin yesterday. Israeli forces and Islamic Jihad members also
exchanged heavy gunfire in the nearby northern West Bank village of Qabatiya.
(Photo by Mohammed Ballas/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(87%); LITIGATION (87%); CIVIL RIGHTS (86%); SHOOTINGS (78%); MIDDLE EAST
PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%); DEATHS (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (71%);
APPROVALS (71%); LAWYERS (70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); CITIZENSHIP LAW
(70%); MARRIAGE (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); CITIZENSHIP (64%) Palestinians; Bombs
and Explosives; Suits and Litigation; Law and Legislation  ; Children and Youth;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (94%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (94%)

PERSON: Greg Myre; Daniel Wultz

CITY: TEL AVIV, ISRAEL (92%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(79%)

REGION: Israel; Tel Aviv (Israel); Jenin (West Bank); Qabatiya (West Bank);
Israel; West Bank; Gaza

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Uncovering Iraq's Horrors in Desert Graves

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1588 words

DATELINE: ON THE EDGE OF THE ASH SHAM DESERT, Iraq, June 3


Among experts on the American-led team investigating Iraq's mass graves, the
skeletal remains lying face-up at the rear of the tangled grave here have been
given a name -- the Blue Man -- that speaks for a sorrowful familiarity
developed by some of those who work with victims of mass murder.

But more than his blue shirt, and his blue-striped trousers, what distinguishes
the remains is the way they speak for the terror of death under Saddam Hussein.
The man was thrown backward by automatic weapons fire, his eyes blindfolded and
his arms tied behind his back, his skull jerked upward at the neck, his
fleshless mouth gaping, his two rows of teeth stretched apart, as though in a
primal scream.

Together, in the late winter of 1991, at least 28 men were executed here,
crowded together in a pit their killers scraped with a backhoe from the desert
floor. Rounded up along the alleyways of their native city, they were forced
aboard a bus or truck and driven out along an isolated highway.

After barely half an hour's journey, the grim caravan turned down a bumpy track,
halting just far enough into the desert for gunfire to be muffled from passing
traffic.

The end would have come quickly, the forensic experts said, victims stumbling
out of the vehicle, herded into the pit, then pushed forward into a shallow cut
not much wider or longer than a stretch limousine. At the last moment, judging
by the pile of bodies, the victims surged backward, perhaps in terror at the
sound of rifles being readied for fire.

Among the bodies, the experts have located at least 80 spent cartridges from
Kalashnikov rifles, which were the weapon of choice among the killers of Mr.
Hussein's secret police.

Michael Trimble, who is called Sonny, the leader of the mass-graves team that
set up camp beside an escarpment in Iraq's western desert last month, is a
53-year-old forensic archaeologist from St. Louis. He is a veteran of other
sites of mass killings around the world, on assignment from a civilian post with
the Army Corps of Engineers.

Standing above the pit where the desert victims died, he said the 120-member
team here, now in their third week of excavation and examination of two
mass-grave sites, were sustained through days of punishing 130-degree heat by an
urge to bring justice for the victims.

''When you work with these people for some time,'' he said, referring to the
remains, ''you get real attached to them, you feel real bad about what happened
to them, and you want to do whatever you can to bring their killers to
account.''

What happened here is not only a macabre marker in the history of Iraq under Mr.
Hussein, but a harrowing footnote in American politics. The victims here,
American and Iraqi officials say, died in Mr. Hussein's suppression of the
Shiite uprising across southern Iraq in early 1991. It was a rebellion that
survivors -- and American critics of the President George H. W. Bush -- say that
the president encouraged after halting American troops at Iraq's southern border
with Kuwait at the end of the Persian Gulf war.

For years, Middle East experts have debated Mr. Bush's role in encouraging
Iraq's Shiites and Kurds to mount a challenge to Mr. Hussein after the war over
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait ended, before ruling out American military action to
halt the mass killings of Shiites that Mr. Hussein initiated to crush the
uprising. Mr. Bush himself has said that what happened to the Shiites was one of
the deepest regrets of his presidency.

For the American forensic experts who came to Iraq after the 2003 invasion, the
desert camp is a way station toward holding Mr. Hussein accountable for what
many Iraqi human rights experts say was the most merciless passage in his 24
years in power.

Raid Juhi, chief investigative judge for the Iraqi court now trying Mr. Hussein
in another case, said during a visit here on Saturday that the court had
documentary evidence, and statements from witnesses, showing that at least
100,000 Shiites, and possibly 180,000, died in the 1991 repression.

The trial of Mr. Hussein and his associates for what is known among the Shiites
as the ''intifada,'' or rebellion, could be still a year or more off.

The Iraqi tribunal has only one courtroom, in Mr. Hussein's old Baath Party
headquarters in Baghdad. The first trial in a series planned for the ousted
Iraqi dictator, involving the brutal aftermath of a failed assassination attempt
in 1982 against Mr. Hussein in the mainly Shiite town of Dujail, is not expected
to end before late summer.

The tribunal will then hear a second case, involving accusations that 50,000
Kurds were killed in what is called the Anfal offensive, which reached its peak
in 1988.

Concerned about a possible insurgent attack, American officials who brought two
reporters to the desert grave site on Saturday, aboard an American military
helicopter, insisted the location not be pinpointed. On the flight from the
Green Zone command compound in Baghdad to the grave site, the Black Hawk
helicopter passed over some of the most hotly contested territory in the war.

The forensic team of Americans, Australians and other nationalities works under
heavy guard, wary of attack by insurgents driven by loyalties to Mr. Hussein.

The proximity of the rebel threat here echoes the events of 1991, when Mr.
Hussein, in Baghdad, quickly marshaled the death squads that spread out across
Iraq's southern provinces to extinguish the Shiite uprising. Of the 200 mass
graves the Iraqi Human Rights Ministry has registered in the three years since
the American-led invasion, the majority are in the south. One, at Mahawil, about
50 miles south of Baghdad, is believed to hold as many as 10,000 to 15,000
victims, Mr. Juhi said.

Two other sites, one at Hatra, near Mosul in the north, and another at Muthanna,
near the southern city of Samawa, have been exhaustively examined by Mr.
Trimble's team. The remains of more than 300 victims from those locations,
killed during the Anfal campaign, are stored in chilled containers at a
high-technology laboratory at the Baghdad international airport.

The desert site here will be studied for another week or two, with the remains
that are found flown to Baghdad for further testing.

The Americans were drawn to the desert site initially by satellite imagery
pointing to about 200 sites in the area where desert undulations suggested there
could be mass graves. Reconnaissance teams brought the focus down to 18 sites,
and 2 of those are under excavation. Work has just begun at the second, at the
entrance to a deep ravine on the escarpment's edge. Team members say bone
fragments, skulls, clothing and spent cartridge cases point to at least 10
victims, possibly more, beneath sediment that winter rains have washed into the
ravine.

The larger of the two sites, where the man in the blue shirt and trousers was
killed, is a ghastly tableau of what summary execution under Mr. Hussein
involved. Kerrie Grant, 45, an Australian forensic archaeologist, said all the
victims appeared to be male, and between the ages of 20 and 35.

Mr. Juhi, the Iraqi judge, said the 1991 killers spent little time hunting down
those responsible for the uprising, seizing young men of fighting age at random
and executing them without trial, in an act of calculated terror.

The victims lie in a huddled group, some thrown backward, some to the side,
others collapsed atop one another, their legs buckled beneath them, with
telltale rips in their clothing showing where bullets struck their chests and
stomachs, others with leg bones shattered by gunfire.

Some, including the Blue Man, who had rips in his clothing at one shoulder and
in the chest, had bullet holes in their skulls as well, as if they might have
survived the first volley and been killed by follow-up shots to the head.

The frayed remains of blindfolds, some fashioned from torn swatches of colored
cotton, some from checkered, Bedouin-style headdresses known as kaffiyehs
remained wrapped around skulls still matted with tangled hair.

Among most of the fully unearthed bodies, the wrist bones met together behind
the victims' backs, with fragments of rope and cloth used to tie them mingled
with the earth-stained bones. The forensic experts say still more bodies, lying
beneath the visible ones, may be exposed when the remains of the 28 men at the
pit's surface are lifted into body bags and taken away.

Ms. Grant, the Australian expert, and Mr. Juhi, the Iraqi judge, said there were
signs that the victims were hurriedly seized at their homes, possibly at night,
and given no time before being taken to their deaths. Heavy jackets and layered
clothing -- including one man's sweater beneath his flowing dishdasha robe --
pointed to the killings having occurred in the early days of the uprising, in
March 1991, when there was still winter weather in this part of Iraq, they said.

A scattering of plastic flip-flops and sandals, and the fact that some victims
arrived here barefoot, was further evidence that the men were surprised by their
killers, they said.

Mr. Trimble, the leader of the mass graves team, said little he found here
surprised him after a lifetime of studying violent death. ''I believe most human
beings operate on a least-effort basis, and murderers certainly do,'' he said.
''The men who killed all these people came down this road, and they did what all
mass murderers do -- they dug deep, they killed their victims quickly, they
covered them up and then they left, as quickly as they came.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: An investigative judge, Raid Juhi, center, at a site Saturday
with Michael Trimble, right, leader of a 120-member mass-graves team. (Pool
photo by Erik de Castro)(pg. A1)
Michael Trimble, head of the excavation team, said of the remains, ''You get
real attached to them, you feel real bad about what happened to them.'' (Photo
by Pool photos by Erik de Castro)
 There are signs that the victims were hurriedly seized at their homes, possibly
at night, and given no time before being taken to their deaths. (pg. A12)Map of
Iraq highlighting Ash Sham Desert: The team works amid the Ash Sham Desert's
130-degree heat. (pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); FORENSICS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%);
DESERT STORM (78%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (78%); ARCHAEOLOGY (78%); ARMIES
(76%); SHOOTINGS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); ASSASSINATION (74%);
CEMETERIES (73%); DESERTS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (67%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Persian Gulf War; Assassinations
and Attempted Assassinations

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%) John F Burns; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; George (Former
Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); KUWAIT (79%); GULF STATES (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Ash Sham Desert (Iraq); Australia; Kuwait; Iraq; Dujail (Iraq);
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             259 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Bush Administration vs. Salim Hamdan

BYLINE: By Jonathan Mahler.

Jonathan Mahler, a contributing writer for the magazine, is working on a book
about the Hamdan case, to be published by Farrar, Straus & Giroux.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 44

LENGTH: 8136 words


In 1996, Salim Hamdan, a 26-year-old Yemeni with a thick mustache and kinky
black hair, was working part time as a taxi driver, dividing his modest income
between the mattress he rented in a crowded boardinghouse in the dirty, bustling
city of Sana and his daily supply of khat leaves, the stimulant that most Yemeni
men chew by the fistful. Then one day the low-hanging horizon of his life
lifted: he was recruited for jihad. He joined about 35 other Muslims, mostly
Yemenis, who were preparing to leave for Tajikistan to fight alongside that
country's small Islamic insurgency against its Russian-backed government.

One of the group's leaders was a self-assured young man named Nasser al-Bahri.
Hamdan, an orphaned only child from a rural tribal village in southern Yemen,
was naturally drawn to strong personalities. Although two years his junior,
al-Bahri, who grew up in an upper-middle-class family in Jidda, Saudi Arabia,
was far more worldly and sophisticated than Hamdan and was without question the
most educated person he had ever met. Al-Bahri had studied business in college,
but he was also deeply steeped in the Koran, having become a devout Muslim as a
teenager in rebellion against his bourgeois upbringing. He spoke comfortably and
forcefully about the plight of Muslims all over the world, and he had traveled
extensively, to places as far as Bosnia and Somalia, to defend his oppressed
Islamic brethren.

Hamdan, who had the rough equivalent of a fourth-grade education, wasn't
especially religious and had no grand plans for his life other than the hope
that he might someday be married, but he nevertheless embraced the idea of
becoming a holy warrior. It didn't hurt that the trip was to be paid for --
al-Bahri told him that the group had raised money from a handful of Saudi-based
Muslim charities -- and that Hamdan would also receive a salary.

The jihadis convened in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, and started working their way
north toward Tajikistan, first by jeep and then, when the roads were impassable,
on foot. After six months traversing Afghanistan's mountainous, often
snow-covered terrain, they were turned back at the Tajik border.

At loose ends, one of the jihadis suggested that they go see a man named Osama
bin Laden, a well-known sheik among radical Islamists who led a militant group
of itinerant Muslim holy warriors called Al Qaeda. Having only recently been
expelled from Sudan, bin Laden had relocated to Afghanistan, where he planned to
rebuild Al Qaeda with the help of his new hosts, the Taliban. Bin Laden earned
his reputation during the anti-Soviet campaign in Afghanistan in the 1980's, but
he was now enlisting soldiers for his new crusade to drive the United States
from the Arabian Peninsula.

Al-Bahri, Hamdan and the rest of the group made their way back through
Afghanistan to bin Laden's home in Farm Hada, a village outside Jalalabad, not
far from the Khyber Pass. They arrived in late 1996 shortly before Ramadan, the
holiest time of year. For three days, bin Laden preached to his prospective
recruits about the religious imperative of reversing America's corrosive
presence in the gulf. Seventeen of the original 35 jihadis decided to stay;
Hamdan and al-Bahri were among them.

For the next several years, both men worked for bin Laden, first in Farm Hada,
then, when he relocated for security reasons in 1997, to a better-fortified
compound in the desert outside Kandahar. In 1999, al-Bahri and Hamdan's lives
became further entwined. At bin Laden's urging and with his financial help, they
married Yemeni sisters in Sana and returned to Afghanistan with their new wives.

By Sept. 11, 2001, however, al-Bahri and Hamdan's paths had diverged. Al-Bahri
was in prison in Yemen for his suspected links to Al Qaeda's bombing of an
American Naval destroyer, the U.S.S. Cole, in 2000. Hamdan was still with bin
Laden, though not for long. In late November 2001, with America's military
campaign in Afghanistan well under way, he was picked up near the border of
Pakistan by a group of Afghan warlords. They hogtied him with electrical wire
and within a matter of days turned him over to the Americans for a $5,000
bounty. The interrogations started, and Hamdan was soon identified as Saqr
al-Jedawi, his alias during his years with bin Laden. He spent the next six
months in U.S. prison camps in Bagram and Kandahar, before being flown to
Guantanamo Bay in May 2002.

Today, Salim Hamdan lives in a 6-by-9-foot cell in Guantanamo, awaiting trial by
a special military tribunal established by presidential order in the aftermath
of 9/11. If everything goes according to the government's plans, the Bush
administration will prosecute Hamdan for violating the laws of war by conspiring
to commit acts of terrorism against the United States. The government has
revealed little about its case against Hamdan -- my portrait is drawn
principally from his lawyers, family members and al-Bahri -- but it has charged
him with serious offenses, including transporting weapons and serving as a
bodyguard to bin Laden. If convicted on all charges, Hamdan could receive a life
sentence.

Hamdan's attorneys, a government-appointed Navy lawyer and a professor at
Georgetown University Law Center, don't deny that their client worked directly
for bin Laden, but they play down his importance to Al Qaeda, portraying him as
an employee, an uneducated and far-from-devout driver and mechanic who was
grateful for a paycheck but generally ignorant of the terrorist enterprise for
which he worked. Moreover, they say that the tribunals, known officially as
military commissions, are illegal and have sued the American government to block
them from going forward.

This spring, the detainee's lawyers will have the chance to make their case to
the Supreme Court, when it hears Hamdan v. Rumsfeld. The name alone guarantees
that it will be one of the most closely watched arguments of the year, and the
eventual ruling will have far-reaching implications not just for Hamdan and the
rest of the Guantanamo detainees, but also for presidential war powers and quite
possibly for the future of democracy in the Middle East. If the war on terror
is, at its heart, a battle to show the Islamic world that there is an
alternative to oppressive theocracies and autocratic dictators, nothing is more
important than how the United States government dispenses justice to detainees
like Salim Hamdan. Until now, America's wartime practice has been to hold onto
captured combatants until the end of hostilities, when there is no longer a
threat of them returning to the battlefield. In this case, though, the
battlefield is unmapped and the hostilities could continue for decades. For the
moment, the government has broadly classified nearly all of the more than 500
detainees at Guantanamo as enemy combatants, but eventually it's going to have
to start sorting them out. This will entail answering some difficult questions.
Are all Muslim men who answered the call to jihad equally guilty? Which
detainees represent a threat to the United States? Who is worth prosecuting, and
how?

Just outside the Old City of Sana, a maze of densely packed, intricately adorned
stone houses and centuries-old shops that rise like drip castles from narrow
cobblestone streets, sits the modern Martyrs' Mosque. If the Old City evokes
Yemen's prosperous, cosmopolitan days at the center of the world's spice trade,
the Martyrs' Mosque, an imposing, ash-colored monolith, speaks to its present as
the poorest and most primitive of the Arabian Peninsula states.

The big open square that fronts the mosque is a gathering place for the
dispossessed. Homeless people lie on flattened cardboard boxes with gasoline
cans repurposed as water jugs beside them. Dababs, minivans stuffed with
passengers, career around Sana's crowded streets, jockeying for fares. Drivers
struggle to be heard above the music issuing from loudspeakers on the
three-wheeled cycles pedaled by cassette vendors. The smells of grilling meat
and corn on the cob commingle with perfumed oil, urine and exhaust.

There are no women in sight here, only young men and boys, a reflection of
Yemen's conservative Islamic culture. And although roughly 40 percent of all
Yemeni men are unemployed, everyone here seems to be in a big hurry, hustling
around, often holding hands, always in standard Yemeni dress: sandals, white
robes and Western-style blazers with the labels showing on the outside of the
left sleeve, just above the cuff. Long curved daggers known as jambiyas,
reminders of the country's enduring tribal culture, hang from belts. Cheeks
bulge with khat, which brightens the mood and sends the mind in every direction,
an apt emblem of the combination of aimlessness and restlessness on display.

Ten years ago, Salim Hamdan was one of these men. He was born in about 1970 (no
one, including Hamdan himself, knows for sure), hundreds of miles from Sana in
the Wadi Hadhramaut, a 100-mile oasis in the mountainous desert of southeastern
Yemen. His father was a farmer and shopkeeper, and the family lived modestly in
a small, mud-brick home in a cliff town overhanging the fertile valley below. He
was still a child when his parents died from illness, one a few years after the
other. With no other family nearby, Hamdan went to live with relatives in
Mukalla, a bleak port city of about 150,000 on Yemen's southern coast. By that
point, Hamdan had already quit school, which is not unusual in Hadhramaut, where
the imperatives of helping your family earn money far outweigh the comparatively
abstract virtues of an education.

Within a few years he was on his own, living on the streets of Mukalla and
working odd jobs. In 1990, Yemen, which had long been divided into two separate
nations, the Islamic north and Marxist south, was officially unified. Hamdan,
who was then 20, joined the mass migration north in search of work. There was a
widespread sense that Sana, the new nation's capital, would soon be booming. As
it turned out, the job prospects were not so promising, particularly for someone
with Hamdan's limited qualifications. He soon found his way to the Martyrs'
Mosque -- where he picked up work driving a dabab -- and then, six years later,
to jihad.

Jihad -- literally, ''struggle'' -- is a slippery concept, one that has been
subjected to almost endless interpretation, violent and nonviolent alike,
emanating from a Muslim's basic religious duty to encourage the spread of Islam.
In recent years, though, it often has come to be understood as a violent
religious crusade against the United States. Hamdan and al-Bahri's routes to
jihad could not have been more different, but in many ways each is emblematic of
the men's respective countries, which represent the two biggest contingents at
Guantanamo. In Saudi Arabia, jihad resonated with particular force with the
educated, affluent and devout; in Yemen, it exerted an especially strong pull on
the country's poor. Nearly half of the country's population lives below the
poverty line; unlike its neighbors in the gulf, Yemen has very little oil, and
what it does have is hoarded by the government. ''Unless they are the sons of
sheiks or political leaders, the young people have no way to use their
energies,'' Nabil al-Sofee, a former spokesman for Islah, Yemen's Islamic party,
told me recently in his office in Sana. ''The one option that is in front of
anyone who wants to achieve anything is jihad.''

Jihad has an almost mythic appeal in Yemen. Its roots run all the way back to
the seventh century, when the Prophet Muhammad is said to have declared,
''Allah, give me fighters from behind me,'' his back turned conspicuously to
Yemen. In its more modern incarnation, jihad can be traced to 1967, when Yemen
was still divided and the British withdrew from its southern half. Finally free
of its longtime occupiers, South Yemen quickly established ties to the Soviet
Union, Cuba and China, and in 1970 became the Arab world's first Communist
state.

South Yemen's new identity inaugurated two decades of hostilities with North
Yemen, a Muslim state whose allegiances were to Saudi Arabia and Egypt. It
didn't take long for North Yemen's rulers -- including the president of today's
unified Yemen, Ali Abdullah Saleh -- to exploit the conflict's religious
undertones. By the time the Soviets invaded Afghanistan in 1979, many young
North Yemenis already accepted that it was their duty as Muslims to confront
Communist unbelievers. And so, over the next several years, scores of young
Yemeni men answered their clerics' calls for jihad. Afghanistan's mujahedeen
received support from many Arab countries, in addition to the United States, but
the Yemenis were among the fiercest of the so-called Afghan-Arab fighters.
Unlike the jihadis from wealthier states in the Persian Gulf, they were
accustomed to hard living, and the rugged, mountainous terrain of Afghanistan
was similar to that of Yemen.

When the Soviets withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989, the leaders of many Arab
countries, understandably worried about the combustible mix of religious
zealotry and combat experience in which these men had been steeped, discouraged
the jihadis from returning home. North Yemen, for its part, not only welcomed
back its own fighters, it opened its borders to jihadis from other Arab
countries as well. The heroic stature of these fighters was cemented in 1994,
when the still-simmering tensions between Yemen's Islamists and Marxists erupted
into a full-fledged civil war and President Saleh called on the ex-jihadis to
help defeat the Communists. The north emerged victorious, and Saleh rewarded
many of these men for their efforts. For his help mobilizing the troops, Sheik
Abdul Majid al-Zindani, an ex-Arab-Afghan warrior and bin Laden's onetime
spiritual mentor, was awarded the chancellorship of Iman University in Sana, a
platform from which he has since steered countless young Yemeni men toward the
path of jihad.

The Yemeni government did little to stanch the flow of jihadis, even in the face
of increasing international pressure. A consummate pragmatist, President Saleh
gave the U.S. permission to use its ports to refuel in the 1990's, but to the
Arab world he presented himself as a leader who was not afraid to stand up to
the West. In the wake of the attack on the U.S.S. Cole in Yemen in 2000, Saleh
scoffed at rumors that the U.S. was planning to intensify its military presence
in the country: ''Yemen is a graveyard for the invaders,'' he told Al Jazeera.
After 9/11, however, President Saleh went to Washington to pledge his support
for the war on terror. But having spent so many years nurturing and exploiting
the country's culture of jihad, he had to be careful about how he went about
dismantling it. Extraditing Islamic radicals, or even putting them in jail for
more than a couple of years, would provoke the country's powerful extremist
element.

The centerpiece of Saleh's solution was to appoint a respected jurist and
cleric, Hamoud al-Hitar, to meet with imprisoned extremists and persuade them
that Islam does not, in fact, condone acts of terrorism. When I visited al-Hitar
at his heavily guarded home in Sana one night last fall, he explained to me how
the so-called Committee on Thoughtful Dialogue works. He called it
''intellectual surgery'' and described it as a simple process: he leads radicals
through a series of questions about their beliefs, using the Koran or the
hadith, a collection of the Prophet Muhammad's teachings, to show them how they
have been misled. At the end of the program, those participants who vow not to
take part in future acts of terrorism are granted presidential pardons and set
free. To the obvious question -- Why believe that they'll honor the vow? --
Judge al-Hitar gave the obvious answer: These are men who take their ideology
seriously; they would never sign a pledge renouncing their beliefs if they
didn't mean it. A couple of years ago, President Saleh released hundreds of men
with connections to Al Qaeda under the auspices of Judge al-Hitar's dialogue
program. One of those men was Nasser al-Bahri.

Al-Bahri declined to see me for the better part of the two weeks I spent in
Yemen. Then, the night before I was scheduled to fly home, he agreed to meet me
the following evening at a relative's home in Sana. A tall, rangy man with a
receding hairline and a neatly trimmed beard, al-Bahri looked older than his 33
years. He sat on a floor cushion, his long legs extending from the bottom of his
creaseless white robe. Early in our conversation, which lasted more than five
hours, the power failed. For the rest of the night, the narrow room was
illuminated by two candles. Al-Bahri apologized for excusing himself repeatedly
to urinate, explaining that he was diabetic.

According to al-Bahri, his decision to renounce Al Qaeda and terrorism had
nothing to do with Judge al-Hitar's dialogue program, which he doubts has truly
changed any minds. Rather, he said that during his two years in prison in Yemen,
almost half of which was spent in solitary confinement, he had the chance to do
a lot of reading and thinking. He continues to believe that America is
oppressing and exploiting Muslims, but he no longer accepts that the random
murder of innocent people is a legitimate expression of jihad, which, he said,
''has its time and place, like prayer.'' There was also the issue of maturity.
''When we reach our 30's, we come to regret what we did in our 20's,'' he told
me matter-of-factly, like an ex-campus radical reflecting on a minor act of
civil disobedience in his distant past.

Al-Bahri was not eager to talk about Hamdan; because he feels responsible for
his brother-in-law's fate, he said that discussing him was too depressing. Not
surprisingly, what he did say distanced Hamdan from the military operations of
Al Qaeda. Al-Bahri described Hamdan as almost childlike, a cheerful,
simple-minded man. According to al-Bahri, Hamdan at first seemed excited about
jihad, but he lacked both the zeal of a holy warrior and the religious grounding
or inclination to grasp the ideology of the movement. As al-Bahri tells it,
Hamdan went to Tajikistan for jihad but stayed in Afghanistan because working as
a driver and mechanic in bin Laden's motor pool paid better than driving a dabab
in Sana.

If al-Bahri was quick to exonerate Hamdan, he showed no hesitation implicating
himself as a senior member of what may be the most notorious terrorist
organization the world has ever known. Al-Bahri sounded neither nostalgic nor
remorseful talking about his years as one of bin Laden's chief bodyguards; he
could have been a retired executive dispassionately recollecting his years with
the firm. Yet he was, in one sense, cautious: while he was willing to answer any
question I asked, he explicitly disassociated himself from each specific attack
that took place during his time with bin Laden.

Al-Bahri's future had come into focus as a teenager in Jidda, when he first fell
under the influence of radical Saudi clerics. ''I saw that my function was to
carry guns and defend Muslims wherever they were,'' he told me. ''That was the
holy work that would lead me to paradise.'' Having grown up in Saudi Arabia,
Islam's holiest land, he responded personally when he heard bin Laden describe
his country as an agent of the Americans and pledge to drive America from the
Arabian Peninsula. What's more, al-Bahri had left Saudi Arabia for Bosnia in the
early 90's and had been without the guidance of a religious leader ever since.
In bin Laden, al-Bahri said, he had found ''a new spiritual father.''

Al-Bahri rose quickly through the ranks of Al Qaeda. Under the alias Abu Jandal,
he helped create new training camps that bore little resemblance to the kind he
attended as a young man in Bosnia, where jihadis learned such conventional
skills as assembling and firing weapons and reading maps. The focus now was on
fighting in cities and preparing for martyrdom operations, which meant learning
how to blend in with local populations and attack civilian targets. Bin Laden
was clear about the goals. ''He would say over and over again that we must carry
out painful attacks on the United States until it becomes like an agitated
bull,'' al-Bahri recalled, ''and when the bull comes to our region, he won't be
familiar with the land, but we will.'' During the late 90's, al-Bahri fought
with the Taliban against the Northern Alliance and served as one of bin Laden's
personal bodyguards during his frequent tours of Qaeda training camps around
Afghanistan.

After the attacks on the U.S. embassies in East Africa in the summer of 1998,
al-Bahri said, bin Laden placed him in charge of the organization's guest houses
in Kabul and Kandahar, where it was his duty to help inspire and train new
recruits to undertake terrorist operations against the United States. It was at
this point, al-Bahri says, that he started having second thoughts about Al
Qaeda, not because he doubted its mission, but because he wasn't convinced these
recruits were prepared to carry it out.

Jihad, it occurred to al-Bahri, had evolved from a genuine religious mission to
a cattle call for any and all Muslims. Even years later, having renounced
terrorism, he seemed irritated by what he characterized as Al Qaeda's failures
of management. ''We were getting young people who were not committed to jihad,
also very young people, 15 or 16 years old,'' he told me. ''What could we do
with them? I said we should accept only religious young people. Only the
religious understand what jihad means. But my voice was not being heard.''
Al-Bahri told me that bin Laden knew he was becoming disillusioned, and that's
why he encouraged him and Hamdan to marry sisters in 1999; in al-Bahri's
interpretation, by tying him to Hamdan, who had fewer options and was thus less
likely to leave, bin Laden would have a better chance of keeping al-Bahri in the
fold.

During the summer of 2000, Hamdan and al-Bahri came back to Sana for a
brother-in-law's wedding. Within a matter of weeks, several Qaeda operatives in
a small boat filled with explosives rammed the U.S.S. Cole, which was on a
refueling stop in Yemen. Shortly after the attack, Yemeni intelligence agents
started rounding up suspected extremists. Al-Bahri tried to flee but was
arrested at the airport trying to return to Afghanistan. Hamdan had already
taken his wife and her parents on a pilgrimage to Mecca, and word quickly
reached him in Saudi Arabia that if he came back to Yemen he'd be picked up,
too. Instead, he went back to bin Laden, taking his wife with him.

In the wake of Sept. 11, al-Bahri told me, three F.B.I. agents came to the
prison where he was being held in Yemen to interrogate him. The transcripts from
their interviews are classified, but al-Bahri says they were mainly interested
in the structure and ideology of Al Qaeda. Asked if bin Laden had access to
chemical or nuclear weapons, al-Bahri replied that bin Laden had something far
more powerful: men who are determined to complete their covenant with God and
carry out martyrdom operations against the United States.

Detainees' lawyers estimate that there are currently about 100 Yemeni prisoners
in Guantanamo. If even a fraction of this many Americans had been imprisoned in
a foreign country for four years, the vast majority without charges, there would
be a national outcry. In Yemen, however, most of the detainees' families are
completely in the dark. Half of the people in the country are illiterate. Those
who can read find few stories about Guantanamo. Many of the papers are
state-run, and the rest are under intense pressure to toe the government line.
President Saleh knows that drawing attention to the detainees would only further
inflame anti-American sentiments and in so doing create more problems for him.

A Yemeni human rights group called HOOD has a rough list of Yemenis who are
being held at Guantanamo and has made contact with some of their relatives, but
the families are not in communication with anyone in the U.S. government. The
detainees' defense lawyers periodically come to Yemen to meet with the families
who have authorized them to represent their relatives, though in some cases the
detainees themselves doubt their American lawyers' good intentions. While I was
in Yemen, I spent several days visiting the families of detainees with David H.
Remes, a partner at the Washington firm Covington & Burling, which represents 17
of the Yemenis at Guantanamo. Remes prefaced several of his meetings by saying
that their sons, brothers or husbands would be very angry if they knew he was
there.

Hamdan, too, sent word through his lawyers that he didn't want me to contact his
family, but I was able to get in touch with his wife's brother, Muhammad
al-Qala, through HOOD. Al-Qala, a staff sergeant in the Yemeni army, invited me
to his home to meet his sister, Hamdan's wife, Um Fatima. Since her husband's
arrest, she and her two daughters have been living with her brother, his family
and their mother in a cramped two-story stone house in central Sana. Hamdan's
lawyers came to Yemen about a year and a half ago to see her, and the lawyer's
interpreter is in fairly regular contact with al-Qala, but no one whom Hamdan
left behind seems to have any real sense of the gravity of his situation or the
significance of his case: what could a superpower like the United States
possibly want with Salim?

Sitting perfectly straight on the shiny, floral-patterned blue floor cushions
that lined the small upstairs living room in her brother's home, Um Fatima spoke
for three hours through an interpreter about her husband. Al-Qala, a stocky man
with a dark mustache and glassy, expressionless eyes, sat beside her
chain-smoking Marlboros and working on a big wad of khat. Um Fatima and Hamdan's
two daughters, 6 and 4, raced in and out in T-shirts and sweatpants. Um Fatima's
full-length covering revealed only her eyes, but the difficulty of talking about
her husband was evident; several times, she became so upset that she had to
excuse herself and leave the room.

Um Fatima and Hamdan were married in Sana in 1999. She had not met him before
their wedding day but was nevertheless a happy bride. They stayed in Sana for a
few months before returning to Afghanistan. Um Fatima was reluctant to go, and
was shocked at the conditions once they arrived. Their mud-brick home had dirt
floors and no running water or electricity. It was also remote: Tarnak Farms,
the walled Qaeda complex in which they lived, was tucked into a vast expanse of
treeless desert and brush about 30 minutes outside Kandahar. Um Fatima's days
were spent alone inside the house with her infant daughter. Hamdan, she told me,
would return in the early evenings, often with clothes stained with grease from
his work fixing the various cars and trucks used on the farm. Um Fatima said she
would occasionally complain to him about their life there. ''Salim would always
tell me to be patient, that someday we would return to Yemen,'' she said.

In her telling, Um Fatima was doing hardship duty for a few years so that her
husband could earn good money working for a sheik she'd never heard of. Even
now, years later, the fact that she had lived inside the walls of a heavily
fortified Qaeda compound while her husband worked for the most infamous
terrorist of our time does not seem to have penetrated her version of reality.

Um Fatima last saw her husband on Nov. 24, 2001. She was eight months pregnant.
At the time, U.S. forces were closing in on Kandahar, the Taliban's last
stronghold in Afghanistan. Hamdan, who had been away for a couple of months with
bin Laden, had recently returned to take Um Fatima and their daughter to
Pakistan. In a borrowed car, with American B-52's circling the skies overhead,
they made their way through the Maruf mountains toward the border. Hamdan
decided to let Um Fatima cross into Pakistan alone; security was tight, and even
if the border guards had no idea that he worked for bin Laden, being a Yemeni
man trying to leave was enough to cause suspicion. He told her he would find
another way through and come find her in a few days.

Over the course of the next few weeks, as Um Fatima traveled deeper into
Pakistan in the back of a pickup truck with a group of Afghan refugees, she
gradually lost hope that she would ever see her husband again. Entering her
ninth month of pregnancy, she became so hysterical, she told me, that some
sympathetic strangers in Karachi bought her a plane ticket home. At the airport
in Sana, she was interrogated for five hours about her husband's whereabouts. Um
Fatima said she assumed he was dead.

Two and a half months later, she received a letter from him on International
Committee of the Red Cross stationery. ''My sweetheart, peace and blessings be
upon you,'' it began. ''I did not die. Allah prescribed a new life for me. Now I
am a detainee with the Americans.. . .''

Um Fatima showed me all of the letters she has received from Hamdan since then.
Later that night, the interpreter who read the dozen or so letters to me told me
how unusual they were. Yemeni men tend to be commanding and aloof with their
wives. Hamdan's letters were emotive, like those of a longing schoolboy. There
are drawings of his dagger (''please take care of my jambiya for me''), simple
poems (''the bird danced and the bird sang. . .'') and the promise to ''see each
other very, very, very, very, very soon, God willing.''

In a three-page military order issued on Nov. 13, 2001, President Bush
authorized the special tribunals before which Salim Hamdan and other
non-American enemy combatants are to be tried. The trials will held in
Guantanamo before panels of three to seven military officers selected by an
administration appointee. Two-thirds of a majority will be required for
non-death-penalty convictions. (A death sentence requires unanimity.) These are
war-crimes tribunals, though unlike the recent international tribunals in Rwanda
and the former Yugoslavia, the list of offenses pertain to acts of terrorism
rather than genocide.

The administration opted for these special tribunals over the U.S. criminal
courts for a number of practical reasons. Broadly speaking, certain rights that
would be considered fundamental in a civilian court wouldn't apply. If
defendants were suspected terrorists, for instance, they couldn't very well be
permitted to see all the evidence against them as some of it would no doubt be
classified for national-security reasons.

Practical considerations aside, the creation of the nation's first war-crimes
tribunals since World War II sent a symbolic message, putting the war against
Islamic extremism in the same class as the war against Nazism. Moreover, the
tribunals fit with the Bush administration's larger strategy to reassert and
expand presidential authority in the aftermath of 9/11. The executive branch
would have complete control. Not only was Congress -- the body empowered by the
Constitution to convene military tribunals -- left out of the decision to
establish them, but it also wasn't consulted on how the tribunals would work.
Instead, the administration's lawyers wrote all of the rules, from the
composition of the panels to the standards for admissible evidence to the
definition of a war crime. The judiciary branch was also cut out of the process:
contested verdicts would be reviewed not by a federal court of appeals but by a
three-member panel picked by Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld.

The first batch of defendants for the tribunals, Hamdan and three others, were
carefully selected and then repeatedly vetted on their journey up the chain of
command. Case summaries were passed from the military lawyers assigned to the
prosecution team to the Pentagon's adviser for the tribunals to Paul D.
Wolfowitz, then deputy defense secretary, to President Bush. Hamdan was
originally slated to be the first Arab tried.

While the government has not accused Hamdan of being a member of Al Qaeda per
se, it does say that he picked up and delivered weapons for use by Qaeda
associates, trained at a Qaeda camp and served as a bodyguard and driver for bin
Laden. The formal charge being brought against him is conspiracy, which the
administration defines as having ''joined an enterprise of persons who shared a
common criminal purpose.'' In a sense, the conspiracy charge is a logical one
for prosecuting members of organizations like Al Qaeda that deliberately
subdivide tasks and inform very few people about operations. ''To capture the
nature of some enterprises, to deconstruct what makes them effective, you have
to focus on the different kinds of contributions, from the target spotter to the
weapons transporter to the financier,'' says Ruth Wedgwood, a law professor at
Johns Hopkins who helped the Pentagon revise some of the rules for the
tribunals.

In the U.S. criminal courts, conspiracy is especially popular among prosecutors
going after organized-crime rings; it gives them leverage to lean on foot
soldiers to testify against their superiors. In the context of war-crimes
tribunals, however, conspiracy becomes more complicated. Because it can be
applied to people at every level, it can create a moral equivalence between
low-level players and leaders. This very issue came up at Nuremberg, when an
assistant attorney general in the Roosevelt administration attacked a Pentagon
proposal to file conspiracy charges against German foot soldiers because it
might, in the world's eyes, weaken the impact of the charges against the Nazi
leaders. (The proposal was never adopted.) What's more, because conspiracy is
such a broad, catch-all charge, it's an easy one for prosecutors to fall back on
when their proof of guilt is thin. The U.S. criminal-court system has numerous
protections against this -- jury trials, judges who are insulated from politics,
access to an independent court of appeals -- most of which are absent from the
tribunals. ''In the American criminal system, we can have a conspiracy doctrine
because we have this unique set of vibrant protections,'' says Neal Katyal, a
Georgetown law professor, the architect of Hamdan's lawsuit against the Bush
administration and a champion of the conspiracy charge in the criminal context.
''But when it comes to war-crimes trials, the international consensus is that
conspiracy is a no-no. When the U.S. Congress itself defined war crimes in two
statutes in 1996 and 1997, it didn't include conspiracy.''

Brig. Gen. Thomas L. Hemingway, an Air Force judge advocate general who is
currently serving as the Pentagon's adviser on the tribunals, wouldn't discuss
the government's evidence against Hamdan other than to point out that the
prosecution has already given the defense 18,000 pages of discovery, including
incriminating photographs and summaries of Hamdan's numerous statements to
interrogators. ''You want a one-word characterization of the case against
Hamdan?'' General Hemingway asked me. ''Solid.''

The government is certainly aware that the first trials will be closely
scrutinized, and it seems improbable that it would choose a case that wasn't
airtight. Hamdan's story also has narrative appeal. Unlike the vast majority of
enemy combatants, who came to Afghanistan with the cresting wave of jihadis
after 1999, he worked for bin Laden from 1996 until his capture in November
2001, a stretch of time that spanned not just 9/11 but also the 1998 attacks on
two U.S. embassies in East Africa and the 2000 bombing of the U.S.S. Cole. And
while many jihadis never even met bin Laden, Hamdan has not disputed working
directly for him. A skilled prosecutor could turn his trial into the history of
Al Qaeda's decade-long war against America and in so doing illuminate the nature
of our enemy; the tribunals will be open to the press, except for when
classified evidence is presented. Whatever evidence the government may have
against Hamdan, it's hard to believe he could have worked for bin Laden for five
years, through several high-profile terrorist attacks, without the knowledge of
Al Qaeda's intentions or bin Laden's trust. And given that he has admitted to
being a driver, the progression to transporting weapons is hardly a leap.

Yet it seems clear that Hamdan was not a high-ranking officer of Al Qaeda. By
the time the United States decided to try him in 2003, there were certainly
people in custody suspected of more serious crimes. Why not prosecute the more
heinous offenders first? The government won't discuss how it settled on Hamdan,
but it's easy to make some logical inferences. It stands to reason that the more
hard-core the suspected terrorist, the more useful the information he possessed.
The government may not have been done questioning the ''highest value''
detainees when it decided to issue its first indictments. (Hamdan's once-regular
interrogations, which started almost immediately after his arrest and continued
for the better part of two years, ceased in early 2004, shortly before the
government announced that he'd been selected for trial.) The United States was
also entering uncharted waters with the tribunals; terrorism is not yet codified
as a war crime in international law. It's possible that the government wanted to
wait to try its most prized detainees until it had the opportunity to test its
legal theories on smaller players.

The treatment of the prisoners may have been a factor as well. Lawyers for the
administration had long since built their legal defense of coercive
interrogations. Nevertheless, for the first tribunals the government may have
wanted ''clean'' -- as in not mistreated or tortured -- defendants, both to
avoid embarrassment and to prevent issues about the veracity of their statements
to interrogators. This, however, is not a point that Hamdan's lawyers intend to
concede. Hamdan has already implied in an affidavit that some of his statements
were coerced. He says he was punched and kicked after failing to answer certain
questions, and that one of his interrogators placed a pistol on the table
between them during their sessions.

In late November, a few weeks after the Supreme Court agreed to hear Hamdan v.
Rumsfeld, Hamdan was moved from his regular cellblock in Camp Delta to a
separate, smaller cellblock called Tango. When his lawyers learned about the
development in early December, they were not pleased. Not only had Hamdan's
relocation violated the explicit order of a federal judge that he be kept among
the general population at Delta, but he also would be right next to Ali Hamza
Ahmed Sulayman al-Bahlul, a supposed Qaeda propagandist with a reputation for
turning other detainees against their U.S. attorneys. ''He's getting put with a
known advocate for firing lawyers -- against a federal order -- and I don't even
get told about it?'' Katyal's co-counsel, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Charles Swift, told me
after Hamdan's move. Swift and Katyal promptly filed an emergency motion to have
their client returned to a normal cellblock, and the authorities at Guantanamo
complied.

Many detainees assume that their lawyers are American spies, a suspicion fed by
the fact that nearly every document or letter that they bring in or take out of
the camp has to pass through military censors. Hamdan's lawyers say they have a
good relationship with him; still, they worry about losing him to what they
consider to be the prison's more radical element. So while Katyal plots strategy
from his office near Capitol Hill in Georgetown, Swift, a voluble,
boyish-looking 44-year-old Navy JAG, shuttles back and forth to Guantanamo Bay
with their interpreter, Charles Schmitz, a soft-spoken professor of geography
and an expert in Yemeni culture, to reassure their client that they are on his
side and to persuade him to have faith in a legal system that he doesn't
understand.

It was hard enough for Swift, who was appointed by the government, to earn
Hamdan's confidence when he first started meeting with him -- in his Navy
uniform -- in early 2004; he now finds himself having to constantly earn it
back. As the indefinite detentions of hundreds of Muslim men, many of whom were
already predisposed to Islamic extremism, enters its fifth year, Guantanamo is
turning into an anti-American hothouse. For the government, the radicalization
of Guantanamo is a complicated issue. The main form of protest in the camps is
the hunger strike, and a prisoner's starving himself to death would turn
Guantanamo, already a public-relations problem, into a full-scale disaster. (As
of Dec. 30, more than 30 detainees had been hospitalized and were being
force-fed.) Radicalization also undermines one of the principal goals of
imprisonment: deterrence. As Guantanamo's critics like to say, ''If you weren't
a terrorist when you went in, you will be when you're let out.''

But radicalization has its advantages for the Bush administration too. Last
summer, some detainees told their American lawyers that they would no longer
meet with them, and a number went so far as to formally fire them. The
government considers the legions of adversarial defense attorneys working pro
bono for the detainees -- from corporate lawyers to human-rights lawyers to law
professors -- to be an impediment to their ability to prosecute the war on
terror. Among other things, the lawyers have filed hundreds of habeas corpus
petitions in order to challenge their clients' continued detention without
recourse.

More broadly, radicalization helps validate Guantanamo's existence. The more
anti-American the detainees become, the greater the danger they pose and thus
the more necessary it is to continue to detain them. So when Swift first heard
about the decision to move Hamdan next to al-Bahul, he wondered whether it
wasn't deliberate. ''If they succeed in radicalizing Salim,'' he said, ''then
they've justified his trial.'' (The Pentagon would not comment on why an
individual detainee might have been moved.)

Last August, Hamdan joined a prisonwide hunger strike to protest the conditions
on Guantanamo. The detainees' numerous demands included the return of religious
books that had been taken from them. When Swift next visited Hamdan in late
August, he found him unusually intransigent. For two days, Hamdan refused to
meet with him altogether. Not long after Swift returned home to Northern
Virginia, he got a call from another lawyer at Guantanamo informing him that
Hamdan, a slight man to begin with, had passed out from dehydration in his cell
and was taken to the medical clinic at Delta and put on an IV drip. Swift flew
back down to Guantanamo Bay almost immediately and managed to persuade Hamdan to
start eating again by appealing to the same sense of solidarity that he says
prompted him to join the strike in the first place. The best way to help his
fellow detainees, Swift told him, was not to martyr himself but to follow
through on their challenge to the system.

Like the government, Hamdan's lawyers also see him as much more than a detainee;
to them, he represents the pretext for a historic and unconstitutional
presidential power grab. As Hamdan's lawyers and other critics see it, the
administration, by unilaterally creating the tribunals, defining the offenses
and handpicking the panels, is not only denying detainees fair trials, it is
also violating bedrock principles of the American government. To put an even
finer point on it, they say the Bush administration is undermining the very
values it purports to be defending in its war against Islamic extremism. They
would like to see Hamdan and other enemy combatants tried before a traditional
military court, a pre-existing legal system approved by Congress with built-in
provisions for the complications that arise during wartime.

Katyal, who served as Vice President Gore's co-counsel in the suit over the 2000
election, draws a sharp distinction between waging war, an act over which the
president should have broad authority, and meting out justice. And so, working
at his own expense with research support from a loose network of law students
from Georgetown, Yale and the University of Michigan along with attorneys from
the law firm Perkins Coie, Katyal has written more than a thousand pages of
briefs arguing that the president has neither the authority to create the
tribunals without explicit Congressional approval nor the right to deny Hamdan
status as a prisoner of war, and in so doing strip him of protections guaranteed
by the Geneva Conventions. ''The Geneva Conventions were written precisely to
make it difficult for political leaders facing political pressure to suspend
basic rights and P.O.W. protections,'' Katyal says. ''The moment we let a
president say he can determine whether someone is a prisoner of war, other
countries are going to start doing it back to us.''

Katyal's arguments found traction in federal court in Washington in the fall of
2004. Just as Hamdan's second round of preliminary hearings were getting under
way at Guantanamo, Judge James Robertson, a former Naval officer, ruled in his
favor, declaring the tribunals illegal and abruptly halting the proceedings 30
minutes after they had begun. In July 2005, however, a three-judge appeals panel
that included John G. Roberts Jr., now chief justice of the Supreme Court,
overturned the decision. Katyal and Swift petitioned the Supreme Court for
review, and in November, after delaying action on the case for several weeks,
the court announced that it would hear Hamdan v. Rumsfeld.

This was not the final word, though. No sooner had the Supreme Court agreed to
consider Hamdan's case than a Republican senator from South Carolina, Lindsey
Graham, introduced a last-minute amendment to a defense-authorization bill
explicitly denying all Guantanamo detainees habeas corpus rights, or access to
the U.S. federal courts. This had been the administration's intent from the
moment it started sketching out its legal strategy in the war on terror in the
aftermath of 9/11, but the last time the issue came before the Supreme Court, in
the spring of 2004 in another detainee case, the court ruled against the
president (with a loud dissent from Justice Scalia). Now Graham was effectively
interceding on the administration's behalf in what amounted to an end run around
the Supreme Court.

Days later, however, Senator Carl Levin, a Michigan Democrat, persuaded Graham
to change the wording of the amendment so that it would not derail pending
cases, including Hamdan v. Rumsfeld. It has since passed both the House and the
Senate and at press time awaited the president's signature.

What about the hundreds of detainees who have not yet filed suits protesting
their imprisonments? Aside from trial or continuing detention, the only option
for the United States is to send them back to their respective nations. To date,
it has released about 260 men, including a handful of Yemenis, all of whom
remain in prison in Yemen, no doubt at the behest of the Bush administration.
But Yemen is an unpredictable ally. In November, the United States suspended it
from an aid program worth hundreds of millions of dollars, citing enduring
governmental corruption, fiscal irresponsibility and the failure to enact
democratic reform. Meanwhile, Islamic fundamentalism continues to gather
strength in Yemen. Recently, three of the country's best-known extremists,
including al-Zindani, one of bin Laden's spiritual mentors, called for a new
coalition dedicated to confronting Islam's enemies and promoting Muslim values.
The ongoing detention of 100 Yemenis at Guantanamo Bay may only help their cause
and increase their leverage with President Saleh. So the United States finds
itself trapped between two unappealing choices: hold these men as the
potentially endless war against terrorism goes on, or return them to a breeding
ground for Islamic radicalism in Yemen.

For his part, Hamdan's immediate concerns have more to do with day-to-day life
at Guantanamo Bay -- how much time detainees are permitted to exercise and at
what time of day, what books they are allowed to read, what comfort items they
are allowed to keep in their cells -- than with the future of his historic
lawsuit against the United States government. As Schmitz, his interpreter, told
me recently, ''The most important thing to him is what we can deliver in the
camp, and that is zip.''

Shortly after the Supreme Court agreed to hear Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, Swift visited
Hamdan's cell armed with several front-page newspaper articles about the
development. When Swift delivered the news, Hamdan smiled. Within a matter of
minutes, though, his mood had visibly darkened, Swift says. Then Hamdan asked
him, ''What is this exactly that I've won?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Breeding Ground of Jihad: Poverty and piety in the Old City
of Sana, Yemen.
Um Fatima, Hamdan's wife, with a photo of her husband and daughter before he was
seized by the U.S.
Nasser al-Bahri, who brought Hamdan to bin Laden, today in Yemen. He now says he
opposes terrorism.
 Members of HOOD, a Yemeni human rights group, one of the few information
sources for families of detainees. (Photographs by Brent Stirton/Getty Images,
for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
AL-QAEDA (90%); TERRORISM (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); FAMILY (77%);
TALIBAN (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); MIDDLE INCOME PERSONS (72%); ROOMING &
BOARDING HOUSES (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%); FUNDRAISING (71%); QURAN &
ISLAMIC TEXTS (70%); ORPHANS (68%); ARMED FORCES (60%) Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group); Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%) Jonathan Mahler; Salim Ahmed Hamdan; Osama Bin
Laden; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: JALALABAD, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: YEMEN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); TAJIKISTAN (93%);
SAUDI ARABIA (87%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); GULF STATES (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             263 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

British Role In U.S. Policy On Detainees Raises Storm

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 730 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 19


The British government may have permitted the use of its airspace and airports
for clandestine American transportation of foreign prisoners more frequently
than it initially acknowledged, according to a leaked document published
Thursday in two British publications.

The document -- a memo said to have been written around Dec. 7 by a Foreign
Office official, Irfan Siddiq, to Grace Cassy, an official in the office of
Prime Minister Tony Blair -- seems likely to deepen concerns across Europe about
the extent of the flights, operated by the Central Intelligence Agency.

Britain denies authorizing the use of its airspace or airports in recent years
for what Washington calls extraordinary rendition, in which the prisoners are
taken, without court approval, to third countries, where human rights groups say
they might face torture or what Britain calls ''cruel, inhuman and degrading''
treatment.

On Dec. 12, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw told lawmakers in the House of Commons
that officials had discovered evidence of two instances in which Britain had
authorized American rendition flights. Both were before the Sept. 11, 2001,
attacks, he said. On Thursday, a government spokesman said Mr. Straw's statement
on Dec. 12 had been ''comprehensive.''

''Anything we do in relation to rendition is in compliance with our
international obligations,'' the spokesman said. ''We fulfill our legal
obligations. This is a classic case where people have got overexcited by getting
a leaked memo, rather than actually reading the content of it.'' He did not deny
its authenticity.

The memo, published in The New Statesman magazine and a newspaper, The Guardian,
was quoted as saying: ''We should try to avoid getting drawn on detail, at least
until we have been able to complete the substantial research required to
establish what has happened even since 1997 -- and to try to move the debate
on.''

''The papers we have unearthed so far suggest there could be more such cases,''
it read, adding: ''The Home Office, who lead, are urgently examining their
files, as are we. But we now cannot say that we have received no such requests
for the use of U.K. territory or airspace for extraordinary rendition.''

The document was apparently intended as advice to the prime minister's office on
how to handle lawmakers' inquiries about the flights.

In the memo, Mr. Siddiq urged the government to refer questioners to ''the
strong antiterrorist rationale for close cooperation with the U.S., within our
legal obligations.''

The document said that rendition -- the extrajudicial transfer of prisoners to
their home country or to American jurisdiction -- as well as extraordinary
rendition to a third country, might be illegal.

''In the most common use of the term -- i.e., involving real risk of torture --
it could never be legal, because this is clearly prohibited by the U.N.
Convention Against Torture,'' the document said.

''It does remain true that we are not aware of the use of U.K. territory or
airspace for the purposes of extraordinary rendition,'' it continued. ''But we
think we should now try to move the debate on from the specifics of rendition --
extraordinary or otherwise -- and focus people instead'' on American assurances
''that U.S. activities are consistent with their domestic and international
obligations and never include the use of torture.''

Last month, responding to a report that the C.I.A. had a network of secret
prisons across Eastern Europe, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice said the
United States did not transport people overseas for torture.

Publication of the British document on Thursday inspired calls for Foreign
Secretary Straw to return to Parliament to explain what Nick Clegg, a spokesman
for the Liberal Democratic Party, called ''months of government obfuscation and
inconsistency on extraordinary rendition.''

The government ruled out a full parliamentary debate.

A spokesman at the Foreign Office said, ''The foreign secretary has made clear
we have not approved and will not approve a policy of facilitating the transfer
of individuals through the U.K. to places where there are substantial grounds to
believe they would face a real risk of torture.''

But Tony Lloyd, a former Foreign Office minister from Mr. Blair's Labor Party,
told BBC radio that Britain should avoid future cooperation with the United
States on renditions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%);
TORTURE (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); BRITISH
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (70%); APPROVALS (70%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (70%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(69%); TERRORISM (67%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (55%)

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (57%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (78%); JACK STRAW (73%) Alan Cowell; Tony (Prime Min) Blair

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (95%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             265 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 1, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Palestinians Debate Shades of Islamic Law

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER; Greg Myre contributed reporting from Gaza for this
article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1014 words

DATELINE: TAYBEH, West Bank, Jan. 30


This is a village of three churches, a brewer of very good beer, and no small
fear -- if not yet full panic -- about what it means now that Hamas, the radical
Islamic party, is in control of Palestinian politics.

''If the whole world and our president are afraid, do you think that we are
not?'' asked Nima Samaan, 62, a Christian Arab, referring to the current, and
secular, Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas.

There is no certain answer to the question asked apprehensively around the West
Bank and Gaza since Hamas swept the parliamentary elections last week: To what
extent -- by law or by social pressure -- will Hamas impose its strong religious
beliefs?

So far Hamas leaders, seeking to calm both Palestinians and an anxious outside
world, have projected moderation. They say they will not impose on the
Palestinians' diverse society any form of Islamic rule.

''You cannot force people to do what they do not want to do,'' said Sheik Fadil
Saleh, 53, a former imam who won a seat in Ramallah for Hamas. ''In the Koran it
is said: No force in religion.''

Given Hamas's roots in the wider Islamic movement, the pledge is not entirely
convincing for many in the tiny and dwindling Christian population, or among
secularists and observant Muslims who want a more secular state.

The worry is not just about more visible signs of Islamization, like bans on
alcohol and the use of head scarves by women. It is also about satellite
television, school curriculums, divorce, banking, even Palestinian folk dancing
in which women and men dance together.

''I do trust the wisdom of the leadership of Hamas,'' said Raji Sourani, a
secular lawyer who directs the Palestinian Center for Human Rights in Gaza.
''It's not the Taliban.''

But the distrust of Hamas's intentions surfaces in jokes (about Hamas traffic
police handing out tickets, not for speeding but for violations of Muslim rules
on purity), no less than in the tension between Hamas and Fatah, the more
secular party, which was ousted in the elections as being corrupt and
inefficient.

''We don't want the rule of mullahs in Palestine,'' Jibril Rajoub, national
security adviser to President Abbas, told Fatah supporters last week.

Still, some people here seem warily willing to take Hamas at its word, if only
for lack of good options.

''Hamas has more important things to worry about than beer,'' said Muni Dahlal,
a 50-year-old Christian here, who had just plucked from a shop refrigerator four
cold bottles of Amstel.

Mr. Dahlal did not vote for Hamas, but said he would support the party if it
made good on its main campaign promise, not to promote Islam but to improve the
lives of Palestinians.

This mostly Christian village, where Hamas nonetheless won a handful of votes,
shows just one of thousands of problems: Taybeh Beer, one of the finest in the
Arab world, is brewed here.

Since its founding in 1987, Hamas has been an explicitly Islamic organization.
Its slogan then was, ''The Koran is our Constitution,'' and as Hamas gained
power in the late 1980's, both through fighting Israel and with well-organized
social programs, adherence to Islam unquestionably increased.

In the first moments of victory, conflicting signals seemed to issue from Hamas
members: Several were quoted as saying they would explore Islamic programs, from
greater segregation of boys and girls in school to mandating head scarves, or
hijabs.

Those members have since said they were misquoted. At any rate, since those
first hours when power began flowing to Hamas, its message has quickly shifted
into unambiguous discipline.

''Our principles are known, and we are willing to discuss them with anybody,''
said Mariam Marjan Saleh, a professor of Islamic law at Al Quds University in
Jerusalem and a newly elected Hamas legislator. ''But people are free to decide
whether they want to accept it or not.''

She said, in fact, that Hamas would prove finally that Islam and democracy are
not opposing ideas.

''God willing, we will show the world a good model,'' she said. ''We will prove
to everyone that Islam and Muslims are the ones who have civilization. Our
religion is a religion of freedom and democracy.''

On women's rights, Sheik Saleh, the former imam, noted that two of his daughters
had graduated from college and a third was now in college studying public
administration. He said that banning alcohol was ''not even in our minds,'' and
that Hamas would focus rather on governing well, fighting corruption and working
for a just solution with Israel.

But some Hamas members have also made it clear that their ultimate goal is an
Islamic state -- not forced, they say, but one that Palestinians, as observant
Muslims, will one day demand on their own.

To critics of Hamas, this is a fundamental worry.

There have been a few public instances of Hamas members making decisions based
on religion. Last summer, the Hamas mayor of Qalqilya, on the West Bank, banned
an outdoor concert because of concerns about men and women mixing.

But mostly, critics say, the pressure has been more social -- encouraged but not
ordered by Hamas.

In Gaza, poorer and more observant than the West Bank, it is nearly impossible
now to buy alcohol. The last public bar, the United Nations club, open mostly to
foreigners, was destroyed by a bomb on Jan. 1.

''In Gaza, any woman who doesn't wear a hijab -- it is the people who criticize,
not Hamas,'' said Muhanad Abdelhamid, a newspaper columnist.

In the end, many Palestinians, even devout Muslims, said they believed Hamas
understood that it was elected to bring to government honesty and strength, not
Islamic rule.

Bahiega Isiefan, 19, a student at Al Quds University who wears a head scarf,
said her mother was worrying last weekend that one son about to be married would
not be allowed, under the new Hamas leadership, to have a wedding with music.
Ms. Isiefan said she could not believe Hamas would risk its new power so
recklessly.

''We are Muslims, we respect Islam,'' she said. ''But we don't want things to
get complicated by religious fanaticism.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hamas's victory causes Palestinians who might prefer pantsuits
to worry they will be wearing head scarves. (Photo by Rina Castelnuovo for The
New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (99%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%);
HAMAS (91%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); BEER & ALE (90%); ELECTIONS (89%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); AL FATAH (77%); POLITICS
(77%); WOMEN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); BANKING & FINANCE (75%);
CHURCH & STATE (73%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (72%); CURRICULA (72%); TALIBAN
(72%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (50%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Islam; Palestinians;
Christians and Christianity

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) Hamas

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (57%) Ian Fisher

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (94%)

REGION: Israel; Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             269 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 20, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Senior Lawyer At Pentagon Broke Ranks On Detainees

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 744 words


One of the Pentagon's top civilian lawyers repeatedly challenged the Bush
administration's policy on the coercive interrogation of terror suspects,
arguing that such practices violated the law, verged on torture and could
ultimately expose senior officials to prosecution, a newly disclosed document
shows.

The lawyer, Alberto J. Mora, a Republican appointee who retired last month after
more than four years as general counsel of the Navy, was one of many dissenters
inside the Pentagon. Senior uniformed lawyers in all the military services also
objected sharply to the interrogation policy, according to internal documents
declassified last year.

But Mr. Mora's campaign against what he viewed as an official policy of cruel
treatment, detailed in a memorandum he wrote in July 2004 and recounted in an
article in the Feb. 27 issue of The New Yorker magazine, made public yesterday,
underscored again how contrary views were often brushed aside in administration
debates on the subject.

''Even if one wanted to authorize the U.S. military to conduct coercive
interrogations, as was the case in Guantanamo, how could one do so without
profoundly altering its core values and character?'' Mr. Mora asked the
Pentagon's chief lawyer, William J. Haynes II, according to the memorandum.

A Pentagon spokeswoman, Lt. Col. Tracy O'Grady-Walsh, declined to comment late
yesterday on specific accusations in Mr. Mora's memorandum. ''Detainee
operations and interrogation policies have been scrutinized under a microscope,
from all different angles,'' she said. ''It was found that it was not a
Department of Defense policy to encourage or condone torture.''

In interviews, current and former Defense Department officials said that part of
what was striking about Mr. Mora's forceful role in the internal debates was how
out of character it seemed: a loyal Republican, he was known as a supporter of
President Bush, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld and the fight against
terrorism.

''He's an extremely well-spoken, almost elegant guy,'' the former director of
the Naval Criminal Investigative Service, David L. Brandt, who first came to Mr.
Mora with concerns about the interrogation methods, said in an interview last
week. ''He's not a door-kicker.''

Mr. Mora is also known for generally avoiding public attention. Reached by
telephone yesterday, he declined to comment further on his memorandum.

Mr. Mora prepared the 22-page memorandum for a Defense Department review of
interrogation operations that was conducted by Vice Adm. Albert T. Church III,
after the scandal involving treatment of prisoners at the Abu Ghraib prison in
Iraq.

The document focused on Mr. Mora's successful opposition to the coercive
techniques that Mr. Rumsfeld approved for interrogators at Guantanamo Bay on
Dec. 2, 2002, and Mr. Mora's subsequent, failed effort to influence the legal
discussions that led to new methods approved by Mr. Rumsfeld the following
April.

Mr. Mora took up the issue after Mr. Brandt came to him on Dec. 17, 2002, to
relay the concerns of Navy criminal agents at Guantanamo that some detainees
there were being subjected to ''physical abuse and degrading treatment'' by
interrogators.

Acting with the support of Gordon R. England, who was then secretary of the Navy
and is now Mr. Rumsfeld's deputy, Mr. Mora took his concerns to Mr. Haynes, the
Defense Department's general counsel.

''In my view, some of the authorized interrogation techniques could rise to the
level of torture, although the intent surely had not been to do so,'' Mr. Mora
wrote.

After trying to rally other senior officials to his position, Mr. Mora met again
with Mr. Haynes on Jan. 10, 2003. He argued his case even more forcefully,
raising the possibility that senior officials could be prosecuted for
authorizing abusive conduct, and asking: ''Had we jettisoned our human rights
policies?''

Still, Mr. Mora wrote, it was only when he warned Mr. Haynes on Jan. 15 that he
was planning to issue a formal memorandum on his opposition to the methods --
delivering a draft to Mr. Haynes's office -- that Mr. Rumsfeld suddenly
retracted the techniques.

In a break from standard practice, former Pentagon lawyers said, the final draft
of the report on interrogation techniques was not circulated to most of the
lawyers, including Mr. Mora, who had contributed to it. Several of them said
they learned that a final version had been issued only after the Abu Ghraib
scandal broke.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (93%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%);
TORTURE (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (76%); CORPORATE COUNSEL (73%);
PRISONS (72%); CORRECTIONS (65%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Torture;
United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Tim Golden; Alberto J Mora; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (79%); CUBA (70%)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             271 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Helping the Sudanese

SECTION: Section 3; Column 6; Money and Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 92 words



To the Editor:

''How States Are Aiming to Keep Dollars Out of Sudan'' (Feb. 19) raised the
complex question about how to best help the Sudanese.

Abandonment of all business ties to the country would mean abandoning some of
the poorest people in Africa. Seeing how so many of our sanctions have not
changed policies in other countries, like Cuba, what convinces us that they will
help to end Sudan's two-decade-long civil war? Perhaps the more constructive
method lies in using these business ties as a bargaining chip.

Payal D. Patel
Portland, Me., Feb. 21

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); GENOCIDE (86%); PERSONAL FINANCE (86%); PENSION & RETIREMENT PLANS (86%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAR CRIMES (85%); CIVIL WAR (85%) Law and
Legislation; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; Pensions and Retirement Plans; Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Payal D Patel

CITY: PORTLAND, ME, USA (50%)

STATE: OREGON, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); MAINE, USA (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; California; New Jersey; Louisiana; Oregon

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             274 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              March 5, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Judge to Rule Whether Confession in Israel Can Be Used

BYLINE: By GRETCHEN RUETHLING

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO, March 4


A federal judge heard arguments on Friday about whether a confession made to
Israeli security agents by an American citizen could be used in a trial in which
he is accused of laundering money for Hamas to finance terrorist acts.

The defendant, Muhammad Hamid Khalil Salah, 52, is one of three men indicted by
a federal grand jury in a racketeering conspiracy in 2004. They are accused of
laundering millions of dollars for Hamas over a 15-year period.

Mr. Salah, of Bridgeview, Ill., a Chicago suburb, says he was physically and
psychologically tortured into confessing. He was arrested in 1993 when he was
crossing into Israel from Gaza and later pleaded guilty to funneling money to
Hamas. He was in prison there until 1997 and then returned to the United States.

In the pretrial hearing over the next two weeks, Israeli security agents are
scheduled to testify about the interrogation of Mr. Salah.

Judge Amy J. St. Eve, who is presiding over the case, ordered part of the
hearing to be closed because of security concerns, despite protests by Mr.
Salah's lawyers, The Chicago Tribune, and civil rights and Arab-American groups.

Federal prosecutors say Mr. Salah is a high-ranking member of Hamas, a claim the
defense calls absurd. Mr. Salah says he was in the Middle East to provide
humanitarian aide for Palestinians when he was arrested.

''Mr. Salah has always been a liar,'' Joseph Ferguson, an assistant United
States attorney, said in court. ''He was calculating. He was strategic. He was a
self-determining player.''

Mr. Ferguson said Mr. Salah had voluntarily confessed and had played a ''cat and
mouse'' game with Israeli interrogators after his arrest by lying and changing
his accounts.

Mr. Salah said nothing about being mistreated when he met with United States
consular officials in the weeks after his arrest, Mr. Ferguson said. He said Mr.
Salah's claims of torture were fabricated and had escalated over time, and he
dismissed them as a publicity stunt.

''This is not a hearing about Israel and its interrogation practices,'' Mr.
Ferguson said.

But Michael E. Deutsch, a lawyer for Mr. Salah, said his client had changed his
accounts and signed confessions because he feared for his life. ''He's
desperate, and he's trying anything to stop what's going on,'' Mr. Deutsch said.
''He gave them what they told him they wanted.''

Mr. Deutsch said the torture tactics that Mr. Salah said were used against him
had been documented by human rights groups as being standard practice at the
time by Israeli security agents.

The government's effort to use the confession was ''nothing more than post-9/11
political propaganda to give the impression that we are fighting terrorism,''
Mr. Deutsch said.

Michael Greenberger, a law professor at the University of Maryland who is the
director of its Center for Health and Homeland Security, said the debate over
the confession sounded similar to the case of an Arab-American student from
Virginia who was convicted last year in federal court on charges of conspiracy
to commit acts of terrorism. In that case, the defendant claimed that security
forces in Saudi Arabia had tortured him into confessing. The judge allowed the
confession.

''These cases are by and large very rare,'' Mr. Greenberger said of the use in
United States courts of confessions obtained in foreign prisons. ''For the
United States, these cases are proving to be big victories for them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); HAMAS (91%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MONEY LAUNDERING (90%); ARRESTS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); LAWYERS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CONSPIRACY (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%);
ARAB AMERICANS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); GRAND JURY (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (62%) Terrorism; Money Laundering; United States International
Relations; Racketeering and Racketeers; Security and Warning Systems;
Confessions

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) Hamas

PERSON: Gretchen Ruethling; Amy J (Judge) St Eve; Muhammad Hamid Khalil Salah

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (88%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (88%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); UNITED STATES (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             275 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cited as Symbol of Abu Ghraib, Man Admits He Is Not in Photo

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE; Hassan M. Fattah contributed reporting from Beirut for
this article, Eric Schmitt from Washington and employees of The New York Times
from Iraq.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: DETAINEES;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1559 words


In the summer of 2004, a group of former detainees of Abu Ghraib prison filed a
lawsuit claiming that they had been the victims of the abuse captured in
photographs that incited outrage around the world.

One, Ali Shalal Qaissi, soon emerged as their chief representative, appearing in
publications and on television in several countries to detail his suffering. His
prominence made sense, because he claimed to be the man in the photograph that
had become the international icon of the Abu Ghraib scandal: standing on a
cardboard box, hooded, with wires attached to his outstretched arms. He had even
emblazoned the silhouette of that image on business cards.

The trouble was, the man in the photograph was not Mr. Qaissi. [Editors' Note,
Page A2.]

Military investigators had identified the man on the box as a different detainee
who had described the episode in a sworn statement immediately after the
photographs were discovered in January 2004, but then the man seemed to go
silent.

Mr. Qaissi had energetically filled the void, traveling abroad with slide shows
to argue that abuse in Iraq continued, as head of a group he called the
Association of Victims of American Occupation Prisons.

The New York Times profiled him last Saturday in a front-page article; in it,
Mr. Qaissi insisted he had never sought the fame of his iconic status. Mr.
Qaissi had been interviewed on a number of earlier occasions, including by PBS's
''Now,'' Vanity Fair, Der Spiegel and in the Italian news media as the man on
the box.

This week, after the online magazine Salon raised questions about the identity
of the man in the photograph, Mr. Qaissi and his lawyers insisted he was telling
the truth.

Certainly, he was at Abu Ghraib, and appears with a hood over his head in some
photographs that Army investigators seized from the computer belonging to
Specialist Charles Graner, the soldier later convicted of being the ringleader
of the abuse.

However, he now acknowledges he is not the man in the specific photograph he
printed and held up in a portrait that accompanied the Times article. But he and
his lawyers maintain that he was photographed in a similar position and shocked
with wires and that he is the one on his business card. The Army says it
believes only one prisoner was treated in that way.

''I know one thing,'' Mr. Qaissi said yesterday, breaking down in tears when
reached by telephone. ''I wore that blanket, I stood on that box, and I was
wired up and electrocuted.''

Susan Burke, a lawyer in Philadelphia who is representing Mr. Qaissi and other
former prisoners in a lawsuit against civilian interrogators and translators at
Abu Ghraib, said that Mr. Qaissi had been abused in the same way as the man in
the photo. ''The sad fact is that there is not only one man on the box,'' she
said.

Using a name that Mr. Qaissi is often called, she said, ''Haj Ali is but one of
many victims of the torture by Graner and the others.''

In the interview for the article, Mr. Qaissi pointed to his deformed hand and
said it matched the hand in the photograph. A close look at the photograph,
however, is inconclusive.

Whether he was forced to stand on a box and photographed is not clear, but
evidence suggests that he adopted the identity of the iconic man on the box, the
very symbol of Abu Ghraib, well after he left the prison.

Records confirm that Mr. Qaissi became inmate 151716 sometime after the prison
opened in June 2003, but do not give firm dates; Mr. Qaissi, a 43-year-old
former Baath Party member and neighborhood mayor in Baghdad, said he arrived at
Abu Ghraib in October 2003 and was released in March 2004, two months after the
Army began an investigation into the abuse.

And he suffered mistreatment and humiliation at the hands of the same people who
photographed the man on the box: photographs investigators seized show him
forced into a crouch, identifiable by his mangled hand, with the nickname guards
gave him -- ''The Claw'' -- scrawled in black marker across his orange jumpsuit.

But if he was the hooded man on the box, he did not mention it on several key
occasions in the first months after the scandal broke.

In the spring of 2004, Mr. Qaissi approached Muhammad Hamid al-Moussawi, the
deputy director of the Human Rights Organization of Iraq, and proposed that the
men set up a group for prisoners of the occupation, Mr. Moussawi said this week.
Yet Mr. Qaissi never claimed at the time that he had been the man in the
photograph, Mr. Moussawi recalled.

A journalist who interviewed Mr. Qaissi three times that May and June about what
happened at Abu Ghraib similarly said he never mentioned the pose or the
photograph. The journalist, Gert Van Langendonck, said Mr. Qaissi mentioned the
other cruelties he described in the Times profile.

A lawsuit Mr. Qaissi joined, filed on July 27, 2004, also made no allegation
that he was shocked with wires or forced to stand on a box. That allegation
appeared only on an amended version of a complaint he later joined, filed last
month, which said he had been forced to stand on the box and fell off from the
shocks of the electrocution: ''They repeated this at least five times.''

Another man had already been publicly identified as the man on the box in May
2004, when documents including logbooks and sworn statements from detainees and
soldiers were leaked to The Times.

On May 22, 2004, The Times quoted the testimony of a detainee, Abdou Hussain
Saad Faleh: ''Then a tall black soldier came and put electrical wires on my
fingers and toes and on my penis, and I had a bag over my head. Then he was
saying, 'Which switch is on for electricity?'''

Specialist Sabrina Harman, one of the soldiers later convicted of abuse,
identified the man by his nickname, Gilligan, in her statement.

She left some room to believe that others were subjected to the same treatment.
''The wires part,'' she said, was her idea, but she said Specialist Graner and
Staff Sgt. Ivan Frederick II had forced detainees to stand on a box to stay
awake, and did so at the request of military intelligence officials. Abu Ghraib
photographs show more than one example of a hooded man forced to stand on boxes.

But Chris Grey, a spokesman for the Army's Criminal Investigation Command, said
that the military believed that Mr. Faleh had been the only prisoner subjected
to the treatment shown in the photo. ''To date, and after a very thorough
criminal investigation, we have neither credible information, nor reason to
believe, that more than one incident of this nature occurred,'' he said.

Mr. Qaissi's lawyer, Ms. Burke, countered, ''We do not trust the torturers.''

Mr. Qaissi seems to have first begun identifying himself as the hooded man in
the fall of 2004, by which point he had started his prisoners' group out of a
politically charged mosque in Baghdad.

In an article in the February 2005 issue of Vanity Fair, Donovan Webster
identified Mr. Qaissi as Haj Ali, the likely man on the box, based on an
extensive investigation of military records. Soon, Mr. Qaissi was featured in
numerous profiles, including in Der Spiegel, reprinted by Salon, as well as on
the PBS current affairs program ''Now,'' where he described being shocked: ''It
felt like my eyeballs were coming out of my sockets.''

With his soft voice and occasionally self-deprecating humor, he has impressed
interviewers as affable and credible. He told his story with a level of detail
that separated it from that of many others.

Most of his assertions and details could be confirmed, Mr. Webster and others
stress. In his three-hour interview with The Times, Mr. Qaissi did not veer from
reported details and appeared confident in his discussion, punctuating his story
with bitter laughter and occasionally, tears. But he never raised the
possibility that another man may have also been photographed in the same pose.

Human rights workers were compelled by his story, as well. Reporting the
Saturday article, The Times relied in part on their statements that he could
well be the hooded man, as well as on prison records and interviews with friends
and his lawyers, who say they have Mr. Qaissi's blanket, the same one, they
said, draped over the man in the photograph. Army officials at the time refused
to confirm or refute Mr. Qaissi's claims, citing privacy protections in the
Geneva Convention.

Abdel Jabbar al-Azzawi, who now lives in Baghdad and says he was in the prison
with both Mr. Qaissi and the man named Gilligan and has joined the lawsuit, says
he saw Mr. Qaissi wearing the blanket fashioned into a poncho depicted in the
photograph, though he did not see the photographs being taken.

Mr. Qaissi's lawyers also stress that the iconic photograph is not the basis of
his case. In court papers, he also says he was punched, kicked, hit with a stick
and chained to his cell while his captors poured cold water over his naked body.

Meanwhile, it is not clear what happened to the real hooded man, Mr. Faleh. An
Army spokesman said he was released from American custody in January 2004.
Tribal leaders, and the manager of a brick factory next to the address where
prison records say he lived, said they had never heard the name. Besides, they
said, detainees often make up identities when they are imprisoned. Mr. Qaissi's
attorneys said they have not attempted to search for him.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In a photo taken in Abu Ghraib prison on Nov. 4, 2003, Ali
Shalal Qaissi displays the deformed hand that gave him the nickname ''The
Claw.'' (Photo by U.S. Army Criminal Investigation Command)(pg. A9)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(89%); LITIGATION (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%); SCANDALS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); TORTURE (78%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (78%); EVIDENCE
(77%); PHOTOGRAPHY (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (71%); POLITICAL
SCANDALS (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (67%); GENOCIDE
(62%) Photography; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Frauds and Swindling; Torture; United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) New York Times

PERSON: Kate Zernike; Ali Shalal Qaissi; Abdou Hussain Saad Faleh

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             277 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Firm Steered Home Buyers, Group Says

BYLINE: By ANAHAD O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section B; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 578 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, March 23


A fair housing group filed a discrimination complaint against a large
Westchester real estate company on Thursday, accusing it of systematically
steering white home buyers away from black and Hispanic neighborhoods by telling
them that the schools in those areas were terrible, even when that was not the
case.

The National Fair Housing Alliance, which filed the complaint with the
Department of Housing and Urban Development, said the company, Peter J. Riolo
Real Estate, would belittle school systems in minority neighborhoods if the
potential buyer was white. If the buyer was black or Hispanic, the group said it
found in its investigation, agents for the company would describe the same
school systems as wonderful, and discourage the buyer from looking at white
neighborhoods.

The group said that the company, a prominent real estate firm in Westchester
County, developed the practice as a way to get around laws that forbid racial
steering. Under federal laws, real estate agents are not allowed to discuss the
racial, ethnic or religious makeup of neighborhoods or schools with potential
home buyers.

''The law is quite clear: You cannot engage in any activity or conduct that
perpetuates housing segregation,'' said Shanna L. Smith, the president and chief
executive of the housing alliance, a coalition of nonprofit groups that used a
federal grant to finance the investigation. ''And by using the schools as the
proxy for race and ethnicity and steering whites away, this company was
perpetuating segregation.''

Peter J. Riolo Jr., who owns the company with his brother, Arthur, said in an
interview on Thursday that he could not answer questions about the complaint
because he had not seen it, but he denied encouraging discrimination.

''We firmly believe in the principles of the fair housing code of ethics,'' he
said. ''We abhor any kind of discrimination.''

The company, based in Hastings-on-Hudson, sells homes throughout the county.
Many of its listings are in well-to-do river towns like Irvington, Dobbs Ferry
and Hastings-on-Hudson.

Ms. Smith said her agency opened an investigation into the real estate company
in 2004, after it was identified in a HUD study as one of many real estate
agencies across the country that practice discrimination. Using people of
different races who posed as buyers, the agency tested 11 of the company's
roughly 20 agents on several occasions, and found that 10 regularly tried to
steer people to different neighborhoods on the basis of their race.

White buyers, for example, were repeatedly told that the schools in Tarrytown
were bad, and were steered toward Hastings-on-Hudson, Ms. Smith said, even
though 98 percent of Tarrytown students graduate from high school and more than
80 percent go on to college. According to census figures, about 23 percent of
the population in Tarrytown is black or Hispanic, while only about 7 percent of
residents in Hastings-on-Hudson are black or Hispanic.

Shortly after the fair housing alliance held a news conference here yesterday to
discuss its findings, the Westchester County Human Rights Commission announced
that it had begun its own inquiry.

''We will be thoroughly investigating this, and where warranted we will
certainly be prosecuting,'' said Delores Brathwaite, the executive director of
the human rights commission. ''But we understand from the Realtor that he is
anxious to speak about how we can resolve this, and we certainly would like that
to happen.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REAL ESTATE (92%); REAL ESTATE AGENTS (91%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%);
HOUSING AUTHORITIES (90%); HOUSING ASSISTANCE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); ETHNICITY (89%); ETHICS (78%); REAL PROPERTY LAW
(78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%); STUDENT DEMOGRAPHICS (77%); HIGH SCHOOLS
(77%); CITIES (76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (72%); GRADUATION RATES (72%);
SCHOOL BUILDINGS (72%); INTERVIEWS (71%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (70%);
EXECUTIVES (66%); CENSUS (61%); GRANTS & GIFTS (51%) Housing; Discrimination;
Blacks; Hispanic-Americans; Minorities (US)

ORGANIZATION: Riolo, Peter J, Real Estate; National Fair Housing Alliance;
Housing and Urban Development Department (Hud)

PERSON: Anahad O'Connor

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Hastings-on-Hudson (NY)

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             279 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America and Torture: Who Is Accountable?

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 195 words



To the Editor:

Re ''The Joy of Being Blameless'' (editorial, March 23):

The United States bears greater responsibility than most nations for
peacekeeping missions around the world, the Bush administration has argued, and
therefore Americans should not be subject to international criminal courts.

For that position to be justified, the United States military must maintain its
credibility by having just procedures for prosecuting abuses of power.

But as you point out, no high-ranking officers or policy makers have been
prosecuted for the appalling abuses at Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq. This fact
shows that the justification for refusing to be subject to the international
courts is without merit.

To insist that Americans cannot be subject to international courts because the
American system of law -- military or civilian -- will carry out justice, while
at the same time those guilty of encouraging abuse and torture go unpunished, is
a disgusting hypocrisy that the rest of the world will not fail to notice.

I am tired of being asked by those from other countries why Americans are so
hypocritical. I have no answer.

Chris Kilmer
Aurora, Colo., March 23, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GENOCIDE
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%) United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)
International Criminal Court

PERSON: Chris Kilmer

STATE: COLORADO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             282 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Genocide in Darfur: History's Lessons

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 208 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Sudan Blocks U.N. Official From Visiting Darfur Region'' (news article,
April 4):

The Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity planned a delegation to Darfur this week
as part of its Nobel Laureates Initiative. But the government of Sudan told us
that permission to enter the country was under review.

Elie Wiesel, the 1986 Nobel Peace Prize recipient, has sent the following
message to the Darfur Coalition, which is organizing a rally in Washington on
April 30:

''In Darfur, humankind's center of suffering today, men, women and children are
uprooted, starved, tortured, mutilated, humiliated and massacred and the whole
civilized world knows it. And little or nothing significant is being done to
stop these massive violations of human rights.

''Who is guilty? Those who commit these crimes. But to the question, 'Who is
responsible?,' we are compelled to say: Aren't we all?''

From the last century, the bloodiest in human history, we must take at least one
lesson. Those who commit genocide cannot hide behind national borders and claims
of sovereignty. There is no choice but to act in defense of defenseless people.

David L. Phillips
New York, April 4, 2006

The writer is executive director, Elie Wiesel Foundation for Humanity.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
AWARDS & PRIZES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); NOBEL PRIZES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TORTURE (74%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (73%); WRITERS (73%); STARVATION (69%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL
BORDERS (66%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations; Wiesel, Elie, Foundation for
Humanity

PERSON: David L Phillips

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             287 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Militant Uprising at Jordanian Prison Is Quelled

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Suha Maayeh contributed reporting from Amman for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 593 words

DATELINE: DUBAI, United Arab Emirates, April 13


Jordanian security forces stormed a high security prison outside Amman on
Thursday, quashing a daylong uprising by Islamist prisoners and leaving one
inmate dead and more than 35 guards and inmates wounded, government officials
said.

It was the second such riot in Jordan in less than two months, adding to rising
concerns that the growing Islamist population within prisons is organizing and
giving Al Qaeda a new avenue for control.

Rioting broke out early on Thursday morning at the Qafqafa prison, about an hour
north of Amman, the capital. The incident started when Islamist prisoners,
including suspected members of Al Qaeda, refused officers' attempts to inspect
their cellblock. One prisoner, who reportedly contacted the Arab news channel Al
Jazeera on a contraband cellphone, said that prisoners had taken two guards
hostage and that security forces had used bullets and tear gas to quell the
riot. The government did not immediately confirm the claims.

Interior Minister Eid Fayez said the inspections were part of a nationwide
effort to crack down on contraband in the country's prisons.

In March, prisoners at the Juweideh prison, on the outskirts of Amman, took a
prison official hostage and wounded several police officers in a 14-hour
standoff that erupted when officials sought to transfer two members of Al Qaeda,
prisoners who were scheduled for execution. During that uprising, inmates at
Swaqa prison, about 60 miles south of Amman, and at Qafqafa prison also rose in
solidarity, pointing to cooperation between groups in different prisons.

Signs of a prisoner movement have been apparent in other countries. In Yemen in
February, 23 prisoners linked to Al Qaeda broke out of a prison by digging a
tunnel under it. Yemeni security officials believe that the men were able to win
the sympathies of low-level prison guards and officials who allowed them to
continue digging.

''Things no longer end in prison anymore. In fact, increasingly they begin
there,'' said Hassan Abu Hanieh, who studies militant movements in Amman. Arab
prisons have become recruitment centers, Mr. Hanieh and other analysts say,
where Al Qaeda is building its ranks.

As governments in the region have cracked down on Islamists, the militants have
flooded into prisons and become a much more powerful part of the population
there. Wardens have had more difficulty keeping them separated from other
prisoners, raising pressure on officials to give in to the Islamists' demands to
keep the peace. The prisoners who rioted Thursday had been allowed to cook their
own meals and received money from their families, said Shaher Bak, commissioner
of the National Center for Human Rights.

''They control the world inside the prisons,'' Mr. Hanieh said of the Islamists.
Almost every prison in Jordan is now controlled by an informal emir among the
Islamist prisoners, who can decide much of the future of inmates, oversees
prayers and searches for recruits, he said. ''What really helps them is that the
society inside has borne a sense of oppression and now view the government as
the enemy,'' he added.

The changing prison population has left officials with a dilemma, said Faris
Breizat, an analyst for the Center for Strategic Studies at Jordan University.
''The authorities have a problem: if they want to put them in solitary
confinement, there's not enough space; if they combine them with other prisoners
they will recruit; but if they leave them together, they will only solidify
their networks,'' Mr. Breizat said. ''In many ways, their hands are tied.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (91%);
RIOTS (91%); CORRECTIONS (91%); AL-QAEDA (90%); PRISONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (89%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (79%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INSPECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); POPULATION GROWTH (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (73%); RELIGION
(61%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (54%) Prisons and Prisoners; Terrorism;
Demonstrations and Riots; Prison Escapes; Islam; Prisons and Prisoners

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (93%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: Hassan M Fattah

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (91%)

STATE: DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%)

COUNTRY: JORDAN (94%); YEMEN (93%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (92%)

REGION: Jordan; Yemen

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             289 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 22, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraq Sentences Man for U.N. Bombing

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 152 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 21


An Iraqi court has tried and sentenced to death a man who confessed to the
truck-bombing of the United Nations headquarters in Baghdad in 2003, a senior
United Nations official said Friday.

The attack killed 22 people, including Sergio Vieira de Mello, the United
Nations high commissioner for human rights.

Gianni Magazzeni, who is in charge of the new United Nations human rights office
in Baghdad, announced the court ruling at a news conference in Geneva. He added
that the defendant, who is accused of belonging to the terrorist group led by
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, was appealing the sentence.

The defendant's name was not released. The United States military said in
December that Iraq had issued an arrest warrant for Mullah Halgurd al-Khabir and
identified him as the prime suspect in the attack. But it was not clear whether
Mr. Khabir had ever been arrested or was the same man put on trial and
condemned.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); LITIGATION (88%); ARREST
WARRANTS (87%); ARRESTS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%); APPEALS (53%); RELIGION
(52%) Sentences (Criminal); Bombs and Explosives

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (58%) United Nations

PERSON: Sergio Vieira De Mello

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); SWITZERLAND (72%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             291 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 30, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scientists Speak Out About Guantanamo

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 344 words



To the Editor:

We are deeply concerned that without serious debate, the United States has
crossed the limits of acceptable practices in the treatment of prisoners at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and other sites. The secrecy and the disdain for
international law and opinion are contrary to the very ideals that our country
has long stood and fought for.

We are told that our country is being protected by locking up dangerous
terrorists in isolated facilities in order to make us accept a breakdown of our
own laws. But we do not know -- indeed, we have not been allowed any way of
finding out -- if the individual prisoners are enemy combatants, Al Qaeda
suspects or innocents unlucky enough to have been caught in a blind sweep.

It is one of the most fundamental principles of a democracy that all accused
should be tried without unreasonable delays and freed if innocent. In no case do
our moral principles permit humiliating and degrading treatment.

The administration has cynically used fear to justify behavior that the
civilized world has long considered criminal.

Although this is not a scientific issue in the usual sense, we feel that to
ignore it would be to abdicate our responsibility to the truth. Therefore, we
have felt compelled to speak out against human rights violations, including
those committed by Americans. We are asking all people of good will to join us
in demanding a quick return to our country's great traditions.

Leonard Susskind
Freeman Dyson
David Gross
Walter Kohn
Palo Alto, Calif., April 19, 2006

The writers are, respectively, a professor of physics at Stanford University; a
professor of physics at the Institute for Advanced Study; a professor of physics
at the University of California at Santa Barbara and the winner of the 2004
Nobel Prize in Physics; and a professor of chemistry at the University of
California at Santa Barbara and the winner of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
The letter was also signed by 15 other members of the National Academy of
Sciences. Their names and affiliations are listed at nytimes.com/opinion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); NOBEL PRIZES (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); WAR CRIMES
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); TERRORISM (76%); PHYSICS (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NAVIES (74%);
WRITERS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); CHEMISTRY (71%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); AL-QAEDA (71%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%);
AWARDS & PRIZES (68%) Terrorism; United States International Relations;
Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (56%); NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES (59%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%) National Academy of Sciences

PERSON: Leonard Susskind; Freeman J (Prof) Dyson; David J (Dr) Gross; Walter
Kohn

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%); SANTA BARBARA, CA, USA (67%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             292 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Request Stokes Debate Over Yale Student With a Taliban Past

BYLINE: By ALAN FINDER

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1214 words


A student at Yale University who was once a roving ambassador for the Taliban
regime in Afghanistan has applied for admission to a degree-granting program,
putting new pressure on university officials in an emotionally charged political
debate over his presence at Yale.

The student, Sayed Rahmatullah Hashemi, 27, began taking courses at Yale last
summer in a nondegree program for untraditional students. After an article about
his experience appeared in The New York Times Magazine on Feb. 26, Yale was
fiercely criticized in opinion articles in The Wall Street Journal and in other
newspapers and magazines, as well as on cable news shows and Web sites.

Four alumni began a blog, Nail Yale, that questioned why someone they described
as ''an apologist for a brutal, misogynistic, terrorist-abetting tyranny'' was
being allowed to attend one of the country's most selective universities. And
some families of victims of the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, and of
American servicemen and women in Afghanistan accused the university of harboring
a representative of a regime that had committed myriad crimes and repeatedly
violated human rights.

But on campus, a number of students and professors support his presence, saying
that he would benefit from a Yale education and that they would benefit from
having him at the university.

Now Yale faces the question of whether to admit Mr. Hashemi on a more formal
basis to a program that leads to an undergraduate degree. Yale's president,
Richard C. Levin, declined a request for an interview and has generally not
spoken publicly about Mr. Hashemi. He did tell The Yale Daily News, the student
newspaper, that the admissions office would decide whether to allow Mr. Hashemi
to pursue a Yale degree.

Mr. Levin also said last month that a Yale College subcommittee would review the
mission and the admissions criteria this summer for both the program Mr. Hashemi
is currently in and the one he has applied to.

In a statement issued in March, the university said: ''We acknowledge that some
are criticizing Yale for allowing Mr. Hashemi to take courses here, but we hope
that critics will also acknowledge that universities are places that must strive
to increase understanding, especially of the most difficult issues that face the
nation and the world.''

Mr. Hashemi worked for the Office of Foreign Affairs under the Taliban, serving
initially as a translator and then as a diplomat in the Afghan Embassy in
Islamabad, Pakistan. He was named a roving ambassador in 2000, traveling to the
Middle East and Europe. He toured the United States early in 2001, speaking at
Yale and several other universities and appearing on public television and
radio; he defended the abridgement of women's rights by the Taliban and the
destruction of huge Buddhist statues, among other things.

At Yale, where the debate has been more muted than in the opinion columns, some
students argue that Yale, as an ethical matter, should not admit Mr. Hashemi
into the degree-granting program.

''I think the university is well within its rights to deny admission to people
who've been complicit in a wide variety of crimes,'' said William A. Wilson, a
freshman who is active in the Yale Political Union, a nonpartisan student group
that organizes debates on current affairs.

Mr. Hashemi's supporters say it is in the long-term interests of the university
and the country to educate bright Islamic students, so they learn to think
critically and better understand the West.

''He is an example to me of intellectual curiosity and tolerance,'' said Tatiana
Maxwell, the president of the International Education Foundation, which was
created to raise money to send Mr. Hashemi to college.

''There is value to him to be at a university where the highest intellectual
standards are upheld,'' she said. ''On the flip side, if someone is willing to
listen and see his value -- Yale, which is educating our future leaders, has the
most to gain by having him in its midst.''

Mr. Hashemi did not respond to a request for an interview. Despite two months of
criticism in the media, he decided over the last few weeks to apply for the
degree-granting program for special students by the deadline of May 1, Mrs.
Maxwell said.

Mrs. Maxwell said the backlash this spring had deeply affected Mr. Hashemi. She
described him as a low-key person who left school after the fourth grade and
earned a high school equivalency degree in Pakistan. When he was suddenly the
object of attention from other Yale students and from the news media in recent
months, Mrs. Maxwell said, he found the experience traumatic; he was uncertain
whether he would remain at Yale.

Some supporters are worried that it might not be safe for Mr. Hashemi to return
home, as he plans to do after the spring semester ends this month. Mrs. Maxwell
and other supporters said there had been speculation in Pakistan, where his
family lives in exile, that he must have been an agent of the Central
Intelligence Agency if he had managed to get admitted by Yale after serving the
Taliban.

If admitted to the degree-granting program, he would have many of the privileges
and responsibilities of Yale undergraduates, although he could not live in
university housing. He is likely to learn within a month or two whether he will
be admitted, university officials said. The program is designed for people who
have not begun or completed their college education because of family or job
responsibilities.

In a statement released two weeks ago, Mr. Levin, the Yale president, said the
standard for admission to the degree-granting program this year would be the
same as for regular candidates for admission to Yale College, ''recognizing that
in assessing more mature candidates, relatively more weight should be given to
achievement than potential.''

Some students and faculty applaud Mr. Hashemi's presence at Yale. ''What the
United States is doing in the Middle East is to try to support and encourage
people all across the region who want to be part of states that are good
international citizens and want to be engaged with the international
community,'' said Charles Hill, a lecturer in international affairs and a
retired veteran of the State Department. ''Mr. Hashemi wants to shape his future
on the side of the line in the region that wants to be legitimate contributors
to international peace and order.''

But the alumni who created the blog, Nail Yale, have assailed the university for
admitting Mr. Hashemi to any of its programs. The blog's name refers to the
Taliban's banning of nail polish and to accusations that Taliban enforcers
pulled out the nails of women who wore polish.

''We wanted to make it clear that alumni were upset about this,'' said Clint
Taylor, one of the blog's founders. ''It's a betrayal of Yale's core values.
We're still at war with the Taliban. They're massacring schoolteachers in
Afghanistan and fighting American soldiers.''

David Cameron, a political science professor, said in an e-mail message that if
Yale decides to admit Mr. Hashemi, he hoped it would state clearly that Mr.
Hashemi would learn about ''values the Taliban rejected: democracy, the rule of
law, ethnic and religious toleration, human rights, and the equality of men and
women.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sayed Rahmatullah Hashemi, a former Taliban ambassador, at Yale
in December. Amid a dispute over his presence, he has applied to a
degree-granting program. (Photo by Reuben Cox)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (92%); TALIBAN (91%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(90%); ACADEMIC ADMISSIONS (89%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (89%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (78%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
ADMISSIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%); WOMEN (77%);
TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (75%); BLOGS & MESSAGE BOARDS (75%); TERRORISM (74%);
PUBLIC BROADCASTING (73%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%);
FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (72%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (70%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(69%); RELIGION (50%)

COMPANY: WALL STREET JOURNAL (57%)

ORGANIZATION: YALE UNIVERSITY (94%) Taliban  ; Yale University

PERSON: Alan Finder; Sayed Rahmatullah Hashemi

CITY: ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (66%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             293 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Trafficking

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 203 words



To the Editor:

As Nicholas D. Kristof writes (''Bush Takes On the Brothels,'' column, May 9),
international trafficking in human beings -- more than 12 million worldwide and
growing -- is modern-day slavery, its victims sold into sexual slavery, child
soldiering, domestic servitude, forced labor and illegal adoptions.

The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime's first annual report on
''Trafficking in Persons,'' published last month, finds that human trafficking
is the world's fastest growing international organized crime, involving billions
of dollars and affecting nearly every country in the world.

And since its victims -- young, poor, primarily girls -- are among the most
disenfranchised on earth, even raising awareness about this human rights crisis
is a challenge.

We, too, commend the United States for its battle against this ''execrable sum
of all villainies,'' and call upon all countries to ratify the International
Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially
Women and Children.

Simone Monasebian
Lucie Hrbkova
New York, May 10, 2006

The writers are, respectively, chief of the New York office and program
management officer, United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (93%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); LABOR TRAFFICKING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (78%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%); FORCED LABOR (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ORGANIZED CRIME (72%); CHILD SOLDIERS (71%)
Prostitution; Children and Youth

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS OFFICE ON DRUGS & CRIME (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%)
United Nations

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Lucie Hrbkova; Simone Monasebian

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (78%)

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 20, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. SHOULD CLOSE PRISON IN CUBA, U.N. PANEL SAYS

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1464 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 19


An important United Nations panel roundly criticized the United States on Friday
for its treatment of terrorism suspects, and called for shutting down the
detention camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

The panel's criticism came as military officials at Guantanamo disclosed the
most serious disturbances by prisoners there since the camp opened four years
ago, and reported new suicide attempts that had left two detainees hospitalized
and unconscious.

The disturbances, which took place on Thursday, included a violent attack on
guards that was put down by antiriot soldiers firing shotgun blasts and pepper
spray, and an episode involving two other groups of detainees who tore apart
their quarters and attacked guards in a showcase unit for the camp's most
compliant inmates.

Military officials said the prisoners' actions were apparently aimed at raising
political pressure on the Bush administration over its detention policy.
Pressure was also ratcheted up by the report issued in Geneva by the United
Nations Committee Against Torture.

After a lengthy review of United States policies, the committee dismissed
several basic legal arguments the Bush administration had offered to justify
such practices as the incommunicado detention of prisoners overseas and the
secret transfer, or ''rendition,'' of suspects for interrogation by other
governments.

The panel, which monitors compliance with the Convention Against Torture, the
main international treaty that bans such conduct, also concluded that the
Central Intelligence Agency's widely reported practice of holding detainees in
secret prisons abroad constitutes a clear violation of the convention.

The United States ''should investigate and disclose the existence of any such
facilities and the authority under which they have been established,'' the
committee said in its 11-page preliminary report. It also called on the Bush
administration to ''publicly condemn any policy of secret detention.''

The recommendations of the committee are not legally binding. But they are
likely to be more influential than previous international reviews, in part
because the Bush administration clearly took the process seriously, sending a
delegation of more than two dozen officials to Geneva earlier this month to
present its legal case.

On Friday, some of those administration officials responded to the report by
defending the United States' treatment of suspected terrorists, and criticizing
the committee's evaluation as flawed and superficial.

''I think the committee was guided more by popular concerns than by a strict
reading of the convention itself,'' said the State Department's legal adviser,
John B. Bellinger III, who led the delegation.

''It obviously causes us to question whether our extensive presentation was
worth it,'' Mr. Bellinger said.

''Unfortunately, I think the committee really had essentially written its
report'' beforehand, he said.

The report was delivered as part of the committee's periodic review of actions
by signers of the torture convention, which the United States ratified in 1994.

The committee's report ''welcomed'' and ''noted with satisfaction'' several
steps by the United States, including the administration's formal statement that
all United States officials are prohibited from engaging in torture at all times
and in all places.

But the panel, which is made up of 10 independent human rights experts from
around the world, was hardly generous in its praise.

It took a broad swipe at the administration's argument that some of its policies
-- like the indefinite detention of prisoners without charge at Guantanamo --
were defensible under laws of armed conflict.

It called for the United States to immediately end its practice of refusing to
register some of the so-called high-value terrorism suspects it holds overseas
or make them accessible to the International Committee of the Red Cross. The
Bush administration, the panel wrote, ''should ensure that no one is detained in
any secret detention facility under its de facto effective control.''

The committee also urged the United States to make sure that its interrogation
methods did not violate the convention, and it specifically called for an end to
techniques like sexual humiliation and ''water-boarding,'' a form of simulated
drowning that reportedly has been used by the C.I.A.

In their presentation to the panel, Bush administration officials insisted that
although abuses had taken place, those who committed them were consistently
punished. But the panel appeared less than convinced, saying the United States
should ''promptly, thoroughly and impartially investigate any responsibility of
senior military and civilian officials authorizing, acquiescing or consenting,
in any way, to acts of torture committed by their subordinates.''

The committee also recommended that the United States enact a federal criminal
law against torture to supplement the prohibitions already in place. It also
insisted that United States officials ''should investigate, prosecute and
punish'' American citizens who are guilty of torturing people overseas.

''None of this is binding,'' said Kenneth Roth, the executive director of the
advocacy group Human Rights Watch. ''The U.S. can just reject the judgment. But
this is the judgment of the authoritative body of experts for interpreting the
convention.''

He called the panel's conclusions ''a complete repudiation of virtually every
legal theory that the Bush administration has offered for its controversial
detention and interrogation policies.''

The committee's appeal to close Guantanamo is only the latest in a recent series
of calls from around the world. The senior Pentagon official in charge of
detainee affairs, Charles D. Stimson, indicated that the administration was no
more persuaded by the committee than it had been by others.

''That is one body's opinion,'' Mr. Stimson, a deputy assistant secretary of
defense, said in an interview.

In recent remarks, President Bush and other officials have suggested that they
would readily do away with the Guantanamo prison if they had a better
alternative.

Meanwhile, the nearly 500 detainees appear determined to increase pressure on
their captors.

The suicide attempts on Thursday came four months after military officials broke
a wave of hunger strikes by force-feeding detainees while they were strapped
into ''restraint chairs'' for hours at a time. But before the attacks on the
guards, Guantanamo commanders said they had been gaining steadily greater
compliance from the detainees, in part by improving their living conditions.

''This was probably the most violent outbreak here,'' the new commander of the
detention camp, Rear Adm. Harry B. Harris, Jr., said Friday. ''This is a way to
bring attention to their detention.''

At a briefing for reporters unusual for its candor and detail, Admiral Harris
said the disturbances began Thursday morning when a prisoner was found
unconscious after ingesting ''a large quantity'' of anti-anxiety drugs that had
apparently been hoarded by detainees.

In the early afternoon, guards discovered a cache of drugs hidden in the toilet
of a cell. Minutes after that, a second prisoner was found in his cell, Admiral
Harris said, ''frothing at the mouth.''

Both of the detainees were stable but still unconscious more than 24 hours after
being hospitalized. Two other detainees also complained to the guards of nausea,
military officials said, including one who said he tried to kill himself but did
not have enough drugs.

At about6:30 p.m., military officials said, guards noticed a detainee who
appeared to be preparing to hang himself from the ceiling with sheets in Camp 4,
the showcase, medium-security wing where detainees live together in dormitories.

But the guards were set upon by detainees who had slickened the floor with
urine, soapy water and feces. After the prisoners hit the guards with blades
from ceiling fans, pieces of metal and other improvised weapons, a riot-control
unit was sent in with batons and shields.

The military police officer in charge of Guantanamo's detention operations, Col.
Michael Bumgarner, said the detainees had continued fighting, even jumping off
beds onto the guards. ''Frankly, we were losing,'' he said.

At that point, Colonel Bumgarner said, guards shot five rounds of ''nonlethal''
pellets from a 12-gauge shotgun, and a rubber grenade from an M-203 launcher.

Rioting then broke out in two other blocks of Camp 4, as some 50 detainees
demolished their quarters to make weapons to attack the guards. It was an hour,
Colonel Bumgarner said, before the disturbances were entirely brought under
control.

A military spokesman said 60 of the detainees were later transferred to more
secure areas of the camp.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); PRISONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(78%); RIOTS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); ARMED FORCES (72%); NAVIES (72%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(66%); SUICIDE (56%) Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations; Suicides and Suicide Attempts; Demonstrations
and Riots; Torture; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (54%) United
Nations

PERSON: Tim Golden; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SWITZERLAND (93%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Geneva (Switzerland)

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             298 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Concern in Iran After a Scholar Is Held 3 Weeks

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 569 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, May 20


An Iranian philosopher and writer who also holds Canadian citizenship has been
detained for three weeks without formal charges, raising concerns that his
arrest could signal greater repression of intellectuals.

The scholar, Ramin Jahanbegloo, was arrested at the Tehran airport late last
month as he headed to Brussels to attend a conference sponsored by the German
Marshall Fund. He had just returned from a six-month teaching program in India.

A few days after the arrest, security officers took Mr. Jahanbegloo to his home
and searched it, removing his computer.

The minister of information, Mohsen Ejei, told reporters this month that he was
arrested because of ''his contacts with foreigners.'' On Monday, the daily
newspaper Jomhouri Eslami, which is close to Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah
Ali Khamenei, called Mr. Jahanbegloo ''an element of the United States who was
part of the plot to overthrow the regime under the guise of intellectual work by
peaceful means.''

Mr. Jahanbegloo, who has delivered lectures on the prospects for democracy in
Iran, wrote nearly 20 books in English, French and Persian on culture and
philosophy. He is now the director of contemporary studies at Iran's Cultural
Research Bureau and an advocate of nonviolence and intercultural dialogue.

Mr. Jahanbegloo's wife and mother have declined to talk to reporters in an
effort to avoid complicating his case.

The arrest coincided with a crackdown on student advocates. A court has issued a
suspended five-year sentence for Abdullah Momeni, a student leader, and an
18-month sentence for Mehdi Aminzadeh, another leader. Each was accused of being
part of the pro-democracy demonstrations in 2002 during which students demanded
the release of Professor Hashem Aghajari, who received a death sentence after
questioning the authority of high-ranking clerics.

However, he has been arrested by the Ministry of Information, unlike the others,
who were arrested by the judiciary. His arrest was a shock since he was not
involved in activism and had advocated dialogue and tolerance in his writings.

Mr. Momeni said the arrest of Mr. Jahanbegloo made sense only as an effort to
frighten dissidents. ''He was just a university professor and intellectual who
advocated philosophical theories,'' he said. ''He had no access to any
classified information.''

''It seems that the authorities want to intimidate freethinkers and
professors,'' he added. ''They do not want intellectuals to have the freedom to
advocate secular and democratic theories which can lay the foundation for
democracy.''

The arrest has further strained relations between Canada and Iran, which soured
after an Iranian-Canadian photojournalist, Zahra Kazemi, was killed in detention
in the notorious Evin prison in 2003.

Mr. Jahanbegloo is also in Evin, in solitary confinement in Section 209, an area
controlled by the Iran's Ministry of Information, people familiar with his case
say. Former prisoners said people held in this section received better treatment
than those in the section controlled by the Judiciary. Mr. Jahanbegloo told his
family over the phone that he was being treated well and fed well.

Former detainees said they were usually interrogated for long periods, then
returned to a tiny room with just a toilet, sink and a lamp that never turned
off. After their release, many have said they had been forced to make false
confessions.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARRESTS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (89%); PRISONS (89%); SENTENCING (89%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (89%);
PHILOSOPHY (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); COUPS (78%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (77%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%);
POLITICAL PROTESTS (75%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%); PHOTOJOURNALISM
(70%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (69%); TERRORISM (60%); SPONSORSHIP (57%) United
States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: GERMAN MARSHALL FUND OF THE US (84%) Jomhouri Eslami (Iranian
Newspaper) ; German Marshall Fund of the United States

PERSON: ALI KHAMENEI (53%) Nazila Fathi; Ramin Jahanbegloo; mohsen (Min) ejei

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); CANADA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
INDIA (92%); IRAN (88%)

REGION: Iran; Canada; Iran

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             300 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karzai Orders Investigation Of U.S. Attack

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Ruhullah Khapalwak contributed reporting from
Kandahar, Afghanistan, for this article and Sultan M. Munadi from Kabul.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE REACH OF WAR: AIRSTRIKE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 305 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, May 23


President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan ordered his security forces to investigate
the American aerial bombardment of a village that killed at least 16 civilians,
officials said Tuesday.

As the numbers of casualties from the Sunday night operation continued to rise,
officials in Mr. Karzai's administration told news agencies that the president
would also ask for an explanation from the American commander of coalition
forces in Afghanistan, Lt. Gen. Karl Eikenberry.

Accounts of the attack filtering in from the village of Tolokan, which is just
20 miles west of Kandahar but is sealed off by Afghan and foreign troops,
suggested that at least 20 villagers, and possibly more, were killed. Wounded
villagers treated in the Kandahar city hospital said Monday that they knew of 16
civilians killed and 15 wounded. Many Taliban fighters were also killed in the
bombardment, they said.

But Abdul Qadar Noorzai, head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
in Kandahar, said villagers coming to see him told him that 20 to 25 civilians
had been killed and 30 to 35 wounded.

Some of the wounded were taken to the Kandahar hospital and some to Pakistan, he
said. The district chief of Panjwai District also confirmed that 20 civilians
had been killed, he said.

Coalition forces said they had carried out a successful operation against
Taliban fighters in the area on Sunday night and were looking into reports of
civilian casualties.

In further violence, four Afghan employees of a medical charity were killed in a
bomb explosion on Tuesday on a road in central Afghanistan. They were driving
through Wardak Province, south of Kabul, when the mine exploded, said Hafizullah
Salaam, an aide to the governor of the province. ''It killed all four workers,
including a woman health worker, and destroyed the vehicle,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALIBAN (90%); BOMBINGS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARMED FORCES (71%); MEDICAL
CHARITIES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%) United States Armament and Defense; United
States International Relations

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (92%) Hamid (Pres) Karzai; Carlotta Gall

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN
(68%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Tolokan (Afghanistan)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             306 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

THREE PRISONERS COMMIT SUICIDE AT GUANTANAMO

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN and TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1746 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 10


Three detainees being held at the United States military prison at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba, committed suicide early on Saturday, the first deaths of detainees to
be reported at the military prison since it opened in early 2002, United States
military officials said.

The deaths come at a time of mounting international criticism of the Bush
administration's handling of terrorism suspects at Guantanamo and other prisons
around the world. President Bush, who was at Camp David on Saturday, expressed
''serious concern'' about the deaths, said Tony Snow, the White House spokesman.

The three detainees were not identified, but United States officials said two
were from Saudi Arabia and the third was from Yemen. Military officials said
that the three hanged themselves in their cells with nooses made of sheets and
clothing and died before they could be revived by medical personnel.

Rear Adm. Harry B. Harris Jr., the commander of the detention camp at
Guantanamo, told reporters in a news conference that the deaths were discovered
early on Saturday when a guard noticed something out of the ordinary in a cell
and found that a prisoner had hanged himself. Admiral Harris said guards and a
medical team rushed in to try to save the inmate's life but were unsuccessful.
Then, guards found two other detainees in nearby cells had hanged themselves as
well; all were pronounced dead by a physician.

Military officials on Saturday suggested that the three suicides were a form of
a coordinated protest.

''They are smart, they are creative, they are committed,'' Admiral Harris said.
''They have no regard for life, neither ours nor their own. I believe this was
not an act of desperation, but an act of asymmetrical warfare waged against
us.''

The Naval Criminal Investigative Service has opened an investigation into the
deaths, and the State Department has notified the governments of Saudi Arabia
and Yemen, according to a statement issued on Saturday by the United States
Southern Command, the military organization that oversees Guantanamo.

All three men left suicide notes in Arabic, officials said. One of the detainees
was a mid- or high-level Qaeda operative, another had been captured in
Afghanistan and the third was a member of a splinter group, Admiral Harris said,
in an account by The Associated Press. He said all three had participated in
hunger strikes at the detention center.

He said the acts were tied to a ''mystical'' belief at Guantanamo that three
detainees must die at the camp for all the detainees to be released. There have
been 41 suicide attempts by 25 detainees since the facility opened, officials
said.

Lawyers for the detainees, human rights groups and legal associations have
increasingly questioned whether many of the prisoners can even rightfully be
called terrorists. They note that only 10 of the roughly 465 men held at
Guantanamo have been charged before military tribunals, and that recently
released documents indicate that many have never been accused even in
administrative proceedings of belonging to Al Qaeda or attacking the United
States.

Advocates for the detainees said they believed the suicides resulted from the
deep despair felt by inmates who are being held indefinitely.

''The total, intractable unwillingness of the Bush administration to provide any
meaningful justice for these men is what is at the heart of these tragedies,''
said Bill Goodman, the legal director of the Center for Constitutional Rights,
the New York advocacy group that oversees lawyers representing many of the
detainees. ''We all had the sense that these men were getting more and more
hopeless. There's been a general sense of desperation that's been growing.''

Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, a lawyer at Dorsey & Whitney in New York who represents
one detainee who has repeatedly attempted suicide, said, ''These men have been
told they will be held at Guantanamo forever. They've been told that while
they're held there they do not have a single right.''

Foreign governments and international organizations have stepped up their
criticism of detainee treatment at Guantanamo. Just last month, a United Nations
treaty panel reviewing the United States' compliance with the international
prohibition on torture argued that Guantanamo should be shut down. Last week,
the Council of Europe issued a separate investigative report that said the
United States had created a ''reprehensible network'' of dealing with terror
suspects, highlighted by secret prisons believed to be in Eastern Europe and
other nations around the world.

Responding to the growing furor over the issue in Europe, Mr. Bush said in an
interview with German television in May that he would like to close the
Guantanamo prison, but that his administration had to await the outcome of a
Supreme Court ruling on whether the detainees should be tried by civilian courts
or military commissions.

Meanwhile, the situation inside the detention center has grown more volatile in
recent months, with reports that prisoners have engaged in hunger strikes,
suicide attempts and violent attacks on guards.

Lawyers for the detainees have predicted for months that some would kill
themselves. They have complained repeatedly about their access to the detainees,
and have litigated in federal courts to try to get more information about the
prisoners' medical and psychological health.

The lawyers have also strenuously protested the administration's efforts to have
all litigation over the treatment of the detainees dismissed under the Detainee
Treatment Act, a law signed by Mr. Bush on Dec. 30 that would strip the courts
of jurisdiction to hear habeas corpus petitions from detainees.

Action on nearly all of those petitions has been suspended in recent months,
pending a ruling by the Supreme Court this month on the case of a former driver
for Osama bin Laden.

In public statements, Defense Department officials have often dismissed the
detainees' suicide attempts as less than serious and as the actions of trained
Qaeda terrorists to manipulate public opinion. The first hunger strikes by
detainees at Guantanamo began soon after the camp opened in January 2002, and
two of those prisoners were forcibly fed through tubes that year. Dozens of
other suicide attempts followed.

Over one eight-day period in August 2003, 23 detainees tried to hang or strangle
themselves, including 10 on a single day. But the Pentagon did not disclose the
episode until January 2005, and lawyers for the detainees have complained about
what they say has been a pattern in which the government has withheld
information about suicide attempts or minimized their importance.

In late 2003, military officials at Guantanamo began to re-classify many of the
suicide attempts as ''manipulative, self-injurious behavior'' that was intended
to bring pressure for better conditions or for release. Officials at Guantanamo
acknowledged that those designations were not necessarily made after any formal
psychological evaluation.

But early last summer, as a new wave of protests broke out, officials at
Guantanamo and at the Pentagon grew increasingly concerned, Defense Department
officials said.

Doctors overseeing the treatment of detainees at Guantanamo sought new guidance
from the Pentagon about the circumstances under which they could force-feed
hunger strikers by tubes inserted through their noses and into their stomachs.
While Defense Department officials took new measures to try to break a wave of
hunger strikes that began last summer, they also undertook a review of
procedures they would follow for the possible burial of detainees or the
transfer of their remains in the event that any of them succeeded in committing
suicide, military officials said.

Military officials began trying to discourage the detainees from killing
themselves in part by having military and medical personnel cite passages in the
Koran that condemn suicide. The detainees were systematically told that annual
reviews of their status as ''enemy combatants'' had been completed, that they
would remain at Guantanamo for at least another year, and that they should
reconcile themselves to the situation, Defense Department officials said.

The military's review of the hunger-strike issue, which included senior Pentagon
officials and officers of the United States Southern Command, which oversees
Guantanamo, eventually led to a decision to begin strapping those detainees who
refused to eat into metal ''restraint chairs'' while they were force-fed.

After the use of the chairs was disclosed by The New York Times in February,
military officials insisted that they were acting only to save the lives of
hunger-striking detainees who were precariously close to serious harm or death.

Interviews with military officials indicated that only a handful of the
detainees who were then being force-fed had lost so much weight that they were
classified by doctors there as ''severely malnourished.'' The restraint chair
was used on all of those who refused to eat, military officials said, regardless
of their medical condition.

For months after the use of the restraint chairs became public, lawyers for the
detainees and other critics of United States detention policy predicted that the
tougher measures would push the prisoners to take more radical steps to end
their lives.

What may have been the most serious such incident before Saturday's suicides
came on May 18, when two detainees were found unconscious in their cells after
ingesting a large quantity of anti-anxiety medication that various prisoners had
apparently hoarded for the purpose. Another detainee said he had also tried to
commit suicide but did not have enough medication; military officials said they
did not believe his attempt had been serious.

Military officials said other detainees violently attacked guards in subsequent
searches of their cells. A few of the detainees have since told their lawyers
that the upheaval was provoked by guards who mistreated the prisoners' Korans as
they tore through their cells.

Another brief hunger strike began barely two weeks later, the military
authorities said, and eventually involved some 75 detainees. The chief spokesman
for the military task force charged with guarding and interrogating the
detainees, Cmdr. Robert Durand of the Navy, described that episode, like others
before it, as an ''attention getting'' effort intended to increase public
pressure for their release.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Chart: ''A Troubled Detention Center''Since January 2002 the military
has reported 44 suicide attempts at Guantanamo, as well as dozens of incidents
classified as ''manipulative, self-injurious behavior.'' Three suicides
yesterday were the first reported deaths.Doctors begin force-feeding two
detainees who had been fasting for nearly a month.By April 2003 there were 24
suicide attempts by 17 detainees.In an eight-day protest, 23 detainees try to
hang or strangle themselves.A total of 350 ''self-harm'' incidents were reported
at Guantanamo in 2003, including 120 ''hanging gestures.''A months-long hunger
strike involves 131 detainees at its peak, but is virtually broken afer the
military begins using restraint chairs for force-feeding.Detainees attack guards
after two prisoners attempt suicide using hoarded medications.Graph tracks the
number of detainees at Guantanamo since 2002.(Sources by Department of Defense
 interviews)(pg. 30)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (92%); SUICIDE (92%); ARMED FORCES (91%); TERRORISM (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
MILITARY BASES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); NAVIES (78%); DEATHS (78%); INTERVIEWS
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (72%); LAWYERS (64%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (64%) United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Suicides
and Suicide Attempts; Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: James Risen; Tim Golden; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CUBA (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             307 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jihadist or Victim: Ex-Detainee Makes a Case

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2543 words


When President Bush ordered Moazzam Begg's release last year from the Guantanamo
prison camp, United States officials say, he did so over objections from the
Pentagon, the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. -- all of which warned that Mr. Begg could
still be a dangerous terrorist.

But American officials may not have imagined the sort of adversary Mr. Begg
would become in the war of perception that is now a primary front in the
American-led campaign against terrorism.

''The issue here is: Apply the law,'' Mr. Begg told an audience earlier this
spring at the Oxford Literary Festival in England, one of many stops on a
continuing lecture tour. ''If I've committed a crime, we say, take this to
court. After all of that, if they can't produce something in court, then shame
on them!''

With a new book about his experiences and a small blizzard of media attention,
Mr. Begg, a 37-year-old Briton of Pakistani descent, has emerged over the last
few months as a minor celebrity in his home country.

Human rights groups have hailed his courage. University students have invited
him to speak. Journalists have generally taken at face value his claim that he
is an innocent man, unlawfully seized and arbitrarily held. After the three
suicides at Guantanamo last Saturday, Mr. Begg instantly became a sought-after
commentator for British newspaper and television reporters.

The respectful reception for Mr. Begg -- whom the Pentagon still portrays as a
terrorist -- is one of many markers of the waning credibility of Washington's
detention policies overseas, and particularly in European countries that are
closely allied with the United States in fighting terrorists.

A British feature film that is to be released in the United States on June 23,
''The Road to Guantanamo,'' depicts another group of former detainees as
innocent, good-natured men cruelly mistreated by their American captors. The
British attorney general, Peter Goldsmith, recently called the prison
''unacceptable'' and said it should be shut down.

Whether Mr. Begg is the potential threat the Pentagon claims or the harmless man
he professes to be cannot be fully resolved from the available evidence. But the
mystery makes Mr. Begg one of the more intriguing case studies in the
trans-Atlantic divide on detention policy.

He and another Briton, Feroz Abbasi, were among the first six Guantanamo
detainees designated by Mr. Bush in 2003 as eligible for trial by military
commissions there. Pentagon officials say Mr. Begg trained at three terrorist
camps, ''associated'' with an array of operatives of Al Qaeda and was ready to
fight American-led forces in Afghanistan but fled into the Tora Bora mountains
when the Taliban lines collapsed.

The British government's refusal to accept the Guantanamo tribunals, in which
rights of due process are sharply limited, eventually forced American officials
to set aside the prosecutions of Mr. Begg and Mr. Abbasi. Officials said they
and two other Britons were finally sent home, in January 2005, after Mr. Bush
overruled most of his senior national security advisers as a favor to Prime
Minister Tony Blair, who was then being harshly criticized for his support of
the Iraq war.

Now, the Bush administration finds itself in the awkward position of insisting
on the danger of a man it set free. ''He has strong, long-term ties to terrorism
-- as a sympathizer, as a recruiter, as a financier and as a combatant,'' said a
Defense Department spokesman, Bryan Whitman.

In interviews in Britain and in his memoir, which is to be published in the
United States on Sept. 11 as ''Enemy Combatant: My Imprisonment at Guantanamo,
Bagram and Kandahar,'' Mr. Begg denied that he ever supported terrorism,
knowingly associated with Qaeda members or took up arms against the United
States. Rather, he offers himself as evidence that the wide American net had
trapped many Muslims who never threatened United States interests.

A Professorial Air

  A small, soft-spoken man with a professorial air, Mr. Begg has distinguished
himself from other former prisoners partly by his tone.

While others have told (and, in some cases, sold) the British press lurid tales
of American interrogators' tempting them with prostitutes and torturing them to
confess, Mr. Begg avoids the word torture. He was sometimes badly mistreated, he
says, and kept in prolonged isolation. But he makes a point of telling audiences
of his friendships with some of his military police guards, and he espouses a
tolerance that seems incompatible with the hatred of militants to whom American
officials link him.

One British interviewer described Mr. Begg as ''devastatingly reasonable.''

Of nearly 20 American military and intelligence officials who were interviewed
about Mr. Begg, none thought he had been wrongly detained. But some said they
doubted that he could be tied to any terrorist acts. At Bagram, where he was
held for 11 months, Mr. Begg's interrogators nicknamed him Hemingway.

''I don't think he was the mastermind of 9/11, but nor do I think he was just an
innocent,'' said Christopher Hogan, a former military interrogator who oversaw
some of Mr. Begg's early questioning there but said he did not have access to
top-secret American or British intelligence files on him. ''We compared him to
somebody who went off to Spain during the civil war -- more of a romantic than
some sort of ideologically steeled fighter.''

Like other military and intelligence personnel familiar with Mr. Begg's
interrogations, Mr. Hogan also described him as having been unusually
forthcoming. ''He provided us with excellent information routinely,'' he said.

Yet if Mr. Begg is a more ambiguous figure than the Bush administration now
describes, the story of his life before he was seized in Pakistan in January
2002 is also more complicated than the account he has put forward, and full of
questions.

Like many from Europe who fell in with Islamic militants in the 1990's, Mr. Begg
was a son of immigrants who settled in a working-class environment where
economic struggles fueled racial prejudice.

During high school in Birmingham, the industrial capital of the English
Midlands, he joined a gang of mostly South Asian teenagers who banded together
against skinheads, punk rockers and other anti-immigrant legions of the day. Mr.
Begg, who now stands 5-foot-3, was the smallest member of the gang; he said he
rarely joined in the fights.

But much of his upbringing did not fit the pattern. His family was relatively
comfortable and liberal. His father, a Muslim born in India, was a bank manager
who wrote poetry in Urdu. He sent Moazzam and his brother to a Jewish primary
school, where they wore blazers with the Star of David.

Inspired by Mujahedeen

  Moazzam's interest in Islam was awakened during a trip with relatives to
Pakistan and Saudi Arabia in his late teens. On a second visit to Pakistan in
late 1993, he writes, he crossed into Afghanistan with some young Pakistanis and
visited a camp where mujahedeen rebels were training to fight the Soviet-backed
Afghan government.

Inspired by the guerrillas' commitment, he threw himself into helping besieged
Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina. He said he traveled to the Balkans 9 or 10
times with a small aid agency, Convoy of Mercy. But the group's founder, Asad
Khan, said he had no recollection of Mr. Begg.

Defense Department officials said one of Mr. Begg's former associates was Omar
Saeed Sheikh, who volunteered on a Convoy trip in 1993. Mr. Sheikh was later
convicted of kidnapping Western tourists in India and is facing execution in
Pakistan for the murder of the Wall Street Journal correspondent Daniel Pearl.
Mr. Begg insisted he did not know Mr. Sheikh.

There are some notable gaps in Mr. Begg's memoir. The book does not mention that
while working as an interpreter at a government welfare office in 1994, he and a
friend were arrested and charged with defrauding the agency. The police found a
night-vision sight, a bullet-proof vest and what news reports called ''extremist
literature'' at Mr. Begg's home.

The charges against him were later dropped for lack of evidence, but his friend,
Shahid A. Butt, pleaded guilty and served 18 months in prison. Mr. Butt was
later convicted with seven other Britons of plotting a terrorist bombing in
Yemen, where he served a five-year sentence.

In early 1998 Mr. Begg, by then married, with two small children, moved his
family to Peshawar, Pakistan, on the border with Afghanistan. He describes the
period as idyllic, with evening strolls through a local park and a quick trip to
visit another training camp in Afghanistan, this one run by Iraqi Kurds. He and
his wife socialized primarily with members of the town's small Palestinian
community, as well as some Arab and Afghan veterans of the anti-Soviet jihad.

But the book does not mention one Palestinian friend, Khalil Deek, who also
lived in Peshawar at the time. The United States 9/11 commission described Mr.
Deek, a naturalized American, as an associate of Abu Zubaydah, a senior Al Qaeda
lieutenant of Palestinian descent who was also in Peshawar then, recruiting new
operatives and sending them to train at Afghan camps.

An American counterterrorism official who began tracking Mr. Begg in 1999 said
the Central Intelligence Agency and MI5, Britain's domestic intelligence
service, suspected Mr. Begg of working with Mr. Deek to create a CD-ROM version
of a terrorist manual, ''Encyclopedia of Jihad,'' which Mr. Deek gave to two
Palestinians who plotted with Mr. Zubaydah to bomb tourist sites in Jordan.

American intelligence officials also said Mr. Deek helped arrange transportation
to Jordan for some operatives in the foiled plot, but after being held in Jordan
for 17 months, he was released without charge.

Mr. Begg acknowledged in an interview that he had met Mr. Deek in Bosnia and
later invested with him in a small business deal to sell traditional Pakistani
clothing. But he said he had never met Abu Zubaydah -- something Pentagon
officials said he had admitted to his American interrogators.

He also denied an assertion by Mr. Whitman, the Pentagon spokesman, that he
spent five days in early 1998 at Derunta, a notorious Al Qaeda-affiliated
training camp in Afghanistan, learning about poisons and explosives.

Two Defense Department officials read to a reporter from what they said were
lengthy sworn statements Mr. Begg made to the Federal Bureau of Investigation,
admitting that he had supported jihad in Chechnya and Kashmir, knew a half-dozen
Al Qaeda figures and had trained at Derunta and two other Afghan camps.

Mr. Begg said that he had never told the F.B.I. anything of the sort, but that
he did sign some documents in custody because he feared for his life.

After he returned to Birmingham in the summer of 1998, he and a friend opened an
Islamic bookstore, which he described as a meeting place for young Muslims,
including some who later fought in the separatist struggle in Kashmir.

Mr. Begg received a first visit from an officer of MI5 soon after the shop
opened. A year later, in late 1999, dozens of police agents searched the book
shop and Mr. Begg's home. They were raided again in February 2000, and Mr. Begg
was arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, but was quickly released
without charge.

'It Was Going Too Far'

  Mr. Whitman, at the Defense Department, said the British government cited Mr.
Begg's ''proven or suspected links to persons who have been arrested or
convicted of terrorist offenses worldwide,'' including Richard C. Reid, who was
later convicted of trying to blow up a trans-Atlantic flight with a shoe bomb.
Mr. Begg said he had never met Mr. Reid or two other men, Ibn al-Shekh al-Libi
and Abu Qatada, whom Pentagon officials linked to him.

''Up until this time I had thought it was all just a silly mistake or a fishing
trip,'' Mr. Begg wrote of the security services' interest in his activities,
''but now I knew it was going too far.''

He said in an interview that he had never even heard of Al Qaeda before 9/11. He
knew something about Osama bin Laden, he said, but generally agreed with those
who saw Mr. bin Laden's conflict with the United States as counterproductive for
Muslims. He said he opposed attacks against civilians but saw justification for
jihadi assaults on ''military targets'' in ''times of war.''

In July 2001, little more than a year after his brief arrest, Mr. Begg moved his
wife and children to Afghanistan. Despite the Taliban's status as an
international pariah for its treatment of women and its hospitality toward Al
Qaeda, the Beggs saw it as a fine, inexpensive place to raise a family. The
memoir describes Mr. Begg's work on charity projects and his fascination with
the atmosphere of Kabul. But without television, he writes, he did not grasp the
enormity of the Sept. 11 attacks. Only when bombs and cruise missiles began to
strike on Oct. 17 did he realize ''it was time to go.''

But, he said, he became separated from his family and reunited with them only
after he crossed the border to Pakistan. They had been in Islamabad only a
couple of months when, on Jan. 31, 2002, Pakistani intelligence agents and
C.I.A. officers burst into their home, pulled a hood over his head and took him
away.

Mr. Begg's memoir recounts a three-year odyssey from a safe house in Pakistan to
a prison camp in Kandahar, Afghanistan, to the main military prison at Bagram
Air Base and finally to Guantanamo. He describes endlessly repetitive
interrogations, with soldiers sometimes demanding information about events that
took place after his capture.

Even now, he says, the accusations against him remain maddeningly vague.

''There is no specific allegation; there are no specific charges,'' he said in
one interview. ''Whom did I recruit? When did I recruit them? Who told them
this? What is the corroborating information -- names, times, places?''

After repeated questions about Mr. Begg by The New York Times, Pentagon
officials offered some information they said had been declassified from
intelligence files. Mr. Whitman said the files showed Mr. Begg to be ''a
sympathizer, a recruiter and a financier'' for terrorists. But officials offered
almost nothing to corroborate such assertions other than excerpts they read from
the F.B.I. statements.

Still, Mr. Begg has hardly been ignored by the administration. Earlier this
year, a State Department public diplomacy official, Colleen P. Graffy,
challenged his supporters, saying, ''Guantanamo is not a spa, but nor is it an
inhumane torture camp.'' The department's little-known Office of
Countermisinformation has also sought to refute Mr. Begg's claims.

But other American officials said their secrecy about the detainees was partly
responsible for having Mr. Begg's version of events accepted as credible.

''This has been the story of our lives here in trying to convince the world
about the propriety of keeping people in Guantanamo,'' said one senior
administration official in Washington, who asked not to be named because he was
criticizing government policies. ''It's been difficult to persuade all U.S.
government agencies to release enough information publicly to show that
individuals like Begg represent a significant threat.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Moazzam Begg, a former Guantanamo detainee rich in ambiguities.
(Photo by Paolo Pellegrin/Magnum, for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
Moazzam Begg, right, with a lawyer, Clive Stafford Smith, in London in November.
Mr. Begg was held for two years at Guantanamo, top. Whether President Bush
should have released him is still an open question. (Photo by Hugo
Philpott/European Pressphoto Agency)
 (Photo by Mark Wilson/Getty Images)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); TALIBAN (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); FESTIVALS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); LITERATURE (74%);
WRITERS (74%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); JOURNALISM (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(72%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (69%); SUICIDE (65%);
CASE STUDIES (60%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (51%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (88%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (71%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); EUROPE
(79%); ENGLAND (71%)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             309 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contradictions Cloud Inquiry Into 24 Iraqi Deaths

BYLINE: This article was reported by John M. Broder, David S. Cloud, John
Kifner, Carolyn Marshall, Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker, and was written by Mr.
Broder.; John M. Broder reported from Los Angeles and Camp Pendleton, Calif.,
for this article; David S. Cloud, Eric Schmitt and Thom Shanker from Washington;
John Kifner from Cincinnati; and Carolyn Marshall from Camp Pendleton.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 2604 words


What really happened in Haditha on Nov. 19, 2005?

On that day, marines killed 24 Iraqi civilians, including 10 women and children
and an elderly man in a wheelchair. But how and why it happened and who
ultimately bears responsibility are matters of profound dispute.

Interviews with marines who were present that day or their lawyers, Iraqi
residents who witnessed the attack and military investigators provide broadly
conflicting accounts of the killings. This article, based on those interviews,
does not resolve those discrepancies. But it does lay bare the task facing
investigators as they try to square the accounts with ambiguous forensic
evidence, and suggests that the work will be hindered by the passage of time,
the tricks of memory and the fog of fast-paced action at several different
locations in Haditha, a tense Euphrates River valley city, seven months ago.

Investigators and townspeople have said that marines overreacted to a fatal
roadside bombing and shot the civilians, only one of whom was armed, in cold
blood.

Marines and their lawyers, who are only now beginning to speak out after months
of harsh portrayals of their actions, contend that they believed they were under
a concerted attack, and entitled under their rules of engagement to use lethal
force against those who they believed were responsible for a roadside bomb that
killed a marine.

The 24 Iraqis killed included 5 men in a taxi and 19 other civilians in several
houses, where, marines have contended, their use of grenades and blind fire was
permitted under their combat guidelines when they believed their lives were
threatened.

However, investigators have found evidence that the men in the taxi were not
fleeing the bombing scene, as the marines have told military officials.
Investigators have also concluded that most of the victims in three houses died
from well-aimed rifle shots, not shrapnel or random fire, according to military
officials familiar with the initial findings.

The houses where the killings took place show no evidence of the violent
room-clearing assault described by the marines and their lawyers, the officials
said.

The bodies have not yet been exhumed for autopsies, and defense lawyers can be
expected to challenge the narrow use of photographic evidence on these points.
But according to two people briefed on the investigation, one member of the
Marine squad at Haditha, himself closely tied to some of the deaths, is now
cooperating with investigators.

The Army general investigating allegations of a cover-up has submitted his
report to Lt. Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli, the No. 2 American commander in Iraq, the
military announced yesterday, but its conclusions have not been made public.

There is little dispute over how the events that led to the deaths of the
civilians began. A 13-man squad of the 3rd Platoon of Company K, known as Kilo
Company, set off before dawn on Nov. 19 from its Haditha headquarters, Fire Base
Sparta, to help replace some Iraqi Army troops at a combat outpost about three
miles to the south. The squad, in four Humvees, was returning to Sparta heading
west along a route the members called Chestnut Road.

A Bomb in the Road

  About two miles from their base, an improvised explosive device, or I.E.D.,
buried in the road exploded under the fourth vehicle, instantly killing Lance
Cpl. Miguel Terrazas, 20, of El Paso. Two other marines, Lance Cpl. James
Crossan and Lance Cpl. Salvador Guzman, were seriously injured.

What happened immediately after the bomb hit, and over the next four to five
hours as the squad dispersed and called in reinforcements, remains in dispute.
Staff Sgt. Frank D. Wuterich, the leader of the squad, told his lawyer, Neal A.
Puckett, that he had quickly set up a defensive perimeter around the convoy and
called in the casualty report. He said he had seen a white car, now usually
referred to as a taxi, containing a driver and four young men. The marines
suspected that those men were spotters for the bomb.

Several marines approached the car, shouting commands in broken Arabic.
According to Sergeant Wuterich's account, the men jumped out of the car and
disobeyed orders to stop. The marines shot and killed them.

But residents watching the episode from nearby homes have told contradictory
stories.

Some described the men as students on their way to a technical college in
Baghdad, and said they had been shot while still sitting in the car. Others said
they had been pulled from the car, ordered to lie on the ground and then
executed.

According to Mr. Puckett, Sergeant Wuterich and his men believed their rules of
engagement permitted them to shoot men of military age running away from the
site of an improvised explosive device.

Two people briefed on the investigation said Thursday that evidence gathered on
the shooting of the taxi passengers now appeared to be the most at odds with the
account given by marines through their lawyers.

One Defense Department official said photographs indicated that the positions of
those corpses -- and the pooling of their blood -- can be viewed as sharply
inconsistent with the marines' version that the Iraqi men were shot as they
fled.

''We may not know for sure what happened, but it doesn't look like there was any
running involved,'' said the official, who would only discuss the inquiry on the
condition of anonymity because the matter remains under investigation.

A second person who has been briefed on the inquiry said that ''there was no
question'' that the taxi shooting ''is the most problematic'' and that Navy
investigators were focusing on the actions of one particular marine in the
squad, although no charges had been filed.

The marines have said they believed they were coming under small-arms fire from
a house on the south side of the road. A four-man ''stack'' of marines, led by
Sergeant Wuterich, who up to that point had no combat experience but was the
senior enlisted man on the scene, broke into the house.

They found no one in the first room, but heard noises behind a door. A marine
with experience in the deadly house-to-house fighting in Falluja a year earlier
rolled in a grenade and another marine fired blind ''clearing rounds'' into the
room, Mr. Puckett, Sergeant Wuterich's lawyer, said.

The technique is known as ''clearing by fire,'' said a marine who was with a
nearby squad that day but who asked not to be identified because his role in the
events is under investigation. ''You stick the weapon around and spray the
room,'' he said. ''It's called prepping the room.''

He added: ''You've got to do whatever it takes to get home. If it takes clearing
by fire where there's civilians, that's it.''

Many of the marines in Kilo Company had served on their previous deployment in
Falluja, which had largely been cleared of civilians before they entered, and
where permissive rules of engagement were in force. But Haditha was a different
combat environment, with insurgents intermingled with civilians. In training
between the two deployments, marines were taught how to protect civilians, and
were instructed on more restrictive combat rules.

Months of Violence

  Haditha, deep in Sunni-dominated Anbar Province, had taken a heavy toll in
marines that spring and summer. In August, six scout-snipers from an Ohio
reserve battalion were ambushed and killed on patrol.

Two days later, 14 more were killed when their amphibious track ran over
antitank mines stacked three high. Four others were killed early in a fierce
firefight inside a hospital, where insurgents hid behind patients.

''Saying who's a civilian or a 'muj' in Iraq, you really can't,'' the marine
said. ''That's how wishy-washy it was. This town did not want us there at all.''
Mr. Puckett, the lawyer, said that the marines in Haditha believed that they
were operating within established rules when they cleared the house.

When the smoke cleared, however, the marines found seven civilians dead,
including two women and a 4-year-old boy. Two young children survived the attack
by hiding under a bed, the children told reporters later. Another child and an
woman escaped.

The marines saw a back door open, Mr. Puckett said, and believed themselves to
be in ''hot pursuit'' of an insurgent gunman. They burst into a second house,
using assault rifles and grenades to clear a room, killing eight civilians,
including two women and five children ages 3 to 14.

This account, however, does not square with the survivors' recollections and the
conclusions of the military's preliminary investigation led by Col. Gregory Watt
of the Army.

For several reasons, Colonel Watt does not believe the marines' version is
accurate, according to a military official who has been briefed on the
investigation but who would not discuss it on the record because it was not yet
complete.

Colonel Watt has interviewed more than two dozen people, including all the
marines in the First Squad, their reinforcements and Iraqi civilians in Haditha,
including the morgue director.

Some marines told Colonel Watt they were let into the houses they entered;
others said they conducted forced entries, the military official said. Colonel
Watt was also troubled by the fact that marines did not change their tactics
after discovering that they had killed unarmed civilians in the first house, the
official said. A dozen more civilians were killed after the first encounter.

The wounds of the dead Iraqis, as seen in photographs and viewed by the morgue
director, were not consistent with attacks by fragmentation grenades and
indiscriminate rifle fire, Colonel Watt found. The civilian survivors said the
victims were shot at close range, some while trying to protect their children or
praying for their lives. The death certificates Colonel Watt examined were
chillingly succinct: well-aimed shots to the head and chest.

Inconsistent Evidence

  In addition, if the marines had violently cleared the houses using automatic
weapons and fragmentation grenades, there would be lots of damage and bullet
marks in the walls. Early investigators said they found no such evidence,
although the walls may have been patched before they arrived.

As this was going on, a Marine quick-reaction force was trying to make its way
to the bomb site. So was another unit, a nine-man squad led by Sgt. Francis
Wolf, a young but experienced combat veteran, and joined by Capt. Lucas
McConnell, according to a corporal who was with the group.

Members of this squad gave differing accounts of their actions. One said that
they quickly came under fire. ''All we knew was, there's a big firefight,'' one
marine in this group told his lawyer, Paul L. Hackett, a major in the Marine
Reserves and an unsuccessful Democratic candidate for Congress from Ohio in a
special election last fall. ''You just heard it everywhere, medium, heavy
machine gun fire.''

The marine represented by Mr. Hackett added: ''This whole section of the city is
a kill zone. We're getting shot every time we turn around.''

But a corporal from this same group, who had been badly wounded in Falluja but
was able to return for a second deployment, said there was intermittent
small-arms fire that did not appear to him to be directed at his patrol. The
other marine may have been hearing the First Squad's action about 700 yards up
the road at the bombing site and thought they were under fire, he suggested.

After clearing the second house, Sergeant Wuterich realized there had been a
significant number of civilian deaths, and reported to the platoon's operations
center that there had been ''collateral damage'' from the operations, according
to his lawyer. He estimated the dead as 12 to 15 Iraqis. Investigators are
looking into whether and how a junior officer, who was monitoring the action
from a nearby observation post, passed along the report of civilian casualties.

Before the episode ended, marines killed four more men in a third house, one of
whom was armed with an AK-47, according to Mr. Puckett's account. Another squad
shot a 45-year-old man who they said appeared to be carrying a weapon, but who
actually was using a cane. Groups of marines came to the scene throughout the
day to evacuate the wounded and bundle up the dead.

Regrets and Cautions

  When they found civilians had been killed, a marine said, Sergeant Wuterich
''was pretty torn up about it. He was pretty remorseful.'' Captain McConnell,
the same marine said, refused a request later that day to have a tank fire on a
house considered threatening, saying: ''There could be women and children. We've
had enough women and children die today.''

The next day, the Marines issued a press release stating that 15 Iraqi civilians
had been killed in a bombing in Haditha and that marines had killed 8 insurgents
after they opened fire on Kilo Company. That statement has not been corrected or
retracted.

About a dozen enlisted marines, including Sergeant Wuterich and Sergeant Wolf,
who engaged in or witnessed the shootings are under investigation for possible
charges ranging from dereliction of duty to murder. A number of their superiors,
up to the division level, are also under scrutiny for failing to report the
events accurately and respond appropriately.

Two mid-level officers, including Captain McConnell, have already been relieved,
for reasons not yet made public.

Gary Myers, a lawyer who has been retained by a marine under investigation in
the Haditha shooting, said he had been told by his client that the marines were
operating within existing regulations. Mr. Myers suggested that responsibility
should be placed on the commanders who approved those rules of engagement, and
not on the soldiers on the ground at Haditha. ''I don't want to see these
marines isolated and vilified,'' he said.



2nd Marine Division: Led by Maj. Gen. Richard A. Huck.

2nd Marine Regiment

After the battalion returned to Camp Pendleton, Calif., sometime around April,
it returned to the command of:

1st Marine Division: Led by Maj. Gen. Richard F. Natonski, who relieved two
officers of command in April in connection with the Haditha investigation.

1st Marine Regiment

3rd Battalion, 1st Marines: Known as the 3/1. Was led by Lt. Col. Jeffrey
Chessani, who was one of the two officers relieved of duty in April.

IN HADITHA ON NOV. 19
Company K (Kilo Company)

About 180 people. Was led by Capt. Lucas McConnell, who was the other officer
relieved of duty in April. He joined members of the 2nd Squad in responding
after the Humvee was hit.

1st Platoon -- Was called to respond to the bombing and came under fire en
route.

2nd Platoon

3rd Platoon -- Led by 2nd Lt. Will Kallop. He was the first officer to arrive at
the scene of the bombing.

Weapons Platoon -- Stationed at an outpost. Tried to respond to bombing, but
came under attack.

1st Squad
13-man unit that is under investigation in the killings of Iraqis in Haditha.
The unit's convoy on the morning of Nov. 19.

1st Humvee
2nd Humvee
3rd Humvee -- The squad's leader, Staff Sgt. Frank D. Wuterich, was in this
vehicle.
4th Humvee -- Hit by bomb. Lance Cpl. Miguel Terrazas, the driver, was killed.
Lance Corporals James Crossan and Salvador Guzman were seriously injured.

2nd Squad -- Some members of this unit, led by Sgt. Francis Wolf, went to the
scene of the bombing.

3rd Squad -- As the designated Quick Reaction Force, this unit was deployed to
the scene of the bombing.

Map of Iraq highlighting neighborhood where killings occurred: A military report
on the deaths of civilians at Haditha, Iraq, on Nov. 19 has not been released.
(pg. A6)

(Sources by Marine officials, marines in Company K and their lawyers)(pg. A6)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A still from a videotape, which an Iraqi human rights group said
had been taken shortly after civilians were killed by marines in Haditha. The
images helped lead to an investigation into the killings of Nov. 19. (Photo by
Hammurabi Human Rights Group)(pg. A6)Drawings (Drawings by Archie Tse/The New
York Times)(pg. A6)Chart: ''An Accounting of the Victims''On Nov. 19, 2005, a
Marine convoy traveling through Haditha, Iraq, was hit by a bomb, killing one
soldier. The squad then went house to house to find who had attacked them.
Twenty-four Iraqi civilians were killed. The unit is now being investigated as
to whether the killings were justified under the military's rules of
engagement.Taxi: 5 KILLEDWitnesses said the driver and four students were
executed. A lawyer for one of the marines said the men were shot after
disobeying orders to stop.First House: 7 KILLEDAn elderly man who used a
wheelchair was among those killed. Two young children survived by hiding under a
bed.Second House: 8 KILLEDA lawyer for one of the marines said the soldiers used
assault rifles and grenades to clear the house. A young girl said she survived
by pretending to be dead.Third House: 4 KILLEDA lawyer for one of the marines
said that one of the men was armed with an AK-47. A witness said that the women
were forced out of the house before the men were killed.Tracing the Chain of
CommandMany of the marines in the 13-man squad hit by a roadside bomb in
Haditha, Iraq, last November are under investigation for the subsequent deaths
of 24 civilians. Others up the chain of command are also being investigated for
possibly trying to cover up the incident.During its tour of Iraq when the
Haditha incident occured, the squad, part of the 3rd Battalion, 1st Marines, was
under the command of:

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAWYERS (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); ARMIES (89%); BOMBINGS
(89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); AUTOPSIES (78%);
WAR & CONFLICT (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); FORENSICS (76%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); EYEWITNESSES (76%);
GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); CITY LIFE (68%); CITIES (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%) United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

PERSON: John M Broder

COUNTRY: IRAQ (99%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             310 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Still Weighing Genocide Case From Milosevic Era

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 985 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


Among the unfinished business left by the death of Slobodan Milosevic is the
central question of whether he was guilty, as charged, of genocide in Bosnia.

But while his death brought a sudden end to his trial at the United Nations war
crimes tribunal, the genocide issue may well be decided by another United
Nations court based in The Hague: the International Court of Justice.

That court, also known as the World Court, has recently finished nine weeks of
hearings on a case filed 13 years ago, in the middle of the Bosnian war. With
Muslim villages under attack and civilians driven into detention camps, Bosnia's
lawyers turned to the court, accusing Yugoslavia of violations ''on all counts''
of the United Nations Convention on Genocide.

The case was held back by a slow-paced institution and by repeated legal moves
by Belgrade to block the lawsuit. In the meantime, Yugoslavia became Serbia and
Montenegro in 2003, and in May simply Serbia.

Now, the hearings over, judges from 16 countries must give their interpretation
of events from the 1992-1995 war. That is expected within the year.

The terror campaign to clear non-Serbs from large swathes of Bosnia has become
commonly known as ''ethnic cleansing,'' but the line, if any, between ethnic
cleansing and genocide has divided legal experts examining events from Bosnia to
Iraq and Darfur.

The World Court suit is unique in that it is not a criminal trial of individuals
-- like those at the tribunals for Yugoslavia, Rwanda or Sierra Leone -- but
rather a civil proceeding, in which for the first time one state is suing
another charging genocide.

The suit may well be the most complex in the 60-year history of the World Court,
the United Nations' highest, which usually deals with issues of sovereignty,
diplomatic relations, and land or sea boundaries.

''This will give new relevance to a court that was sidelined by the new war
crimes tribunals,'' said Antoine Garapon, director of the Institute for Advanced
Legal Studies in Paris. ''It may ultimately pass a historic judgment on
Milosevic and his regime, even if that was not its function.''

Should the court rule in Bosnia's favor, the Serbian state will suffer the
stigma of having committed genocide, an outcome that would implicate the entire
Milosevic government.

For Serbian citizens and their fledgling economy, that could mean also being
saddled with hefty war reparations. Bosnia has asked the court to award damages
for the loss of life and property. During the war, 100,000 people died, the
majority of them Muslims, and entire Muslim towns and villages were destroyed,
including their mosques and monuments. No figure was set.

Serbia has argued that there were local excesses of war but no genocidal
campaign, that Belgrade did not control events in Bosnia and that a verdict
favoring Bosnia will make reconciliation between the neighbors even more
difficult.

Bosnia says the opposite, and argues it needs ''recognition of Serb guilt'' even
more than reparations.

Even at this late stage, Serbia has raised new obstacles, challenging once more
the jurisdiction of the court. It argued that during the relevant period,
Yugoslavia was not a member of the United Nations and, by extension, not a party
to the court. In the past, judges twice ruled the court had jurisdiction.

In the recent hearings, the opposing legal teams made ample use of documents,
evidence and even witnesses from trials at the war crimes tribunal, which sits a
few miles away. The tribunal found genocide at Srebrenica in 1995, when more
than 7,000 Muslim men and boys were executed.

But at least one crucial cache of material has remained out of reach. The
wartime records of the Supreme Defense Council, which included Yugoslavia's
military and political leaders, were handed to the tribunal after much Western
pressure.

But Belgrade secured the guarantee that they be accessible only to the court's
judges and lawyers. Belgrade officials claimed national security, but some have
made it no secret they wanted to keep the records out of the hands of the
Bosnians suing them at the World Court.

Tribunal officials familiar with the secret archives said the minutes of the
meetings revealed much about how Belgrade ran the war in Bosnia.

''Of course people may say things differently if they know they are recorded,''
one official said, requesting anonymity because he lacked permission to speak to
reporters. ''Milosevic was also known to convey important decisions in
private.'' Parts of the minutes were missing, he said.

During Mr. Milosevic's trial, prosecutors said the archives provided the best
records and insights into his real power and his state of mind.

Human rights lawyers have insisted that opening the archives is necessary for
Serbia to be confronted with its wartime history.

For now, Bosnia must demonstrate that Serbia not only supplied but also
controlled the troops that were involved in eradicating Muslim communities --
including Bosnian Serb troops and Belgrade's own special forces and militias.

Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb military commander wanted for genocide by
the war crimes tribunal, traveled to Belgrade almost weekly during the war,
according to testimony from NATO commanders.

Legally proving genocide requires showing intent to destroy a group, in whole or
in part. Phon van den Biesen, of the Bosnian team, said that intent was evident
in this case from the pattern of crimes on the ground, including the destruction
of close to 1,000 mosques, so evidence from the archives would not be needed.

Lawyers following the case said defining genocide or proving it at this court
might be different. ''This is not a criminal trial and the levels of proof
needed are not as high,'' said Richard Dicker, a director of Human Rights Watch.
''In any case, it will be hugely important to see how this court interprets and
rules on genocide.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bosnian women in Tuzla last week with photos of missing kin.
They sought arrests of Bosnian Serb fugitives. (Photo by Amel Emric/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (94%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
CIVIL PROCEDURE (77%); RELIGION (75%); DAMAGES (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (72%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF
JUSTICE (92%) United Nations; International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ (79%); FRANCE (67%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             311 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Seeking An Exit Strategy for Guantanamo

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section 4; Column 5; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 970 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


IF an enemy devised a diabolical plot to darken America's image, it is hard to
imagine anything operating more efficiently toward that end than the detention
camp at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. And last week, after the suicides of three inmates
intensified condemnation at home and abroad, President Bush mused about whether
the camp should be closed.

''I'd like to close Guantanamo,'' the president told a press conference Tuesday,
and acknowledged what even close allies like the British have argued for some
time: ''No question, Guantanamo sends a signal to some of our friends --
provides an excuse, for example, to say the United States is not upholding the
values that they're trying to encourage other countries to adhere to.''

Yet Mr. Bush insisted that some Guantanamo prisoners are too dangerous to set
free, and even the camp's fiercest critics admit that shutting Guantanamo and
deciding what to do with the remaining 460 prisoners would not be easy. Still
more problematic is deciding the fate of as many as three dozen so-called ''high
value'' Al Qaeda prisoners held in overseas jails overseen by the Central
Intelligence Agency.

In fact, the ''end game'' for detainees, as some in the government call it,
requires grappling with problems posed by a war with no conventional enemy
soldiers, no rules and no clear conclusion.

The challenges include gauging how dangerous it would be to set a particular
Islamist radical free; devising trials that offer a measure of military justice
but not the full protections of civilian courts, and deciding whether to
transfer prisoners to countries that might free a hardened jihadist or torture a
political dissident.

At stake in the camp's future is more than America's reputation, said Timothy
Naftali, a University of Virginia historian who has written on American
counterterrorism.

He said Guantanamo has become ''a wonderful recruitment trigger'' for Islamist
extremists, as its perceived injustices are detailed and magnified on the Web.
If there is a security risk in shutting the camp down, there is also a security
risk in keeping it open, Mr. Naftali said.

American officials made a strategic decision after the Sept. 11 attacks not to
treat suspected terrorists either as criminal defendants or as prisoners of war,
because either option could preclude interrogation to learn of impending
attacks. One consequence has been to land detainees in a legal netherworld with
no obvious exit.

The drive for intelligence, meanwhile, led to aggressive interrogation
techniques that some F.B.I. agents and military lawyers thought abusive and
unwise. In a 2004 memo made public this year by The New Yorker, the Navy's
general counsel, Alberto J. Mora, described warning colleagues in 2002 that
degrading treatment for prisoners would prove ''almost incalculably harmful to
U.S. foreign, military and legal policies.''

The administration chose Guantanamo because it is a place outside the American
justice system. But American courts reached it, with the Supreme Court's 2004
ruling in Rasul v. Bush that federal courts must consider petitions from its
inmates.

Now the government and its critics are awaiting the high court's ruling in
Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, which will determine whether Congress can strip civilian
judges of their power over Guantanamo cases and whether the inmates can be tried
as war criminals before special military commissions.

The commissions would allow far greater flexibility than civilian courts in
using hearsay evidence, protecting intelligence secrets and closing parts of
trials, said A. John Radsan, former assistant general counsel at the Central
Intelligence Agency, but they would probably be used for only a few inmates. The
government would have to persuade other nations to take the rest.

Some 290 Guantanamo prisoners have been released or sent to their home
countries, the Pentagon says. But other countries are not eager to take them,
especially if America doesn't want them set free, said Scott L. Silliman,
director of the Center on Law, Ethics and National Security at Duke University
law school. ''The countries are saying, 'You never charged them,' '' he said. ''
'How do you expect us to charge and incarcerate them on your behalf?' ''

Some former inmates return to the battlefield, as American officials fear they
will. But the case of five ethnic Uighurs from China illustrates another problem
as well. American officials cleared them of wrongdoing but did not want to
return them to China, where they might face prison. They were sent to Albania
last month to seek asylum.

Some analysts have proposed other options, like convening a special court under
the auspices of the United Nations. Mr. Naftali has suggested a high-tech
international monitoring system for those released.

For civil libertarians, it is urgent to come up with a solution to the
Guantanamo conundrum and the underlying question of how to treat terrorist
suspects.

''It's set the cause of human rights back permanently,'' said Michael Ratner,
president of the Center for Constitutional Rights, whose lawyers are co-counsels
for 200 Guantanamo detainees. ''For decades,'' he said, the recent practices
''will be a green light for other countries that that want to go off the page of
fundamental human rights.''

Mr. Radsan, the former C.I.A. lawyer, offers a more measured critique. He says
the secret detainees held abroad are a more serious constitutional concern than
the Guantanamo inmates, because they have no access to any legal process.

Still, he said, critics need to keep in mind that preventing another terrorist
attack also helps preserve civil liberties. A major attack on American soil, he
said, could prove ''devastating'' for the justice system, leading to incursions
on rights that might make Guantanamo's flaws seem modest.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Basics -- Items for the prisoners. (Photo by Joe
Skipper/Reuters)(pg. 1)
 Transport -- Going to interrogation. (Photo by Marc Serota/Reuters)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); POWS &
MIAS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA (87%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (87%); US
PRESIDENTS (77%); MILITARY BASES (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); INTERROGATION OF
SUSPECTS (77%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (71%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(71%); NAVIES (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%); LAWYERS (69%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE
FORCES (66%); HISTORY (65%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (64%); ARMED FORCES (64%);
CORPORATE COUNSEL (60%); PRESS CONFERENCES (56%) Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba); United States International Relations; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (82%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (82%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group); Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (67%) Scott Shane; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             313 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 21, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Argentina: Impunity Gone, 'Dirty War' Trial Begins

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 119 words


The trial of a security official accused of human rights abuses during the
military dictatorship of the 1970's, the first such legal proceeding since the
Supreme Court overturned a pair of amnesty laws last year, has begun in La
Plata, the capital of Buenos Aires Province. Miguel Etchecolatz, the former
chief of investigations of the provincial police, faces charges of illegal
arrest, torture and murder in eight cases. He was found guilty of kidnapping
political prisoners in a 1986 trial and sentenced to 23 years in prison, but
that verdict was later vacated because of the amnesty provision, which granted
immunity from prosecution to officials who were following their superiors'
orders.   LARRY ROHTER (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AMNESTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); MURDER (88%);
PRISONS (88%); SENTENCING (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); TORTURE (88%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (87%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (87%);
MILITARY RULE (86%); IMMUNITY (86%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (86%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (84%)

PERSON: Larry Rother; Miguel Etchecolatz

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (92%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%)

REGION: Argentina

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             315 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 28, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Damage Study Urged on Surveillance Reports

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE; Dan Bilefsky contributed reporting from Brussels for
this article, and Carl Hulse and Eric Lichtblau from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 925 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 27


Senator Pat Roberts, the chairman of the Senate intelligence committee, asked
the director of national intelligence on Tuesday to assess any damage to
American counterterrorism efforts caused by the disclosure of secret programs to
monitor telephone calls and financial transactions.

Mr. Roberts, Republican of Kansas, singled out The New York Times for an article
last week that reported that the government was tracking money transfers handled
by a banking consortium based in Belgium. The targeting of the financial data,
which includes some Americans' transactions, was also reported Thursday by The
Los Angeles Times and The Wall Street Journal.

In his letter to John D. Negroponte, director of national intelligence, Mr.
Roberts wrote that ''we have been unable to persuade the media to act
responsibly and to protect the means by which we protect this nation.''

He asked for a formal evaluation of damage to intelligence collection resulting
from the revelation of the secret financial monitoring as well as The Times's
disclosure in December of the National Security Agency's monitoring of phone
calls and e-mail messages of Americans suspected of having links to Al Qaeda.

In London, meanwhile, a human rights group said Tuesday that it had filed
complaints in 32 countries alleging that the banking consortium, known as Swift,
violated European and Asian privacy laws by giving the United States access to
its data.

Simon Davies, director of the group, Privacy International, said the scale of
the American monitoring, involving millions of records, ''places this disclosure
in the realm of a fishing exercise rather than a legally authorized
investigation.''

The Belgian prime minister, Guy Verhofstadt, has asked the Justice Ministry to
investigate whether Swift violated Belgian law by allowing the United States
government access to its data.

The American Civil Liberties Union has condemned the program, and a Chicago
lawyer, Steven E. Schwarz, filed a federal class-action lawsuit against Swift on
Friday alleging that it had violated United States financial privacy statutes.

President Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow and
numerous Republicans in Congress have vigorously defended the financial tracking
program as legal and valuable and condemned its public disclosure. They have
suggested that the articles might tip off terrorists that their money transfers
could be detected. Representative J. D. Hayworth, Republican of Arizona,
circulated a letter to colleagues on Tuesday asking that The Times's
Congressional press credentials be suspended.

Tony Snow, the White House spokesman, said any effort to measure damage to
intelligence collection would take some time.

''It's not as if the terrorists are going to say, 'Oops! Going to stop doing
that,' '' Mr. Snow said at a briefing. ''But I think it is safe to say that once
you provide a piece of intelligence, people on the other side act on it.''

The electronic messaging system operated by Swift, the Society for Worldwide
Interbank Financial Telecommunication, routes nearly $6 trillion a day in
transfers among nearly 8,000 financial institutions.

At a confirmation hearing on Tuesday for Henry M. Paulson Jr., the nominee for
Treasury secretary, Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, asked whether the
monitoring might violate the Fourth Amendment's protection against unreasonable
searches. ''I think you'll agree that we could fight terrorism properly and
adequately without having a police state in America,'' Mr. Baucus said.

Mr. Paulson did not express an opinion on the propriety of the Swift monitoring
but pledged to study it. ''I am going to, if confirmed, be all over it, make
sure I learn everything there is to learn, make sure I understand the law
thoroughly,'' he said.

Democratic staff members said they had pressed Treasury officials in recent days
for a fuller accounting of which members of Congress were briefed on the program
and whether notification requirements under the International Economic Emergency
Powers Act, invoked by President Bush days after Sept. 11, were met.

Treasury officials have told Congressional staff members that they briefed the
full intelligence committees of both houses about a month ago, after inquiries
by The Times, according to one Democratic aide who spoke on condition of
anonymity. Some members were told of the program several years ago, but the
Treasury Department has not provided a list of who was informed when, the aide
said.

Democrats said they hoped to get a clearer idea of the legal foundations for the
program, how it was monitored, and how long it will be allowed to continue under
the president's invocation of emergency powers.

Representative Carolyn B. Maloney, a New York Democrat who serves on the House
financial services committee, said Tuesday: ''The administration is basing its
actions on a 1970's law that never envisioned a state of perpetual emergency. It
wasn't meant to become the status quo. That is why Congress needs to look at its
current use.''

Victor Comras, a former State Department official who served on a United Nations
counterterrorism advisory group, pointed out on The Counterterrorism Blog that a
2002 United Nations report had noted with approval that the United States was
monitoring international financial systems.

While providing no details, the report mentioned Swift and similar
organizations, saying ''the United States has begun to apply new monitoring
techniques to spot and verify suspicious transactions.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An aerial view of the headquarters of Swift, a Brussels-based
banking consortium that handled money transfers tracked by the United States.
(Photo by Christian Widemann/Ricardo Bofill Taller de Arquitectura, via
Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
WIRETAPPING (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (87%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); LITIGATION (70%);
ELECTRONIC MAIL (67%); CLASS ACTIONS (66%); LAWYERS (66%) Terrorism; Banks and
Banking; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; United States International Relations; News
and News Media; Terrorism

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (71%); WALL STREET JOURNAL (57%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (55%) Swift (Society for
World Interbank Financial Telecommunication); New York Times

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (71%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (71%)

PERSON: PAT ROBERTS (91%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (78%); DICK CHENEY (59%); GEORGE W
BUSH (56%) Scott Shane; John D Negroponte; Pat (Sen) Roberts

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (77%)

STATE: KANSAS, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BELGIUM (88%)

REGION: London (Eng)

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             317 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Ruling, Uncertainty Hovers at Cuba Prison

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; National Desk; THE RULING ON TRIBUNALS: THE
PRISON; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1381 words

DATELINE: GUANTANAMO BAY, Cuba, June 29


As the Supreme Court prepared to rule on the Bush administration's plan to try
terror suspects before special military tribunals here, the commander of
Guantanamo's military detention center was asked what impact the court's
decision might have on its operations.

''If they rule against the government, I don't see how that is going to affect
us,'' the commander, Rear Adm. Harry B. Harris, said Tuesday evening as he sat
in a conference room in his headquarters. ''From my perspective, I think the
direct impact will be negligible.''

The Defense Department repeated that view on Thursday, asserting that the
court's sweeping ruling against the tribunals did not undermine the government's
argument that it can hold foreign suspects indefinitely and without charge, as
''enemy combatants'' in its declared war on terror.

Privately, though, some administration officials involved in detention policy --
along with many critics of that policy -- were skeptical that Guantanamo could
or would go about its business as before. ''It appears to be about as broad a
holding as you could imagine,'' said one administration lawyer, who insisted on
anonymity because he was not authorized to discuss the ruling. ''It's very
broad, it's very significant, and it's a slam.''

For the moment, the effect of the court's ruling on the detention and
interrogation operations at Guantanamo is likely to be as political as it is
practical.

Construction crews went to work Thursday morning as usual at Camp Six, putting
final touches on a hulking, $24 million concrete structure that is to be the
permanent, medium-security facility for terror detainees.

President Bush and other officials have said repeatedly of late that they have
yet to find a better place to incarcerate the dangerous men still held at
Guantanamo, and there is no indication that the administration has seriously
begun to widen its consideration of those possibilities.

But administration officials said Thursday that they would have no choice but to
start thinking anew about the problem.

Over the last six weeks, the military custodians at Guantanamo have been rocked
by desperate protests -- the suicides of three detainees who hanged themselves
from the steel-mesh walls of their small cells, the intentional drug overdoses
of at least two other prisoners, and a riot against guards in a showcase camp
for the most compliant detainees. Those events, in turn, set off new waves of
criticism of the camp from foreign governments, legal associations and human
rights groups.

Thursday, in rejecting the administration's elaborate plan to try Guantanamo
detainees by military commission, as the tribunals are called, the court struck
at one of the first ramparts the administration built to defend itself against
criticism that Guantanamo was a ''black hole'' in which men declared to be
enemies of the United States were stripped of rights guaranteed by the
Constitution.

''It strengthens calls for solving 'the Guantanamo problem,' '' the
administration lawyer said. ''Not because it deals with the detention issue
directly, but because it removes the argument that soon there would be more
legal process there.''

While officials at the White House counsel's office, the Justice Department and
the Pentagon begin considering how to seek Congressional authorization for a new
version of military commissions or perhaps to prosecute terror suspects in
military courts-martial, Defense Department officials said Guantanamo would
operate much as before.

''Guantanamo serves as an important detention and intelligence facility,'' said
a senior Pentagon spokesman, Bryan Whitman. ''These are dangerous people. Many
have vowed to go back to the battlefield if released. It enables us to thwart
future attacks.''

Only 10 of the approximately 450 detainees now held at Guantanamo have been
formally charged before the military commissions. Officials declined to say
whether those detainees -- who include Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a onetime driver for
Osama bin Laden who was the plaintiff in the Supreme Court case -- might now be
moved back out of the maximum-security cells in which they have been held since
pretrial hearings for the commissions began to accelerate in early April.

The court's ruling is expected to jump-start litigation in more than 100
district court cases on behalf of the detainees, and could also allow for new
cases, officials and lawyers for the detainees said. Those cases cover a wide
range of issues dealing with the prisoners' treatment, including their medical
attention and how they are interrogated.

''What the decision says is that the government cannot hold these prisoners
lawlessly,'' said Joseph Margulies, a lawyer with the MacArthur Justice Center
in Chicago who has defended one of the military commission defendants and is the
author of a new book, ''Guantanamo and the Abuse of Presidential Power.''

''It is now incumbent on the government to come into federal court and
demonstrate the lawfulness of the detentions,'' Mr. Margulies said. ''It cannot
hold people in conditions that are cruel and degrading. It cannot apply coercive
interrogation techniques.''

Military and intelligence officials at Guantanamo said they had stopped using
such interrogation methods, and had taken many steps over the last two years to
treat the detainees more humanely. Now, however, issues like how detainees on
hunger strikes should be force-fed will again be litigated.

Officials said the ruling was also likely to influence a long-running debate
within the administration over whether to explicitly apply a minimum standard
from the Geneva Conventions to the treatment of all military detainees.

The debate has focused on a proposed Pentagon directive that would establish
guidelines for interrogating detainees as well as on a draft field manual for
Army interrogators.

Some officials, including lawyers in the military services and the State
Department, have advocated drawing the language of those documents directly from
Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions, which sets out that minimum standard for
the treatment of captured fighters and others in conflicts that do not involve
nation states.

Other officials, led by Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff, David S.
Addington, have opposed any direct reference to Article 3. These officials
argued in part that Mr. Bush rejected that standard when he determined in 2002
that terror detainees should be treated humanely even though the conventions did
not apply to the conflict in which they were involved, officials familiar with
the debate said.

In his majority opinion, Justice John Paul Stevens said that the United States
was legally bound by Common Article 3, as the provision is known (it is common
to all four Geneva Conventions). He said the article ''affords some minimal
protection'' to detainees even when the forces they represent are not
signatories to the conventions themselves.

The court's ruling was also a setback to the administration's litigation
strategy in cases involving the detention and prosecution of terror suspects.
That strategy, according to current and former officials, has been to press for
the most expansive interpretation of executive power -- and the toughest
military commissions possible -- and to back down only if the courts required
it.

Federal courts previously ruled in the administration's favor in several
important decisions involving Guantanamo. And despite the qualms of some
legislators, the Congress made no significant effort to intervene in detention
policy until Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, began his successful
push last summer to prohibit the cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment of
terror detainees held by the military.

However the policies on prisoner treatment at Guantanamo are ultimately
resolved, the administration has already quickened the pace of its efforts to
repatriate as many of the detainees as possible. Some 300 have been sent home,
either for continued detention by their own governments or to be released
outright.

In Washington on Thursday, President Bush repeated that he hoped to find ''a way
to return people from Guantanamo to their home countries.'' He added, however,
that some of the detainees ''need to be tried in our courts.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A guard opening a gate near a resting area where two detainees
sat this week in the military detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (Pool
photo by Brennan Linsley)(pg. A21)
 Officials may soon begin to look harder for an alternative site for the
detainees held at Guantanamo Bay. (Photo by Brennan Linsley/Associated
Press)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); PRISONS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); TERRORISM (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAWYERS (75%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); SUICIDE
(65%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (64%); CONSTRUCTION (64%)

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: Tim Golden; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: CUBA (96%); UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             319 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BENEFITS

SECTION: Section 14; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 423 words



Wiesenthal Center Dinner

  WEDNESDAY -- The Simon Wiesenthal Center, a Jewish human rights organization
dedicated to preserving the memory of the Holocaust, will give a fund-raising
dinner in the grand ballroom of the Waldorf-Astoria. The event will feature a
special tribute to Mr. Wiesenthal, the Nazi hunter, who died in September and
for whom the rights organization, which is based in Los Angeles and has offices
and educational programs in New York, is named. Rupert Murdoch, the chairman of
News Corporation, will also be honored. The evening begins with cocktails at 6,
followed by dinner at 7. Tickets, $1,000, from (212) 888-7003.

Animal Rescue


THURSDAY -- The North Shore Animal League America, which supports animal
shelters nationwide, including one it operates in Port Washington, N.Y., will
benefit from a party at a gallery space at 116 Prince Street (Greene Street).
Photographs by Mick Rock and Henry Diltz will be on sale during the evening,
which includes refreshments and vegetarian hors d'oeuvres served throughout. The
event begins at 6. Tickets, $50, from (516) 812-7209.

For Women's Health

  JAN. 19 -- Glenn Close will be the mistress of ceremonies and James D.
Wolfensohn, the former World Bank president, will be honored at a black-tie
dinner at Cipriani 42nd Street to raise money for the International Women's
Health Coalition and its work to promote and protect the rights and health of
girls and women, particularly in countries emerging from socialism. Cocktails
begin at 6:30. Tickets, $1,000, from (800) 807-1787.

Foundation for the Arts

  JAN. 19 -- A benefit for the New York Foundation for the Arts will feature
performances by William Cepeda, a jazz musician; Bob Holman, a poet; Connie
Beckley, a performance artist; and the Nicholas Leichter Dance company. The
organization supports artists and arts organizations. A cocktail reception
begins at 6 at a private home on the Upper West Side, with the performances to
begin at 7:30 at the New York Society for Ethical Culture, 33 Central Park West
(64th Street). Tickets, $250, from (212) 366-6900, ext. 207.

Antiques Show Preview

  JAN. 19 -- The annual preview of the Winter Antiques Show at the Seventh
Regiment Armory will raise money for the social service programs in the South
Bronx of the East Side House Settlement. Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be
served throughout the evening, which begins at 5 for those with $1,000 tickets,
at 6 for those with $500 tickets and at 7 for those with $300 tickets.
Information and tickets from (718) 292-7392.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Schedule

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); FUNDRAISING (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARTISTS & PERFORMERS (89%);
VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (89%); WOMEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); MUSEUMS &
GALLERIES (78%); DANCE (77%); ANIMAL WELFARE (74%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); MEAT FREE DIETS (73%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (71%); DANCE
COMPANIES (68%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (63%); JAZZ & BLUES (63%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

COMPANY: TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY FOX INC (83%)

ORGANIZATION: SIMON WIESENTHAL CENTER (84%); INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH
COALITION (54%)

TICKER: FOX (NASDAQ) (83%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (83%); NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS
(83%); NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (83%)

PERSON: KEITH RUPERT MURDOCH (55%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (77%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); CALIFORNIA, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             323 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

What's Left Unsaid

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 740 words


Have you ever talked sexy to your wife or your girlfriend -- or your husband or
your boyfriend -- on the telephone? Would you keep talking if you thought that
one of Dick Cheney's operatives was listening in?

Talk about a chilling effect.

What if you were thinking of running for Congress and you tried to bolster your
understanding of terrorism by speaking with knowledgeable but controversial
figures in the Middle East? How would you feel if you knew -- or even suspected
-- that government agents were monitoring your conversations? Would you be less
likely to engage in those conversations? Would you begin to censor yourself?
Would your contacts still be willing to speak freely if they thought the feds
were listening in?

Freedom of speech in the United States covers matters trivial and profound. The
corrosive damage that is being done to the First Amendment, that cornerstone of
free speech, has been largely overlooked in the controversy over President
Bush's decision to permit the government to eavesdrop without warrants on phone
calls and e-mail messages inside the United States.

Most of the attention generated by this domestic spying program has
understandably been focused on its affront to the Fourth Amendment, which
prohibits unreasonable searches, and its brazen violation of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act, which established clear-cut rules for electronic
surveillance in the U.S.

But there's an additional danger. When the government's spies are allowed to
snoop willy-nilly on phone calls and e-mail in the United States, without the
important legal constraint of having to seek a warrant, it means that the
all-important First Amendment has developed a chill, symptomatic of a
life-threatening illness.

The ostensible aim of the president's domestic surveillance program, conducted
by the supersecret National Security Agency, is to home in on communications
into and out of the United States that involve individuals or organizations
suspected of some sort of terror connection. But, as The Times reported last
week, F.B.I. officials have repeatedly complained that the N.S.A. has bombarded
them with thousands upon thousands of unsubstantiated tips -- names, telephone
numbers, e-mail addresses and so forth -- that have either led nowhere, or to
completely innocent individuals.

Whatever its stated goals, the N.S.A. seems to be operating the greatest fishing
expedition in the history of the world.

The American Civil Liberties Union, in a lawsuit seeking a halt to the spying,
warned that scholars, lawyers, journalists and others who communicate with
people outside the U.S. are already experiencing a chilling effect. People who
are doing nothing wrong, but who feel they may become targets of the program,
for whatever reasons, are curtailing their conversations and censoring their
correspondence, according to the suit.

Laurence Tribe, a professor of constitutional law at Harvard, noted that people
who are aware of the surveillance program and who believe that their political
views may be seen as hostile by the government, may also become less candid in
their telephone conversations and e-mail. Others could unwittingly become the
victim of contacts by individuals that the government may be interested in.

He gave an example:

''I recently got a series of e-mails from someone, quite without invitation,
that got rather scary in the sense that they started saying positive things
about Osama bin Laden. I asked the person in reply to stop e-mailing me, and I
got an e-mail today saying, 'Your request is permanently granted.' But in the
meantime, granted or not granted, that could easily put me on some kind of
targeting list.''

Speaking about the potential long-term effect of widespread domestic spying,
Professor Tribe said:

''The more people grow accustomed to a listening environment in which the ear of
Big Brother is assumed to be behind every wall, behind every e-mail, and
invisibly present in every electronic communication, telephonic or otherwise --
that is the kind of society, as people grow accustomed to it, in which you can
end up being boiled to death without ever noticing that the water is getting
hotter, degree by degree.

''The background assumptions of privacy will be gradually eroded to the point
where we'll wake up one day, or our children will, and it will seem quaint that
people at one time, long ago, thought that they could speak in candor.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (88%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (87%);
WIRETAPPING (78%); CENSORSHIP (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); US
FEDERAL ELECTIONS (76%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%);
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (72%);
LITIGATION (72%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (68%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (67%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (57%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and
Methods; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Privacy; Freedom and Human
Rights; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
(59%) National Security Agency; American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (77%); DICK CHENEY (72%) Bob Herbert; George W (Pres)
Bush; Laurence H (Prof) Tribe

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Afghanistan, Seeking Aid, Promises Progress

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: ISLAMABAD, Pakistan, Jan. 30


Afghanistan is expected to sign an agreement for an ambitious five-year plan for
social, economic and political change with more than 60 donor countries at a
two-day donors' conference in London that begins Tuesday.

Eager to secure an international commitment to Afghanistan's future, President
Hamid Karzai and his government have sought long-term strategic and economic
agreements with the United States and the European Union. The plan, called the
Afghan Compact, pledges development and changes to turn the country into a
functioning democracy and an economically viable state. It would replace the
United Nations-sponsored Bonn accords, which laid out the first political goals
for a post-Taliban Afghanistan.

Anwar ul-Haq Ahadi, the country's finance minister, said in a telephone
interview on Monday from London that he was seeking pledges of at least $10
billion at the conference. He said the government would need $4 billion a year
for the next five years to help it carry out the plan.

Despite its achievements in the four years since the fall of the Taliban
government -- adopting a new constitution and electing a president and a
Parliament -- Afghanistan does not have a viable economy. Its government is
largely reliant on foreign aid, and as it struggles with an insurgency that on
occasion has reached the capital, Kabul, it is almost wholly dependent on
foreign troops for security.

Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice is expected to announce a new pledge from
the United States as Afghanistan's major donor at the conference in London,
which is being led jointly by Prime Minister Tony Blair and Mr. Karzai.

''Afghanistan, because of the history of severe destruction of its institutions,
its economy, its governance and laws, and everything else, requires more
attention from the international community,'' said Ishaq Nadiri, a senior
presidential economic adviser.

The country of 25 million people has some of the worst economic and health
indicators in the world. Six million people rely on food aid, 80 percent of the
people are illiterate and there is virtually no industry. Last year, the
government raised only $300 million in revenues for a total budget of close to
$5 billion. The rest -- to finance its army, police force, health services and
rural development -- came from foreign aid.

Mr. Ahadi said Afghanistan needed at least five more years of international help
before it could come close to financing its own budget. He said the compact
would help make the use of foreign aid more efficient and would ensure that the
Afghan government had a greater say in how the money was spent.

Afghanistan in turn has pledged to meet concrete benchmarks that will satisfy
its international donors, in particular in areas of administrative improvements,
equality for women, democratization and human rights, Mr. Ahadi said.

A draft copy of the compact, provided to The New York Times by an Afghan
official indicates that the government will make a commitment to address
corruption and the power that warlords retain over many areas of the country.

It calls for the government to create a mechanism for basing government and
judicial appointments on merit, rather than tribal or regional power. The
government would also, within two years, set up a national agency to register
and adjudicate property issues, an effort to correct some of the worst excesses
of land-grabbing and dispossession during decades of war and postwar chaos.

Some of the commitments the Afghan government is expected to make will be
intensely difficult politically, the American ambassador to Afghanistan, Ronald
E. Neumann, said in a recent interview in Kabul.

''I am certainly seeing them voluntarily take commitments to benchmarks and
timelines in these areas which have been very tough,'' he said. ''Time will tell
if they are willing to discharge them, but by taking on that commitment they are
voluntarily putting themselves in a position where they will be under more
pressure to perform.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An Afghan man who sells coal waited for customers in Kabul.
Afghanistan wants assurances of additional foreign help. In return, its leaders
are setting detailed and lofty goals for development the money will finance.
(Photo by Ahmad Masood/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TALIBAN
(90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); BUDGETS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (76%); BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (74%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (74%); WOMEN (73%);
EUROPEAN UNION (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); RURAL DEVELOPMENT (71%); FOOD
ASSISTANCE (65%); ARMED FORCES (64%); POLICE FORCES (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS (61%);
GENDER EQUALITY (60%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (60%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS
(50%) Foreign Aid; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%) United Nations; Taliban
(Afghan Group)

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (79%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); TONY BLAIR (56%) Carlotta
Gall; Hamid (Pres) Karzai

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (94%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); ISLAMABAD, PAKISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (72%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             330 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 3, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hamas Is Silent on Leaders As the Power Tilts to Gaza

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: GAZA, Feb. 1


In an interview a few years ago, Mahmoud Zahar, a surgeon and senior leader of
the radical Islamic movement Hamas, was asked his medical specialty.

''Thyroids: I'm very good at cutting throats,'' Dr. Zahar said, drawing his
forefinger across his neck as a rare smile spread across his face.

Before Hamas's triumph in the Palestinian elections last week, Dr. Zahar and
other senior Hamas figures were well known here, though not necessarily in the
wider world. Since its founding in 1987, the group has emphasized its collective
leadership rather than promoting individual leaders. And given that Israeli
airstrikes have killed several of the most prominent Hamas leaders in recent
years, the surviving ones have maintained a low profile.

Still, Dr. Zahar, who is around 60, is one of several Hamas leaders likely to
become much more visible as Hamas assumes control of the Palestinian government
after defeating the governing Fatah party.

The other top figures include Khaled Meshal, the group's overall leader, who is
in exile and has spent most of the past few years in Damascus, Syria. There is
also Ismail Haniya, who was at the top of Hamas's candidate list and is regarded
as the most pragmatic of the senior leaders. He is considered likely to land a
top government post, possibly even the prime minister's job.

So far, Hamas has refused to say who will fill which posts. And because Hamas
has previously boycotted the Palestinian Authority, group leaders have no formal
experience in government.

There has been speculation among political analysts that Hamas may install
little-known technocrats in the government rather than its top-tier leadership.
However, a number of Hamas figures are sure to play central roles regardless of
whether they hold government positions.

Mr. Meshal, who travels throughout the Arab world, will not be part of the new
government since he is abroad, but will exert considerable influence even from
afar.

There is also speculation that Mr. Meshal, who turns 50 this year, may try to
visit Gaza, since the Palestinians now control its southern border with Egypt.
But Israel says its military will still pursue wanted Palestinians despite
having withdrawn from Gaza, and Mr. Meshal could become a target if he enters
it.

Mr. Meshal, who has salt-and-pepper hair and a matching beard, is a strict
ideologue. He routinely calls for violent confrontation with Israel, even during
the past year, while Hamas has largely abided by a truce and some Hamas leaders
have flirted with the notion of an extended cease-fire.

At a news conference last Saturday in Damascus, Mr. Meshal said Hamas would seek
to establish a Palestinian army, though interim agreements with Israel say the
Palestinians can have only a police force and related security services, not a
military.

Mr. Meshal was born near the West Bank city of Ramallah, and received a physics
degree from Kuwait University in 1978. In 1997, he was the senior Hamas figure
in Amman, Jordan, when Israeli Mossad agents, disguised as Canadian tourists,
injected him with a slow-acting poison.

The agents were captured, and an angry King Hussein of Jordan demanded that
Israel provide the antidote that saved Mr. Meshal's life. To get its agents
back, Israel also was forced to release 20 prisoners, including Sheik Ahmed
Yassin, the Hamas founder and ideological leader.

Most of Hamas's top echelon is based in Gaza, and always has been. Perhaps the
most important figure at present is Mr. Haniya, 42.

''He is very eloquent and has real stature,'' said Raji Sourani, who knows many
Hamas leaders, though he himself is a secular lawyer who runs the Palestinian
Center for Human Rights. ''He is the Hamas leader who commands the most respect
here.''

Mr. Haniya held a news conference on Monday to announce that Hamas wanted to
work with the international community and urge Western countries not to cut off
financial assistance to the Palestinians.

''We are ready to cooperate with the free world,'' Mr. Haniya said. ''We are
asking you to be open-minded and responsible in dealing with the results of this
election.''

Mr. Haniya appears to have a strong bond with ordinary supporters, though his
tone tends to be a bit less strident than other leaders, particularly those
abroad.

''The local Hamas leadership, especially Ismail Haniya, is more pragmatic than
the external leaders because they see how tough Palestinian life is on the
streets here,'' said Mokhaimer Abu Sada, a political science professor at Al
Azhar University in Gaza City. ''When Khaled Meshal is in Damascus talking about
continued armed struggle, he doesn't see the level of suffering that has taken
place here for the past five years.''

Mr. Haniya was born in the congested Beach refugee camp in Gaza City. Though he
now has a comfortable three-story stucco home in the camp, it is squeezed
between the cinder-block homes that dominate the area.

Like most Hamas leaders, he has a large family: eight boys and four girls. And
like other Hamas leaders, he has spent time in Israeli prisons. Mr. Haniya has
been arrested at least three times by Israel, and was once deported to Lebanon
for more than a year.

He received a degree in Arab literature from the Islamic University in Gaza City
in the mid-1980's, and spent many years as an administrator at the institution,
where many Hamas leaders have studied or worked. His Hamas colleague, Dr. Zahar,
taught medicine at the university for years.

Hamas says its political leaders operate independently from the group's military
wing. Israel has never accepted this, saying Hamas leaders signal when bombings
and other attacks should be carried out, even if they are not involved in the
details.

After the Palestinian uprising against Israel began in 2000, with Hamas suicide
bombings constituting the deadliest attacks, Israel launched a sweeping
crackdown on the Hamas leadership.

Sheik Yassin was killed in a missile strike in Gaza City in March 2004. A month
later, his successor as the Hamas leader in Gaza, Dr. Abdel Aziz Rantisi, died
in a similar strike.

The Israelis struck Dr. Zahar's home in Gaza City in September 2003, killing one
of his sons and wounding him and his wife.

With Israeli soldiers leaving Gaza last summer, the leaders of Hamas and other
armed factions now move around more freely, though Israel has continued periodic
airstrikes.

The Israeli military response in the West Bank has been even more comprehensive.
Most of the prominent Hamas leaders there have been killed or arrested in recent
years. Still, the group's electoral performance in the West Bank was nearly as
strong as in Gaza, a poorer, more religious territory that always has been the
Hamas stronghold.

The Hamas election victory is also shifting the center of gravity for
Palestinian politics from the West Bank to Gaza.

After the Palestinian Authority was established in 1994, the Palestinian leader
Yasir Arafat divided his time between a seaside compound in Gaza City and his
offices in the West Bank town of Ramallah.

But Israel confined Mr. Arafat to his Ramallah compound from 2001 until shortly
before his death in November 2004, and during this time Palestinian political
activity took place almost entirely in the West Bank. But with most Hamas
leaders based in Gaza, and Israel barring them from traveling to the West Bank,
much of the focus is expected to move here.

''I don't think the Hamas leadership knows how it is going to have government
meetings,'' said Mr. Sourani, the human rights advocate. ''It may be by e-mail
or fax or video conferences.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Khaled Meshal, overall leader of Hamas, has spent years in
exile. (Photo by Ali Jareckji/Reuters)
Mahmoud Zahar, third from left in turtleneck, is likely to play a more visible
role as Hamas assumes control of the Palestinian government. (Photo by Shawn
Baldwin for The New York Times)
 Ismail Haniya, whose name was first on the Hamas candidate list, appears likely
to get a top government post, possibly even prime minister. (Photo by Shawn
Baldwin for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); AL FATAH (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); RELIGION (73%); BORDER CONTROL (68%); BOYCOTTS (64%);
POLICE FORCES (64%) Palestinians; Elections; Legislatures and Parliaments

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (50%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) Hamas; Fatah

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (50%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (50%)

PERSON: Greg Myre; Mahmoud Zahar; Khaled Meshal; Ismail Haniya

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (92%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (94%); SYRIA (92%); EGYPT
(79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Syria; Israel

LOAD-DATE: February 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             335 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; NEWS SUMMARY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 899 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

U.N. Investigators Seek Closing of U.S. Prison Camp
Human rights investigators working for the United Nations called on the United
States to shut down the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and either
give its detainees quick trials or free them.   A6

Review of Death Squad Claim


Iraq's Interior Ministry has opened an investigation into claims that its
officers are operating death squads that hunt Sunni Arab men, a senior Iraqi
official said.   A6

A Fragile United Front on Hamas
The Bush administration is struggling to maintain cooperation with its European
and Arab allies to stick to a warning to cut off financial aid if Hamas does not
renounce its anti-Israel positions, American officials said.   A12

Hamas appeared poised to name one of its less radical leaders as its candidate
for Palestinian prime minister, while Israel's Defense Ministry drew up
sanctions likely to be imposed after the new Palestinian parliament is sworn in.
A12

France Says Iran's Goal Is Clear
France accused Iran of pursuing a nuclear program that could only be intended
for military purposes, in comments that reflected European frustration with
Iran's resumption of uranium enrichment.   A4

Drought Devastates East Africa
A drought has killed dozens of people since December as well as huge numbers of
animals, devastating local economies.   A3

Silenced China Journal to Return
A news journal that was closed by Chinese censors will resume publication in
March but without an editor and investigative reporter who earned it a
reputation for aggressive reporting, the editor said.   A8

NATIONAL   A14-20

House Intelligence Panel To Open Inquiry on Spying
Leaders of the House intelligence committee said they had agreed to open a
Congressional inquiry related to the Bush administration's domestic surveillance
program.   A1

Bush Backs Cheney Response
President Bush said that Vice President Dick Cheney had handled the disclosure
of an accidental shooting of a hunting partner ''just fine'' and that the
incident had been a ''traumatic moment'' for Mr. Cheney.   A16

Terror Suspect's Trial Opens
A federal terrorism trial opened in Sacramento with wildly diverging views of a
23-year-old California man who traveled to Pakistan either for terrorism
training, as the government contends, or to help his ailing mother, study
religion and get married, as his lawyer asserts.   A14

G.O.P. Rejects Budget Inquiry
House Republicans rejected a call for an inquiry into the enactment of a major
budget-cutting bill that Democrats say is invalid, as a simmering partisan feud
over Congressional procedure boiled over.   A18

City Prepares for Mardi Gras
Six months after Hurricane Katrina, the city of New Orleans is readying itself
for the first Mardi Gras parade of 2006, trumpeting a plaintive, post-traumatic
theme: ''May God Bless New Orleans.''   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

3 New Images of Washington
Looking more than two centuries into the past, scientists have created what they
say are the most accurate depictions of George Washington at three critical
stages in his life, ages 19, 45 and 57.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

City Leaders Propose New Curbs on Lobbying
Mayor Bloomberg and the City Council speaker, Christine M. Quinn, saying they
wanted to avoid the kind of influence-peddling scandal that is rocking
Washington, proposed new limits on lobbyists that would ban them from certain
areas inside City Hall and limit their ability to giveofficials gifts and
campaign donations.   B1

U.S. Defends Arab Port Deal
The Bush administration dismissed the security concerns of New York-area
officials and restated its approval of a deal that will give a company based in
Dubai a major role in operating ports in and around New York City.   B1

WEEKEND   E1-34; E35-42

Les Miz to Return (It was Gone?)
Giving new meaning to the term ''revival,'' Cameron Mackintosh has decided to
bring his long-running hit ''Les Miserables'' back to Broadway a mere three and
a half years after closing a 16-year run.   E3

ESCAPES   F1-14

OBITUARIES   A21

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-8

'Idol' Beating Olympics Soundly
NBC's Olympic broadcasts have never faced the kind of strong counterprogramming
that is being deployed against them by ''American Idol'' on the Fox network.
''Idol'' has trounced the Winter Olympic Games twice and will face them three
more times next week.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

Icahn in Negotiations
The financier Carl C. Icahn is backing away from his attempt to break Time
Warner into pieces -- looking instead to negotiate some smaller changes in
exchange for dropping his campaign against the company.   A1

China Seeks Auto Industry
China is pursuing a novel way to catapult its automaking into a global force:
buy one of the world's most sophisticated engine plants, take it apart,
transport it to China and put it back together again. In a sign of China's
manufacturing ambitions, a Chinese company, is bidding to buy a car engine plant
in Brazil from DaimlerChrysler and BMW.   A1

Inside View of Wal-Mart
An internal Web site for Wal-Mart's managers run by H. Lee Scott Jr., the
company's chief executive, gives a glimpse of the concerns that are roiling
Wal-Mart's retailing empire.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Doing the president's dirty work; a chance for New Orleans; price
gouging on cancer drugs?; stumbling forward in Haiti.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E33
Weather   A19

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); BUDGETS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); ESPIONAGE (87%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); RIGHT TO SPEEDY TRIAL (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); BUDGET CUTS
(74%); LAWYERS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); SHOOTINGS (72%); RELIGION (71%);
PARADES & MARCHES (69%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (68%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (68%); HURRICANE KATRINA (65%); HURRICANES (65%); MARDI GRAS (62%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HAMAS (91%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (78%); GEORGE W BUSH (76%)

CITY: NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (92%); SACRAMENTO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); LOUISIANA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); CUBA
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); FRANCE (92%); PAKISTAN (79%);
ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             337 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Settling Detainee's Suit In 9/11 Sweep

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1540 words


The federal government has agreed to pay $300,000 to settle a lawsuit brought by
an Egyptian who was among dozens of Muslim men swept up in the New York area
after 9/11, held for months in a federal detention center in Brooklyn and
deported after being cleared of links to terrorism.

The settlement, filed in federal court late yesterday, is the first the
government has made in a number of lawsuits charging that noncitizens were
abused and their constitutional rights violated in detentions after the terror
attacks.

It removes one of two plaintiffs from a case in which a federal judge ruled last
fall that former Attorney General John Ashcroft, the director of the Federal
Bureau of Investigation and other top government officials must answer questions
under oath. Government lawyers filed an appeal of that ruling on Friday.

In the settlement agreement, which requires approval by a federal judge in
Brooklyn, lawyers for the government said that the officials were not admitting
any liability or fault. In court papers they have said that the 9/11 attacks
created ''special factors,'' including the need to deter future terrorism, that
outweighed the plaintiffs' right to sue.

''A settlement like this is not a precedent, but it's a form of
accountability,'' said Gerald L. Neuman, a law professor at Columbia University
who is an expert in human rights law and was not involved in the case. ''When
the government finds it necessary to settle, that changes the government's
incentives. It doesn't mean the government will settle future cases that it
makes different calculations about,'' like another lawsuit, brought as a class
action on behalf of hundreds of detainees, that is pending before the same
judge.

A spokesman for the Justice Department said officials would not comment on the
agreement. But lawyers who represent both the Egyptian, Ehab Elmaghraby, who
used to run a restaurant near Times Square, and the second plaintiff, a
Pakistani who is still pursuing the lawsuit, described the outcome as
significant.

''This is a substantial settlement and shows for the first time that the
government can be held accountable for the abuses that have occurred in Abu
Ghraib, Guantanamo Bay and in prisons right here in the United States,'' said
one of the lawyers, Alexander A. Reinert of Koob & Magoolaghan.

The lawsuit accuses Mr. Ashcroft and the F.B.I. director, Robert S. Mueller III,
of personally conspiring to violate the rights of Muslim immigrant detainees on
the basis of their race, religion and national origin, and names a score of
other defendants, including Bureau of Prison officials and guards at the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn.

A 2003 report by the Justice Department's inspector general found widespread
abuse of the noncitizen detainees at the Brooklyn center after 9/11, and in
recent months, 10 of the center's guards and supervisors have been disciplined.

Mr. Elmaghraby, who spent nearly a year in detention, and the Pakistani man,
Javaid Iqbal, held for nine months, charged that while shackled they were kicked
and punched until they bled. Their lawsuit said they were cursed as terrorists
and subjected to multiple unnecessary body-cavity searches, including one in
which correction officers inserted a flashlight into Mr. Elmaghraby's rectum,
making him bleed.

In a telephone interview from his home in Alexandria, Egypt, Mr. Elmaghraby, 38,
said he had reluctantly decided to settle because he is ill, in debt and about
to have surgery for a thyroid ailment aggravated by his treatment in the
detention center.

''I wish I come to New York, to stay in the court face to face with these
people,'' he said in imperfect English, adding that he had always expected the
courts to uphold his claim. ''I lived 13 years in New York, I see a lot of big
cases on TV. I think the judges is fair.''

The government had argued that the lawsuits should be dismissed without
testimony because the extraordinary circumstances of the terror attacks
justified extraordinary measures to confine noncitizens who fell under
suspicion, and because top officials need governmental immunity to combat future
threats to national security without fear of being sued.

The federal judge, John Gleeson of the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of New York, disagreed, writing in his decision last September,
''Our nation's unique and complex law enforcement and security challenges in the
wake of the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks do not warrant the elimination of remedies
for the constitutional violations alleged here.''

In all, 762 noncitizens were arrested in the weeks after 9/11, mostly on
immigration violations, according to government records. Mr. Elmaghraby and Mr.
Iqbal were among 184 identified as being ''of high interest'' to investigators
and held in maximum-security conditions, in Brooklyn and elsewhere, until the
F.B.I. cleared them of terrorist links. Virtually all were Muslims or from Arab
countries.

That in itself is not evidence of discrimination, government lawyers wrote in
the brief they filed on Friday with the Appellate Division, Second Department,
because ''the Al Qaeda terrorists who perpetrated the Sept. 11 attacks were
Muslims from certain Arab countries'' who ''viewed themselves as conducting a
religious war.''

''There were no clear judicial precedents in this extraordinary context,'' the
appeal brief said, calling the policy of holding people until they could be
cleared ''a bona fide response to a national catastrophe.''

Unlike the detainees covered by the class-action lawsuit, who were held on
immigration violations alone, Mr. Elmaghraby and Mr. Iqbal eventually pleaded
guilty to minor federal criminal charges unrelated to terrorism: Mr. Elmaghraby
to credit card fraud, Mr. Iqbal to having false papers and bogus checks. But
they maintain that they did so only to escape the abuse. They were deported in
2003 after serving prison terms.

Mr. Iqbal was one of several detainees who returned to New York this year to
give depositions in their lawsuits under conditions of extraordinary security,
including the requirement that they be in constant custody of federal marshals
and not call anybody. Mr. Elmaghraby did not come because of his ill health and
because the settlement was close, said one of his lawyers, Haeyoung Yoon of the
Urban Justice Center.

''His circumstances made it extremely difficult for him to continue,'' Ms. Yoon
said. ''But I also feel this is really the beginning of justice for what
happened in New York and the United States after Sept. 11, the mass arrests,
detention and basically disappearance of an entire community.''

Mr. Elmaghraby, who had a weekend flea market stand at Aqueduct Raceway in
Queens, was picked up on Sept. 30, 2001, in his apartment in Maspeth, Queens,
when federal agents were investigating his landlord, apparently because years
earlier the landlord, also a Muslim, had applied for pilot training. Mr.
Elmaghraby says his wife, an American citizen, left him after being threatened
with arrest by an F.B.I. agent when she arrived at his first court hearing.

Mr. Iqbal was arrested in his Long Island apartment on Nov. 2 by agents who were
apparently following a tip about false identification cards. In his apartment
they found a Time magazine showing the World Trade Center towers in flames and
paperwork showing that he had been in Lower Manhattan on Sept. 11, picking up a
work permit from immigration services.

The inspector general's report said that little effort was made to distinguish
between legitimate terrorism suspects and people picked up by chance, and that
clearances took months, not days, because they were a low priority. Among the
abuses described in the report -- many of them caught on prison videotape --
were beatings, sexual humiliations and illegal recording of lawyer-client
conversations.

After the report was released, Mr. Ashcroft said he made ''no apologies'' for
finding every legal way to protect the public. Still, officials pledged to
improve the system and punish abuses.

Traci L. Billingsley, a spokeswoman for the Federal Bureau of Prisons, said that
its own investigation began in April 2004, after federal officials declined to
prosecute.

She would not identify the 10 employees disciplined, but said that two had been
fired and two demoted, and that the others had received suspensions ranging from
2 to 30 days. She listed the offenses as ''lack of candor, unprofessional
conduct, misuse of supervisory authority, conduct unbecoming, inattention to
duty, failure to exercise supervisory responsibilities, excessive use of force,
and physical and/or verbal abuse.''

Because of the secrecy surrounding the cases, however, the taint of suspicion
has been almost impossible for former detainees to dispel, their lawyers said.
In one of the court hearings leading up to the return of the former detainees
for depositions, for example, the federal magistrate asked what made them
different from anyone else suing the government, ''other than their ethnicity.''

Ernesto H. Molina Jr., a Justice Department lawyer representing Mr. Ashcroft,
replied, ''That they came under the umbrella of a terrorist investigation, your
honor.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 2, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Tuesday about a settlement in a lawsuit
brought by an Egyptian man detained after 9/11 misidentified the court where
government lawyers sought to overturn a judge's decision to let the suit
proceed. It is the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. (The
Appellate Division, Second Department, is a New York State appeals court.)

A front-page article on Tuesday about a settlement in a lawsuit brought by an
Egyptian man detained after 9/11 misidentified the court where government
lawyers sought to overturn a judge's decision to let the suit proceed. It is the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. (The Appellate Division,
Second Department, is a New York State appeals court.)

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ehab Elmaghraby in Alexandria, Egypt, with his parents in April
2004. Mr. Elmaghraby, detained after 9/11, said he settled his lawsuit
reluctantly. (Photo by Barry Iverson for The New York Times)(pg. B7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); LITIGATION (93%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11
ATTACK (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); LAWYERS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
PRISONS (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); RELIGION (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRANT
DETENTION CENTERS (89%); JUDGES (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); DEPORTATION (77%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
CONSPIRACY (76%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (74%); LAW SCHOOLS (74%); REFUGEES (71%);
APPROVALS (70%); APPEALS (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%) Terrorism;
Suits and Litigation; Freedom and Human Rights; Immigration and Refugees;
Terrorism; Islam; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (54%)
Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (79%) Nina Bernstein; Ehab Elmaghraby; John Ashcroft;
Robert S III (Dir) Mueller; Javaid Iqbal

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT (78%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); EGYPT (94%); PAKISTAN (79%); CUBA (74%)

REGION: Egypt; Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             339 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1047 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

Pakistan Welcomes Bush With Security and Protest
President Bush arrived in Pakistan to a capital under extraordinary security as
recent protests over the cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad first published in a
Danish newspaper have been increasingly redirected at Mr. Bush and the
pro-American policies of Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf.   A1

Before leaving for Pakistan, President Bush finished his visit to India with a
speech praising the new warmth in Indian-American relations, and urged Americans
to welcome rather than fear India as an economic competitor.

A5

Russia Warns Hamas on Israel
Russia warned the leaders of Hamas, in Moscow on a high-profile visit, that the
organization had to recognize Israel and dismantle its militias or face
isolation. The Hamas leaders reiterated that the group would not moderate its
positions.   A6

Six weeks after Hamas's win in the Palestinian parliamentary elections, American
and European officials say they are beginning to give up hope that the threat to
cut off financial support will prompt it to moderate its positions, leaving the
West with a dilemma.   A7

Shiite Imams Defend Jaafari
Shiite imams at Friday Prayer services across Iraq lashed out at the country's
Kurdish, Sunni Arab and secular political leaders, who are mounting an effort to
prevent Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari, a Shiite, from retaining his post in
the new government.   A3

Iran Nuclear Talks Stall
Renewed talks over Iran's nuclear program failed to produce an agreement after
Iran rejected Europe's demand that it stop making enriched uranium. The talks
had been called by Iran with promises of new ideas on how to break the impasse.
A5

U.N. Vote Isolates U.S.
The United States has found itself isolated in its opposition to a proposal to
replace the discredited Human Rights Commission, and its pledge to vote against
adoption of the plan has thrown the United Nations into turmoil.   A4

NATIONAL   A8-10, 14

Former Congressman Gets 8 Years for Bribes
After acknowledging that he had ''made a very wrong turn,'' former
Representative Randy Cunningham was sentenced in federal court in San Diego to 8
years and 4 months in prison for taking $2.4 million in bribes from defense
contractors in return for smoothing the way for government contracts.   A1

City Clerk Joins Mayoral Race
After a week on the lam, the New Orleans Parish Clerk of Criminal Court showed
up in court to answer a summons for failure to relinquish some of her duties,
only to announce that she was quitting her job -- so that she could run for
mayor.   A9

Names of Detainees Released
After four years of secrecy, the Pentagon handed over documents that contain the
names of detainees held at the American military prison at Guantanamo Bay.   A9

Bush Budget to Increase Deficit
President Bush's budget proposals would increase the federal deficit by $35
billion this year and by more than $1.2 trillion over the next decade, the
Congressional Budget Office reported.   A14

EDUCATION

Vermont Schools in Jeopardy
Vermont public schools have lost three-quarters of their children since 2000,
and with the lowest birth rate in the country and the highest rate of students
attending college elsewhere, Vermont's governor is treating the situation like a
crisis.   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

F.D.A. Lags in Drug Follow-Up
When it approves new drugs for sale, the Food and Drug Administration often
requires their manufacturers to study whether they are working as intended and
whether they have unwanted side effects, but the agency reported that two-thirds
of the studies had not even been started.   A8

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Lawyer Battles Cancer A Year After Conviction
Lynne F. Stewart, a defense lawyer who was convicted of aiding terrorists almost
a year ago clarified the mystery of her delayed sentencing: she is recovering
from breast cancer surgery and is about to embark on radiation therapy.   B1

Hands-On Criminology
Students at John Jay College of Criminal Justice on the West Side of Manhattan
are spending their study time not poring over books and fictional cases, but
trying to solve the real-life murder of a beloved classmate whose body was
dumped in a desolate stretch of Brooklyn after she had been strangled and
suffocated.   B1

Mayor Knew of Labor Inquiry
City officials acknowledged that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg knew of an
investigation involving Brian M. McLaughlin, the labor leader whose group became
a key backer of the mayor's re-election campaign, raising questions about his
political alliance with someone under scrutiny by a city agency.   B1

FASHION   B7

SPORTSSATURDAY   D1-6

OBITUARIES   A11

Henry M. Morris
The author known as the father of modern creationism, he was 87.   A11

ARTS   B9-18

Film About Cannibal Banned
For more than three years, the man known as the Cannibal of Rotenburg has held
Germans in grisly thrall, with his lurid tale of killing and eating a willing
victim he found through the Internet. Now, as Armin Meiwes stands trial for a
second time on murder charges, he has persuaded a German court to ban a horror
film based on the notorious case.   B9

BUSINESS DAY   C1-13

BlackBerrys to Stay On
Just days before a judge was expected to issue an injunction shutting down
BlackBerry service for 3.2 million users, NTP has dropped its patent
infringement lawsuit against Research In Motion in exchange for a $612.5 million
payment.   C1

Real Estate Standoff
While many home buyers are convinced that prices will fall and refuse to offer
the asking prices, just as many sellers are biding their time until bids
improve, resulting in a standoff with prices continuing to rise but with a
growing number of houses for sale.   A1

Next-Day Pill at Wal-Mart
Relenting to pressure from state government officials, Wal-Mart Stores said
yesterday that it would begin carrying Plan B, a contraception pill, in all of
its United States stores by the end of the month, but that it would allow
pharmacists who object to filling the prescription to refer customers to another
pharmacist or pharmacy.   C4

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A12-13

Editorials: Underwriting Hamas; the mayor speaks his mind; new strategy on clean
air; Lawrence Downes on the return of ''The Electric Company.''

Column: John Tierney.

Bridge   B17
Crossword   B12
TV Listings   B18
Weather   C14

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (93%); HAMAS (91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); PRISONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (88%); LITIGATION (84%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BUDGETS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); MAYORS (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (69%); CONTRACTS & BIDS (69%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%); BRIBERY (66%); JAIL SENTENCING (65%);
SENTENCING (65%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%); CORRECTIONS (65%); DEFENSE
SPENDING (64%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY
(60%); ARMED FORCES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (58%)

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); PAKISTAN (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
INDIA (93%); ISRAEL (92%); EUROPE (92%); DENMARK (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(91%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); IRAQ (79%); CUBA (67%)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             343 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 807 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-17

Israel Captures 6 Inmates In Raid of West Bank Prison
Israeli military forces besieged a Palestinian prison in the West Bank and
seized six Palestinian inmates, killing a prison guard and a prisoner in the
process.   A1

85 Bodies Found in Baghdad


The bodies of more than 85 executed men have surfaced across Baghdad in the past
two days, in both Sunni and Shiite neighborhoods, providing more graphic proof
of sectarian strife and spiraling lawlessness.   A1

Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld hinted that American troop levels in Iraq
might be increased to coincide with a surge of pilgrims expected to visit Muslim
shrines in coming weeks.   A14

Rift in Iran Over Nuclear Stance
While Iran's top leaders remain resolute in their combative approach to building
a nuclear program, some people in power have begun to say that President Mahmoud
Ahmadinejad's tactics are making it harder for Iran to develop one.   A1

Protests Intensify in France
Tens of thousands of students marched through Paris and other French cities,
stepping up their opposition to a law that makes it easier to hire -- and fire
-- young workers.   A3

U.S. Faults U.N. Rights Group
A senior Bush administration official said the United States plans to vote
against the proposed United Nations Human Rights Council.   A10

Milosevic Funeral Preparations
While the circumstances of Slobodan Milosevic's death remain mysterious,
preparations were made for the former Yugoslav leader and accused war criminal
to be buried in Belgrade.   A6

NATIONAL   A18-24

Judge Faults Prosecution In Trial of Moussaoui
A federal district judge ruled that because of three significant instances of
misbehavior by government lawyers in the trial of Zacarias Moussaoui for the
deaths that occurred in the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the prosecutors
would be barred from using any testimony or evidence from a handful of
government aviation officials.   A24

Carla J. Martin has become the most talked about lawyer in Washington for
hampering the government's effort to execute the only man tried in an American
courtroom for involvement in the attacks.   A1

Suit Against White Prison Gang
Federal prosecutors opened a sweeping murder and racketeering case aimed at
dismantling the Aryan Brotherhood.   A18

Hawaii Dam Break Kills One
One person was killed and as many as seven were missing after a rain-swollen dam
burst on the North Shore of Kauai.   A18

Homeless Sex Offenders
A new state law in Iowa barring those convicted of sex crimes involving children
from living within 2,000 feet of a school or day care center has rendered some
offenders homeless and left others sleeping in cars or in the cabs of their
trucks.   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Shrinking Ice in Arctic Sea
For the second year in a row, the cloak of sea ice on the Arctic Ocean failed to
grow to its normal winter expanse, scientists said, leading some experts to
predict the expansion of open water next summer.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Ground Zero Negotiations Continue, With Hiccups
Negotiators trying to resolve the fate of ground zero worked into the night
trying to settle their financial differences over a significant realignment of
the rebuilding plans as a deadline approached. But stumbling blocks remained,
and two people involved said the talks nearly ''blew up'' several times.   B4

Witness Implicates Detectives
A key witness in the federal trial of Louis J. Eppolito and Stephen Caracappa,
two retired detectives accused of taking part in at least eight murders for
Brooklyn's Luchese crime family, told jurors that the two had murdered at least
two men and kidnapped another on the mob's behalf.   B3

EDUCATION   B8

SPORTSWEDNESDAY   D1-6

ARTS   E1-10

DINING OUT   F1-8

OBITUARIES   A25

Lennart Meri
The first president of Estonia in the post-Soviet era and an internationally
recognized filmmaker, travel writer and translator, he was 76.   A25

John M. Falotico
The detective who arrested David R. Berkowitz, the notorious ''Son of Sam''
killer, he was 82.   A25

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Mike Wallace to Retire
After serving as a correspondent on ''60 Minutes'' since its inception in
September 1968, Mike Wallace said he had decided to retire this spring, at the
end of the current television season. His decision provides a capstone to a
remarkable career in journalism, which he began at CBS in 1951.   C1

Utilities Avoid Paying Tax
In a practice legal in most states, a large number of electric utility companies
across the nation are collecting billions of dollars from their customers for
corporate income taxes, then keeping the money rather than sending it to the
government.   A1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: A stumble a day; crucial moment on immigration; the Internet
campaign loophole; secret avian flu archive.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E9
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CORRECTIONS WORKERS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); PRISONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (87%); SEX OFFENSES (86%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(75%); LAWYERS (75%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); TERRORISM
(72%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (72%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); LEGISLATION (71%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (70%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (70%); TESTIMONY (69%); JUDGES (69%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); CIVIL AVIATION (66%); SUITS & CLAIMS (65%); AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION (65%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (63%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (62%);
CHILDREN (60%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%); PARIS, FRANCE (55%)

STATE: HAWAII, USA (92%); ARCTIC OCEAN (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
ISRAEL (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); ARCTIC (90%); FRANCE (75%)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             344 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Democracy Push By Bush Attracts Doubters in Party

BYLINE: By STEVEN R. WEISMAN

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Diplomatic Memo; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1389 words


Even as it presents an updated national security strategy, the Bush
administration is facing fresh doubts from some Republicans who say its emphasis
on promoting democracy around the world has come at the expense of protecting
other American interests.

The second thoughts signify a striking change in mood over one of President
Bush's cherished tenets, pitting Republicans who call themselves realists
against the neoconservatives who saw the invasion of Iraq as a catalyst for
change and who remain the most vigorous advocates of a muscular American
campaign to foster democratic movements.

''You are hearing more and more questions about the administration's approach on
this issue,'' said Lorne W. Craner, president of the International Republican
Institute, a foundation linked to the Republican Party that supports democratic
activities abroad. ''The 'realists' in the party are rearing their heads and
asking, 'Is this stuff working?' ''

The critics, who include Senators Chuck Hagel of Nebraska and Richard G. Lugar
of Indiana and Representative Henry J. Hyde of Illinois, as well as Henry
Kissinger and Brent Scowcroft, are alarmed at the costs of military operations
and of nation-building in Iraq and Afghanistan.

They have also been shaken by the victory of Hamas in Palestinian elections in
January and by the gains Islamists scored in elections in Iraq, Egypt and
Lebanon.

The administration, with support from legislators like Senators John McCain of
Arizona and Sam Brownback of Kansas, contends that whatever their outcome,
elections are better than violent upheaval. But critics worry that
antidemocratic extremists will prevail wherever tradition and existing civil
institutions are too weak to protect the rights of minorities or to nurture
moderates.

They also argue that heavy-handed pressure has strained American relations with
Egypt, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Russia and China, making it harder to enlist them
in fighting terrorism, stabilizing the Middle East and curbing nuclear weapons.

The renewed violence in Iraq since the voting there has discredited, in their
view, the promise of democracy as an outlet for tensions, bringing sectarian
parties-- and their affiliated militias -- to the fore.

''You cannot in my opinion just impose a democratic form of government on a
country with no history and no culture and no tradition of democracy,'' said
Senator Hagel.

Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, who is traveling this week in South
America, Asia and Australia in part to promote democracy, acknowledges the
growing dissent but says the administration will stick to its goals.

''There is a debate, and I think it's a debate that's healthy,'' she said.
''This is obviously a really big change in American foreign policy, to put the
promotion of democracy at the center of it. And people take very seriously what
this president is doing and intends to do.''

Mr. Bush's intent is clear from the very first sentence of the national security
strategy paper issued yesterday: ''It is the policy of the United States to seek
and support democratic movements and institutions in every nation and culture,
with the ultimate goal of ending tyranny in our world.'' The 49-page document
calls this task ''the work of generations.''

It names as strongholds of tyranny North Korea, Iran, Syria, Cuba, Belarus,
Myanmar and Zimbabwe. It gives the United States credit for toppling Saddam
Hussein and the Taliban, and cites ''some preliminary steps'' toward democracy
in Saudi Arabia and ''more open but still flawed'' elections in Egypt. It says
that the Palestinian voting was ''free, fair and inclusive'' but that democratic
principles ''are tested by the victory of Hamas.''

The concern, expressed by Representative Hyde, chairman of the International
Relations Committee, is that the administration views democracy as a ''magic
formula.''

''Implanting democracy in large areas would require that we possess an unbounded
power and undertake an open-ended commitment of time and resources, which we
cannot and will not do,'' he said.

William Kristol, editor of the conservative Weekly Standard, said: ''What's
really driving the criticism is disenchantment with the war. But it's unfair to
say that supporters of the war thought it was going to be easy to build a
democracy in Iraq.''

Even many supporters of the democracy program say the administration's
miscalculations in Iraq have done damage to the cause.

''I think this administration tends to have the right general policies but to be
remarkably unwilling to look at how weak their instruments of implementation
are,'' said Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker.

The American effort has also stirred controversy abroad. This year the United
States is spending $1.7 billion to support groups seeking political change, but
lately Russia, Egypt, China and many countries in Africa and Latin America have
cracked down on these groups.

Senator McCain, a leading proponent of the program, said that despite these
setbacks and controversies, and the lack of civilian structures and rule of law
in many countries, the administration was right to push for democracy and
elections.

''The moral of the story is that democracy is tough,'' he said. ''We have to
recognize that you can have two steps forward and one step back.''

The issue of which should come first -- civil society and rule of law, or
elections -- was underscored by the Hamas victory. Before the Palestinian
elections, Washington had pressed for a law requiring political candidates to
disavow racism and lawlessness, but was rebuffed.

''There's an assumption here that somehow you can neatly build a civil society,
and neatly build the habits of democracy, and then you take off the
authoritarian hat and everything's in place for democracy to rise,'' Ms. Rice
said, when asked about such criticism. ''I just don't think it works that way in
the real world.''

One prominent neoconservative, Francis Fukuyama, asserts in a new book that the
administration embraced democracy as a cornerstone of its policy only after the
failure to find unconventional weapons in Iraq. The issue was seized upon to
justify the war in retrospect, and then expanded for other countries, he says.

Mr. Fukuyama, who opposed the war in Iraq, said in an interview that it was
naive and contrary to the tenets of conservatism for the United States to think
that it could act as midwife or cheerleader for democracy in societies it knows
little about.

Indeed, as he points out, in the 2000 election campaign, both Mr. Bush and Ms.
Rice, then his foreign policy adviser, criticized the Clinton administration's
interventions to promote democracy in Somalia, Haiti and the Balkans as
misplaced idealism.

''It's this weird situation, where you have a really conservative Republican
president using all this Clintonesque rhetoric about rights and ideals,'' Mr.
Fukuyama said.

Administration officials say they are guided not by naivete but by hard-nosed
necessity. If authoritarian governments in the Middle East do not open
themselves to reform, extremists will eventually blow them up, they say.

Mr. Craner, of the International Republican Institute, who was an assistant
secretary of state for democracy, human rights and labor in Mr. Bush's first
term, said that at least rhetorically, Republicans generally supported democracy
and were likely to continue doing so.

Even such leaders of the ''realist'' camp, like Mr. Kissinger, a former
secretary of state, and Mr. Scowcroft, national security adviser under the first
President Bush, say they support democracy as a major part of American foreign
policy.

But in an echo of the cold war debates over whether to confront or negotiate
with the Soviet Union, both have also warned that the United States should not
risk alienating crucial allies or fomenting unrest by demanding rapid internal
change.

Mr. Kissinger noted in a commentary last year, for example, ''The United States
is probably the only country in which 'realist' can be used as a pejorative
epithet.''

But the leaders of the cause are not backing down.

''Obviously, we want stability and we want allies in the war on terror,'' said
one, Representative David Dreier, Republican of California. ''But I don't think
we should back down from democratization just because it's hard.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); HAMAS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); TERRORISM (70%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); FOREIGN POLICY (66%); RELIGION (66%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (65%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (58%) United States International Relations; Freedom and
Human Rights; United States Armament and Defense; Elections; Palestinians;
United States International Relations; Islam; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%); INTERNATIONAL REPUBLICAN INSTITUTE (56%) Hamas

PERSON: CHUCK HAGEL (92%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%); DICK LUGAR (78%); BILL FOSTER
(73%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%); SAMUEL BROWNBACK (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) Steven
R Weisman; George W (Pres) Bush; Chuck (Sen) Hagel; Richard G (Sen) Lugar; Henry
J (Rep) Hyde; Henry A (Dr) Kissinger; Brent Scowcroft

STATE: NEBRASKA, USA (79%); INDIANA, USA (79%); KANSAS, USA (79%); ARIZONA, USA
(79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); EGYPT (92%); LEBANON (92%); CHINA (79%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); ASIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); ISRAEL (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan; Israel; Egypt; Lebanon

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             347 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Joy of Being Blameless

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 620 words


The contrast could not have been more stark, nor the message more clear. On the
day that a court-martial imposed justice on a 24-year-old Army sergeant for
tormenting detainees at Abu Ghraib with his dog, President Bush said once again
that Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, whose benighted policies and managerial
incompetence led to the prisoner abuse scandal, was doing a ''fine job'' and
should stay at his post.

We've seen this sorry pattern for nearly two years now, since the Abu Ghraib
horrors first shocked the world: President Bush has clung to the fiction that
the abuse of prisoners was just the work of a few rotten apples, despite report
after report after report demonstrating that it was organized and systematic,
and flowed from policies written by top officials in his administration.

Just this week, Eric Schmitt and Carolyn Marshall provided a bloodcurdling
account in the Times of how a Special Operations unit converted an Iraqi
military base into a torture chamber, even using prisoners as paintball targets,
in its frenzy to counter a widely predicted insurgency for which Mr. Rumsfeld
had refused to prepare. In early 2004, an 18-year-old man suspected of selling
cars to members of a terrorist network was arrested and beaten repeatedly.
Another man said he had been forced to strip, punched in the spine until he
fainted, put in front of an air-conditioner while cold water was poured on him
and kicked in the stomach until he vomited. His crime? His father had worked for
Saddam Hussein.

These accounts are tragically familiar. The names and dates change, but the
basic pattern is the same, including the fact that this bestiality produced
little or no useful intelligence. The Bush administration decided to go outside
the law to deal with prisoners, and soldiers carried out that policy. Those who
committed these atrocities deserve the punishment they are getting, but
virtually all high-ranking soldiers have escaped unscathed. And not a single
policy maker has been called to account.

Col. Thomas Pappas, the former intelligence chief at Abu Ghraib, testified at
the dog handler's trial that the use of dogs had grown out of conversations he
had had with military jailers from Guantanamo Bay led by Maj. Gen. Geoffrey
Miller, who had been sent to Iraq to instruct soldiers there in the
interrogation techniques refined at Gitmo under Mr. Rumsfeld's torture-is-legal
policy. Colonel Pappas said General Miller had explained how to use the ''Arab
fear of dogs'' to set up interrogations.

What of General Miller? He invoked his right against self-incrimination to avoid
testifying, and Time magazine reported this week that he was exonerated by an
Army whitewash. Apparently he was not responsible for the actions of soldiers
operating under rules he put in place.

About the only high-ranking officer whose career has suffered over Abu Ghraib is
Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, who was the commander in Iraq at the time. General
Sanchez should certainly take responsibility, but he was also a victim of
administration blunders.

General Sanchez was vaulted inappropriately from head of the First Armored
Division to overall commander because Mr. Bush declared ''mission
accomplished'': the war's over. He was then denied the staff, soldiers and
equipment he needed to deal with the insurgency that quickly broke out and
produced thousands of prisoners.

Mr. Bush has refused to hold himself or any of his top political appointees
accountable for those catastrophic errors. Indeed, he has promoted many of them.
And this is not an isolated problem. It's just one example, among many, of how
this president's men run no risk of being blamed for anything that happens, not
matter how egregious.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY OFFENSES (90%); ARMIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); DOGS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (72%); SCANDALS (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (66%);
ARRESTS (66%); TERRORISM (65%) Editorials; Torture  ; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human
Rights; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (66%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             351 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Honduras: Ex-Colonel Ordered To Pay $47 Million In
Torture Case

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 174 words


A United States District Court judge in Miami found a former Honduran Army
colonel responsible for killings and kidnappings in Honduras during the 1980's
and ordered him to pay $47 million to several torture victims and surviving
relatives of the dead. Judge Joan A. Lenard found that the colonel, Juan Lopez
Grijalba, served as chief of an intelligence unit known as Battalion 3-16, which
received money and training from the United States. The unit, organized as part
of the Reagan administration's effort to stop the spread of Communism in Central
America, was responsible for systematic abuses against civilians suspected as
subversives. Mr. Lopez Grijalba moved to Miami in 1998 but was deported in 2004.
He has not faced criminal prosecution. Among the plaintiffs in the Florida suit,
filed by the Center for Justice and Accountability, a human rights organization,
were Oscar Reyes, a journalist, and his wife, Gloria, who were tortured, held
for nearly five months and then forced into exile in the United States.   GINGER
THOMPSON (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TORTURE (93%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); JUDGES (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); DEPORTATION (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (51%) Torture; Kidnapping; Decisions and Verdicts; United States
International Relations; Suits and Litigation; Deportation

PERSON: Ginger Thompson; Juan Lopez Grijalba; Joan A (Judge) Lenard

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (93%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: HONDURAS (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL AMERICA (58%)

REGION: Honduras; Florida

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             354 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 790 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

U.S. Will Not Seek Seat On U.N. Rights Council
The United States said it would not be a candidate for the new United Nations
Human Rights Council, which was approved last month by the General Assembly with
Washington nearly alone in opposition.   A6

Bomb Kills 10 Near Shiite Shrine


A car bomb ripped through a crowd of Shiite worshipers and pedestrians near the
Imam Ali mosque in Iraq, killing at least 10 people and wounding 34, hospital
officials said.   A10

The American military is scrambling to improve the way it honors soldiers who
have died in battle and cares for surviving relatives after many complaints that
it failed to compassionately guide families through the casualty process.   A1

Bush Is Put on Spot Over Iraq
President Bush faced some unusually tough questions from members of a bipartisan
audience on a swing through North Carolina as part of his campaign to buoy
support for the Iraq war.   A8

Rivalry Frustrates Hamas
Ismail Haniya, the new Palestinian prime minister from Hamas, said a rivalry
with Al Fatah, the longtime Palestinian power, is hindering his control over key
government agencies.   A6

SCIENCE/HEALTH

First Bird Flu Found in Britain
Bird flu killed a swan found in Scotland, government officials said, making it
the first recorded case of the disease in a wild bird in Britain.   A15

NATIONAL   A16-23

Agreement on Immigration In Danger of Slipping Away
Senate leaders reached agreement on a broad, bipartisan compromise that would
put the vast majority of the nation's 11 million illegal immigrants on a path to
citizenship. But its prospects for passage grew more uncertain as Republicans
and Democrats clashed over how to proceed now.   A1

Bush Tied to Iraq Leak
Vice President Dick Cheney's former chief of staff testified that he was
authorized by President Bush, through Mr. Cheney, in July 2003 to disclose key
portions of what until then was a classified prewar intelligence estimate on
Iraq, according to a new court filing.   A1

Gospel of Judas Surfaces
An early Christian manuscript, including the only known text of the Gospel of
Judas, has surfaced after 1,700 years, and it portrays Judas Iscariot not as a
betrayer of Jesus but as his favored collaborator.   A1

Giuliani Testifies at Terror Trial
Rudolph W. Giuliani took the witness stand to describe the horrors and grief
caused by the Sept. 11 attacks, as part of the government's effort to persuade a
jury to order the execution of Zacarias Moussaoui.   A18

Confusion Hurt Aid Response
Confusion over how to handle the emergency supplies, offers of military
assistance and $126 million in cash that poured in from foreign governments
after Hurricane Katrina meant delays in aiding storm victims, federal officials
acknowledged.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Ex-Detectives Convicted Of Helping Kill for the Mob
Two highly decorated New York City detectives were convicted of being mob
assassins who helped to kill at least eight men in one of the most spectacular
police corruption scandals in the city's history.   A1

Giuliani Prepares for 2008
After four years of enjoying private life, former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani is
taking several steps that could lay the groundwork for a presidential bid,
building and deepening alliances with Republicans nationwide and especially with
conservative leaders of the party.   A1

Banks Press Bad Landlords
A coalition of housing advocacy groups and two large banks that hold mortgages
on hundreds of apartment buildings in New York City announced an unusual
agreement under which they will use the banks' leverage as lenders to pressure
landlords into repairing dilapidated buildings.   B1

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-7

38-Game Hitting Streak Ends
Jimmy Rollins, left, was chasing Joe DiMaggio's 56-game hitting streak, but he
settled for 38, meaning DiMaggio's 65-year old record is still safe. Rollins,
the Phillies shortstop, went without a hit in four at-bats in a 4-2 loss to the
St. Louis Cardinals at Citizens Bank Park in Philadelphia.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-9

More Cardiac Device Tests
The Food and Drug Administration plans to strengthen how it monitors heart
devices like defibrillators by appointing outside medical experts to help it
review the safety of units already on the market, a top agency official said.
C1

The Goldman Call to Politics
For several decades, a Goldman Sachs senior partner, his pot of money made, has
traditionally pursued a second career in politics. Now, Henry M. Paulson, Jr.,
the firm's chief executive, must decide if he will follow that tradition.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Playing hardball with secrets; don't tamper with the courts; the
Indian nuclear deal; Windows on Apple.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E36
TV Listings   E27
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HAMAS (87%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); APPROVALS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); DELAYS
& POSTPONEMENTS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(76%); IRAQ WAR (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); AVIAN INFLUENZA (71%); HOSPITALS
(70%); WITNESSES (70%); ARMED FORCES (70%); AL FATAH (67%); HURRICANES (66%);
BIBLE & CHRISTIAN TEXTS (66%); JURY TRIALS (66%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (64%);
HURRICANE KATRINA (61%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); HAMAS (82%)

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (58%); RUDY GIULIANI (57%); GEORGE W BUSH (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SCOTLAND (79%)

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             361 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bringing It All Back Home

BYLINE: By John E. Leigh.

John E. Leigh served as Sierra Leone's ambassador to the United States from 1996
through 2002.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 910 words

DATELINE: Concord, Mass.


THE arraignment of Charles Taylor, the former president of Liberia, at the
United Nations-backed Special Court for Sierra Leone in Freetown is a welcome
development in Africa's struggle against injustice, warlord impunity and the
criminalization of state power. But Mr. Taylor's forthcoming war crimes trial
should not be transferred to The Hague, as Liberia's president and the court
itself have requested.

Such a transfer would defeat a principal purpose behind the establishment of the
special court in Sierra Leone -- namely, to teach Africans, firsthand and in
their own countries, the fundamentals of justice and to drive home the
democratic principle that no one is above the law. The special court has the
potential to help raise West Africa's standards for accountability,
transparency, fairness and the humane treatment of defendants.

In countries where might makes right, demonstrating the proper administration of
justice can be an unbeatable nation-building tool. This is a key part of what
the special court was set up to do and has done quite well in Sierra Leone since
it commenced operations in late 2002.

Sierra Leone is still unstable, reeling from the consequences of a civil war
that Mr. Taylor fueled by providing arms and training to violent insurgents. We
continue to suffer from poor governance, profound poverty and superstitious
beliefs -- the very weaknesses Mr. Taylor exploited in crafting his plunder of
Sierra Leone and Liberia. If impunity and the criminal abuse of state power are
not contained, progress in several parts of Africa, including Sierra Leone, will
be stymied for years to come.

On the other hand, witnessing the proper administration of justice will render
us Africans better able to protect our rights and more reliant on democratic
principles, rather than on superstitious beliefs. Our leaders, seeing one of
their own called to account for his crimes before the bar of justice in Sierra
Leone, may come to understand that there are consequences for abusing power.

Popular perception in Africa is that conditions abroad are far superior to those
at home. Spiriting the real kingpin among those charged with war crimes away to
Europe, while his fellow accused are held back to be tried locally, would send a
message to Mr. Taylor's admirers that the whole world deems Mr. Taylor too big a
fish to be tried locally. To such people, Mr. Taylor's transfer abroad would
seem like favoritism rendered to one of the most brutal of warlords out of
perverse respect for the extreme horrors he perpetrated.

In order to drive home the true benefits of properly administered justice, Mr.
Taylor and his fellow defendants should be held in the same humid place of
detention, given the same food and tried by the same judges in the same
courthouse nearest the scene of his crimes. All this should take place in plain
view of Mr. Taylor's victims.

Mr. Taylor's lawyer, Vincent Nmehielle, wants the court to believe that his
client would like to be tried in Sierra Leone. Those of us who are familiar with
Mr. Taylor's tactics know better. He is hoping that if he pretends to prefer
being tried in Sierra Leone, the court will deny his request and be more
motivated to ship him to Europe instead.

A practiced escape artist, Mr. Taylor knows he is better off in Europe than in
Sierra Leone, where thousands of people would happily administer vigilante
justice. Any escape from the protection of the United Nations detention center
in Freetown would be a death sentence.

True, fears that Mr. Taylor's trial in Freetown could cause instability in
Sierra Leone, Liberia and elsewhere in the region have substantial merit. There
are thousands of former combatants, including many Taylor loyalists and
admirers, walking the streets and byways of Sierra Leone, Liberia and Ivory
Coast. Some even hold public office in Liberia. Many of these people are
disenchanted with the status quo, and it is quite possible that they could turn
again to violence.

But the solution is not to rob Africans of the experience of seeing real justice
administered to their most powerful tormentor. Potential instability should be
addressed not by pandering to thuggish elements but by tightening security in
both Sierra Leone and Liberia, under a robust United Nations peacemaking
mandate.

There are already enough forces in the area to accomplish this. In 2000 and
2001, the United States spent $100 million to train at least seven battalions of
a West African multinational armed force to help secure the peace in Sierra
Leone. In addition, there are British-trained security forces in Sierra Leone
and 15,000 United Nations peacekeepers in Liberia. The international community
should further let it be known that if any group seeks to interfere with the
trial by orchestrating violence in support of Mr. Taylor, its leaders will be
subject to indictment themselves.

The benefits of trying Mr. Taylor in Freetown far outweigh the costs of
activating internationally trained security forces to help maintain short-term
stability in the region. And rather than concerning itself with trying Mr.
Taylor in Europe, the world should get active in securing a suitable place for
the long-term incarceration of Africa's most notorious warlord should he be
convicted.

Sierra Leone may not be stable enough to provide such a place on its own today.
But the only way it will get there is if its people are permitted to see justice
done at home.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); GENOCIDE
(73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (72%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (65%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (58%) John E Leigh; Charles G Taylor; Ellen (Pres)
Johnson-Sirleaf

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (96%); AFRICA (96%); LIBERIA (96%); NETHERLANDS (88%);
WESTERN AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone; Hague (Netherlands); Liberia

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             363 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 20, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Our Dirty War

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT; David Brooks is on vacation.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 710 words


I said, ''Some of these folks have never been heard from again, right?''

''Yup,'' said Curt Goering. ''That's right.''

Mr. Goering is the senior deputy executive director for policy and programs at
Amnesty International USA. We were discussing a subject -- government-sanctioned
disappearances -- that ordinarily would repel most Americans.

In past years, stories about torture and ''the disappeared'' have been
associated with sinister regimes in South and Central America. The attitude in
the United States was that we were above such dirty business, that it was
immoral and uncivilized, and we were better than that.

But times change, and we've lowered our moral standards several notches since
then. Now people are disappearing at the hands of the U.S. government.

''Below the Radar: Secret Flights to Torture and 'Disappearance' '' is the title
of a recent Amnesty International report on the reprehensible practice of
extraordinary rendition, a highly classified American program in which
individuals are seized -- abducted -- without any semblance of due process and
sent off to be interrogated by regimes that are known to engage in torture.

Some of the individuals swept up by rendition simply vanish.

''This is a kind of netherworld that people disappear into and don't frequently
emerge from,'' said Mr. Goering. ''It's a world that's outside the reach of law.
These individuals might as well be on another planet.''

There is no way to know how many people have been seized, tortured or killed.
Since there are no official proceedings, there is no way to know whether a
particular individual who is taken into custody is a legitimate terror suspect
or someone who is innocent of any wrongdoing. But we have learned, after the
fact, that mistakes have been made.

You may not be familiar with the name Khaled el-Masri, but the Bush
administration sure knows who he is. Mr. Masri, a German citizen of Lebanese
descent, was arrested while visiting Macedonia in December 2003. A few weeks
later, he was handed over to a group of masked men dressed all in black -- in
the so-called ninja outfits frequently worn by the rendition cowboys.

Mr. Masri's clothes were cut off and he was drugged, put aboard a plane and
flown to Afghanistan, where he was held in a squalid basement cell for five
months.

It turned out, as noted by Dana Priest of The Washington Post, who was awarded a
Pulitzer Prize this week for her reporting on the government's covert
counterterrorism programs, that ''the C.I.A. had imprisoned the wrong man.''

Ms. Priest wrote:

''Masri was held for five months largely because the head of the C.I.A.'s
counterterrorist center's Al Qaeda unit 'believed he was someone else,' one
former C.I.A. official said. 'She didn't really know. She just had a hunch.' ''

Someone had a hunch that Maher Arar was a terrorist, too. A Canadian citizen who
had been born in Syria, he was snatched by American authorities at Kennedy
Airport in New York on Sept. 26, 2002, and shipped off to a nightmare in Syria
that lasted nearly a year. He was held for most of that time in an underground,
rat-infested cell about the size of a grave.

No one, not even among the Syrians who tortured him, was ever able to come up
with any evidence linking Mr. Arar to terrorism. He was released and returned to
his family in Ottawa. Shunned and emotionally shattered, he seems a ruined man
at just 35 years of age.

The cases of Khaled el-Masri and Maher Arar are among the handful that we know
about. Most cases remain concealed in the lawless netherworld that Mr. Goering
spoke of.

The Amnesty International report describes various acts of torture and other
forms of mistreatment that are alleged to have been inflicted on victims of
rendition. According to the report, Vincent Cannistraro, a former director of
the C.I.A's Counterterrorism Center, said the following about a detainee who had
been rendered to Egypt:

''They promptly tore his fingernails out and he started telling things.''

The Bush administration will never do the right thing when it comes to
rendition. Congress needs to step in and thoroughly investigate this program,
which is nothing less than a crime against humanity. Congress needs to
investigate it, document it and shut it down.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (89%); TERRORISM (88%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); MISSING PERSONS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); EXECUTIVES (72%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); ARRESTS
(67%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (60%) Terrorism; Torture; Freedom and Human
Rights; United States International Relations; Terrorism

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (50%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (50%)

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%) Amnesty International (Orgn)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (50%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (50%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (50%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (50%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (50%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (50%)

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Khaled El- Masri; Maher Arar

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (57%); NORTH &
SOUTH AMERICAS (55%)

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             369 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Blowback in Africa

BYLINE: By Raffi Khatchadourian.

Raffi Khatchadourian traveled to Chad in 2005 for the International Reporting
Project at Johns Hopkins University's School of Advanced International Studies.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 632 words


EVER since Chad gained independence 46 years ago, it has been a world-class
model of political dysfunction. In the 1970's, Chad's president, Francois
Tombalbaye, compelled civil servants to renounce Western customs, undergo a
tribal initiation rite known as yondo and profess belief in a nationalist creed
he called Chaditude. He was executed in 1975. In the 1980's, a rebel leader
named Hissene Habre led an army to the presidential palace and seized power. He
became known as the ''African Pinochet'' and murderously pursued opponents for
nearly a decade.

In 1990, Mr. Habre was chased out by an armed faction led by Chad's current
president, Idriss Deby. Now Mr. Deby is facing his own rebellion.

Americans might dismiss this numbing cycle of coups as esoteric history
belonging to a troubled and distant country. They shouldn't. The C.I.A. armed
Mr. Habre for years, and since 2003, the United States military has been
training and equipping Mr. Deby's army, making his fight to stay in office our
fight, too.

Last year, Chad took part in a vast, international military exercise organized
by the United States -- the largest exercise of its kind in Africa since World
War II, according to the Defense Department. This summer, American forces will
continue to advise Chadian soldiers, and Congress is expected to allocate $500
million for a five-year program to train and equip several Saharan armies --
including Mr. Deby's.

The military hopes these initiatives will help contain the threat of terrorism
by bringing order to the Great Desert and its borderlands. For centuries, the
Sahara has been a lawless realm, and with millions of Muslims living across the
region in isolated communities, counterterrorism officials fear that Islamic
militants may seek sanctuary there.

But dispensing military aid to Chad now -- with Mr. Deby fighting hundreds of
rebels backed by Sudan -- seems reckless. It puts American military equipment
and expertise in the hands of a desperate dictator. Worse still, it risks
pouring additional fuel into the human furnace of Darfur, and it may well come
to impede the careful diplomatic work required to solve that crisis.

So far, American officials have made much of Sudanese assistance to the rebels,
framing the recent conflict in Chad as an outgrowth of the tragedy in Darfur.
There is some truth to this. But the violence in Chad also has its own political
narrative. During his 16 years in power, Mr. Deby has ruled Chad brutally. His
security forces have committed torture, rapes, summary executions and mass
killings.

Mr. Deby is a member of the Zaghawa -- a northern tribe making up roughly 5
percent of Chad's population -- and last year the State Department described his
regime as a Zaghawa oligarchy shielded by a security and intelligence apparatus
that violates human rights with impunity. In 2004, Mr. Deby altered Chad's
Constitution to grant himself another term in office. Elections are scheduled
for next Wednesday. There is little likelihood they will be fair.

Only one compelling argument exists for giving Chad military aid, and it follows
from the logic of lesser evils. Many of the refugees fleeing Darfur are Zaghawa,
and Mr. Deby has taken them in. If his regime collapses, tens of thousands of
people will once again be at the mercy of Sudan's janjaweed marauders, and the
genocide may spread.

This argument, though, is complicated by another unsettling development. In
recent months, scores of Chadian soldiers have defected to the rebel militias.
If the defections continue, they raise the horrific possibility that American
military equipment and expertise could end up going to men aligned with the
janjaweed. In that case, our military assistance to Chad, far from containing
political anarchy, would only add to it.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Sam Weber)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); RELIGION (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (87%); WAR CRIMES (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); POPULATION SIZE (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (76%); COUPS (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (71%);
WORLD WAR II (71%); TERRORISM (69%); COUNTERTERRORISM (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%); TORTURE (62%) United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Foreign Aid; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: Raffi Khatchadourian; Idriss (Pres) Deby

STATE: SAHARA DESERT (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CHAD (95%); SUDAN (93%); AFRICA (93%)

REGION: Chad; Chad

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             372 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

GROWING UNEASE FOR SOME BLACKS ON IMMIGRATION

BYLINE: By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 3


In their demonstrations across the country, some Hispanic immigrants have
compared the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.'s struggle to their own, singing
''We Shall Overcome'' and declaring a new civil rights movement to win
citizenship for millions of illegal immigrants.

Civil rights stalwarts like the Rev. Jesse Jackson; Representative John Lewis,
Democrat of Georgia; Julian Bond and the Rev. Joseph E. Lowery have hailed the
recent protests as the natural progression of their movement in the 1960's.

But despite some sympathy for the nation's illegal immigrants, many black
professionals, academics and blue-collar workers feel increasingly uneasy as
they watch Hispanics flex their political muscle while assuming the mantle of a
seminal black struggle for justice.

Some blacks bristle at the comparison between the civil rights movement and the
immigrant demonstrations, pointing out that black protesters in the 1960's were
American citizens and had endured centuries of enslavement, rapes, lynchings and
discrimination before they started marching.

Others worry about the plight of low-skilled black workers, who sometimes
compete with immigrants for entry-level jobs.

And some fear the unfinished business of the civil rights movement will fall to
the wayside as America turns its attention to a newly energized Hispanic
minority with growing political and economic clout.

''All of this has made me start thinking, 'What's going to happen to
African-Americans?' '' said Brendon L. Laster, 32, a black fund-raiser at Howard
University here, who has been watching the marches. ''What's going to happen to
our unfinished agenda?''

Mr. Laster is dapper and cosmopolitan, a part-time professor and Democratic
activist who drinks and dines with a wide circle of black, white and Hispanic
friends. He said he marveled at first as the images of cheering, flag-waving
immigrants flickered across his television screen. But as some demonstrators
proclaimed a new civil rights movement, he grew uncomfortable.

He says that immigrant protesters who claim the legacy of Dr. King and Rosa
Parks are going too far. And he has begun to worry about the impact that the
emerging immigrant activism will have on black Americans, many of whom still
face poverty, high rates of unemployment and discrimination in the workplace.

''I think what they were able to do, the level of organization they were able to
pull off, that was phenomenal,'' said Mr. Laster, who is also a part-time
sociology professor at a community college in Baltimore. ''But I do think their
struggle is, in fundamental ways, very different from ours. We didn't chose to
come here; we came here as slaves. And we were denied, even though we were legal
citizens, our basic rights.''

''There are a still lot of unresolved issues from the civil rights era,'' he
said. ''Perhaps we're going to be pushed to the back burner.''

This painful debate is bubbling up in church halls and classrooms, on call-in
radio programs and across dining room tables. Some blacks prefer to discuss the
issue privately for fear of alienating their Hispanic allies. But others are
publicly airing their misgivings, saying they are too worried to stay silent.

''We will have no power, no clout,'' warned Linda Carter-Lewis, 62, a human
resources manager and the branch president of the N.A.A.C.P. in Des Moines.
''That's where I see this immigrant movement going. Even though so many
thousands and thousands of them have no legal status and no right to vote right
now, that day is coming.''

Immigrant leaders defend their use of civil rights language, saying strong
parallels exist between the two struggles. And they argue that their movement
will ultimately become a powerful vehicle to fight for the rights of all
American workers, regardless of national origin.

''African-Americans during the civil rights movement were in search of the
American dream and that's what our movement is trying to achieve for our
community,'' said Jaime Contreras, president of the National Capital Immigration
Coalition, which organized the April 10 demonstration that drew tens of
thousands of people to Washington.

''We face the same issues even if we speak different languages,'' said Mr.
Contreras, who is from El Salvador and listens to Dr. King's speeches for
inspiration.

Mr. Jackson, who addressed the immigrant rally on Monday in New York, echoed
those views. He noted that Dr. King, at the end of his life, focused on
improving economic conditions for all Americans, regardless of race. And he said
the similarities between African-Americans and illegal immigrants were too
powerful to ignore.

''We too were denied citizenship,'' Mr. Jackson said. ''We too were undocumented
workers working without wages, without benefits, without the vote. ''We should
feel honored that other people are using tactics and strategies from our
struggle. We shouldn't say they're stealing from us. They're learning from us.''

Mr. Jackson said corporate employers were fueling the tensions between blacks
and immigrants by refusing to pay a living wage to all workers. John Campbell, a
black steel worker and labor activist from Iowa, agreed.

''This is a class issue,'' said Mr. Campbell, who has been disheartened by black
critics of the immigrant marches. ''We need to join forces. We can't improve our
lot in life as African-Americans by suppressing the rights of anyone else.''

But blacks and immigrants have long had a history of uneasy relations in the
United States.

W.E.B. DuBois, a founder of the N.A.A.C.P., and other prominent black leaders
worried that immigrants would displace blacks in the workplace. Ronald Walters,
director of the African-American Leadership Institute at the University of
Maryland, said blacks cheered when the government restricted Asian immigration
to the United States after World War I. And many Europeans who came to this
country discriminated against blacks.

Blacks and Hispanics have also been allies. In the 1960's, Dr. King and Cesar
Chavez, the Mexican-American farm labor leader, corresponded with each other.
And when Mr. Chavez was jailed, Dr. King's widow, Coretta Scott King, visited
him in jail, Mr. Walters said. In recent years, blacks and Hispanics have been
influential partners in the Democratic Party.

A recent poll conducted by the Pew Hispanic Center captured the ambivalence
among blacks over immigration. Nearly 80 percent said immigrants from Latin
American work very hard and have strong family values.

But nearly twice as many blacks as whites said that they or a family member had
lost a job, or not gotten a job, because an employer hired an immigrant worker.
Blacks were also more likely than whites to feel that immigrants take jobs away
from American citizens.

Mr. Walters said he understood those conflicting emotions, saying he feels torn
himself because of his concerns about the competition between immigrants and
low-skilled black men for jobs. In 2004, 72 percent of black male high school
dropouts in their 20's were jobless, compared with 34 percent of white and 19
percent of Hispanic dropouts.

''I applaud them moving out of the shadows and into the light because of the
human rights issues involved,'' Mr. Walters said of illegal immigrants. ''I've
given my entire life to issues of social justice as an activist and an academic.
In that sense, I'm with them.

''But they also represent a powerful ingredient to the perpetuation of our
struggle,'' he said. ''We have a problem where half of black males are
unemployed in several cities. I can't ignore that and simply be my old
progressive self and say it's not an issue. It is an issue.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Rev. Jesse Jackson on Monday at Union Square rally. (Photo
by Uli Seit for The New York Times)(pg. A1)
Some blacks are uneasy about immigrants' taking on the mantle of the civil
rights era, but John R. Campbell Jr., left, says blacks and Hispanics should be
united. Ronald Walters, above, said earlier blacks had opposed immigration.
(Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)
 (Photo by Mark Kegans for The New York Times)(pg. A20)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (94%); IMMIGRATION (94%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%);
AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); FOREIGN LABOR (78%); FUNDRAISING
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (76%); SOCIOLOGY (75%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (75%); HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES (75%); COMMUNITY
COLLEGES (75%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (71%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (69%); COLLEGE
& UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (69%); RIOTS (61%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (60%)
Immigration and Refugees; Demonstrations and Riots; Blacks; Illegal Immigrants;
Foreign Workers; Freedom and Human Rights; Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: HOWARD UNIVERSITY (54%)

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (92%); JESSE JACKSON (90%); JOHN LEWIS (73%)
Rachel L Swarns; Martin Luther Jr (1929-68) King; Jesse L (Rev) Jackson

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             373 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 8, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Cheney Lauds 3 Premiers For Efforts To Join NATO

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 720 words

DATELINE: DUBROVNIK, Croatia, May 7


Vice President Dick Cheney spent the weekend in this picturesque Dalmatian port,
his last stop on a visit to Eastern Europe and former Soviet bloc states.

He met with leaders of Macedonia and Albania, as well as Croatia, and, before
leaving Sunday, said that their efforts to join the European Union and NATO
would help invigorate both institutions.

Mr. Cheney's visit was a low-key finale to a strategically important trip, which
first took him to Lithuania for a meeting with a number of Eastern European
leaders, where he gave a speech criticizing Russia for restricting human rights
and using its natural resources to put pressure on its neighbors. He later
visited Kazakhstan, which the United States has been trying to develop as an
source for oil.

Mr. Cheney told a group of prime ministers, ''It's very important -- both for
NATO and the E.U. -- to take in new members, people who aspire to join the
organization, help rejuvenate it.''

Albania, Croatia and Macedonia form the Adriatic Charter, an association
encouraged by Colin L. Powell when he was secretary of state to aid their
attempts to join NATO.

The visit was a reward for Croatia, which Mr. Cheney said had made substantial
progress in recent years. It has shed its nationalist image and helped to bring
its last remaining Croatian war crimes suspect, Gen. Ante Gotovina, to the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Croatia is now
regarded as the favorite among the former Yugoslav states to be accepted into
the European Union and NATO.

But Croatia has resisted American pressure to sign an agreement that would
shield American soldiers from prosecution at the International Criminal Court in
The Hague, which the Bush administration has not recognized. The United States
has cut aid to many nations that have refused to sign immunity agreements,
contending that it was acting to protect American soldiers from politically
motivated prosecution. Croatia has lost $5.8 million in military aid as a
result.

But now Croatian officials say they are trying to resolve the issue through a
status of forces agreement, to prevent American personnel on Croatian territory
from being transferred to the court.

On Saturday, Mr. Cheney and his wife, Lynne, toured the old city in Dubrovnik,
though it rained and they were subjected to the heckling of a lone Canadian
student.

Mr. Cheney's visit encouraged local officials to conclude that the Bush
administration would stay involved in helping to resolve the problems remaining
in the region from the inter-ethnic and political turmoil of the 1990's.

''The three of us agreed that alongside the E.U., the U.S. should also be
present in solving those issues,'' Ivo Sanader, Croatia's prime minister, told
reporters after the meeting on Sunday.

This is an important year for the region to try to settle issues festering from
the war in Bosnia, which ended a decade ago. Negotiations on the future of
Kosovo, the province of Serbia now controlled by the United Nations, are under
way, and could lead to it becoming independent.

In two weeks Montenegro, which with Serbia makes up all that remains of the
Yugoslav federation, will hold a referendum about whether it will sever its
remaining ties with the government in Belgrade.

Mr. Cheney did not publicly address these issues, but his team sought
reassurance from the Adriatic Charter nations that they would help to maintain
the timetable, officials who took part in the discussions said.

Chiding Moscow Again

  SHANNON, Ireland, May 7 (Reuters) -- Mr. Cheney took Russia to task again on
Sunday.

Heading home from visits to Lithuania, Kazakhstan and Croatia, Mr. Cheney said
he had heard repeated concerns about Russia's ''internal developments,'' as well
as its use of energy resources to ''obtain leverage'' over its neighbors.

He insisted, however, that Russia had nothing to fear from NATO, which has
expanded eastward since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.

The vice president's plane touched down briefly at Shannon's airport on its way
back to Washington.

In response to concerns about the repercussions of his criticism, Mr. Cheney
dismissed the notion that Russia would retaliate by hardening its position at
the United Nations against an American-led effort for action against Iran over
its nuclear ambitions.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Meeting in Croatia yesterday were, from left, Prime Minister
Sali Berisha of Albania, Vice President Dick Cheney, Prime Minister Ivo Sanader
of Croatia and Prime Minister Vlado Buckovski of Macedonia. (Pool photo by Shawn
Thew)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (86%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (77%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); GENOCIDE (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); NATURAL RESOURCES (75%); EUROPEAN UNION LAW (72%); ARMED
FORCES (68%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (65%) United States International
Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (84%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (54%)
European Union; North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: DICK CHENEY (93%) Nicholas Wood; Dick (Vice Pres) Cheney; Sali (Prime
Min) Berisha; Ivo (Prime Min) Sanader; Vlado (Prime Min) Buckovski

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (74%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CROATIA (97%); EUROPE (96%); ALBANIA (94%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF
(94%); EASTERN EUROPE (90%); NETHERLANDS (79%); KAZAKHSTAN (79%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); LITHUANIA (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Croatia; Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic); Albania; Croatia

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             380 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 23, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1125 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

Iraqi Charities Bringing A Divided Land Together
The Iraqi government has registered 5,000 private organizations, including
charities and human rights groups. Officials estimate that another 7,000 groups
exist unofficially. The efforts show that even as sectarian violence tears
Iraq's cities apart, a growing number of Iraqis are trying to bring them
together.   A1

Only 48 hours after Iraq's new government took office, the British prime
minister, Tony Blair, flew to Baghdad to discuss an issue crucial to Iraq, as
well as to the politics of the war in London and Washington: when British and
American troops can start to withdraw.

A14

Underdog Surges in Mexico
In the race for presidency of Mexico, Felipe Calderon, fond of portraying
himself as the underdog, has surged past the front-runner, Andres Manuel Lopez
Obrador, with a stream of advertisements portraying Mr. Lopez Obrador as a
dangerous, violent leftist who will bankrupt the country.   A1

U.S. Jets Kill Afghan Civilians
American military planes in pursuit of suspected Taliban fighters bombed a
village in southern Afghanistan, killing 16 civilians and wounding 15, among
them women and children, the local governor and villagers said.   A10

New Ways to Recall Holocaust
Israel, 58 years after the Holocaust, is trying to cope with the fading of
history. As the number of survivors and perpetrators dwindles, Israel has been
exploring ways of preserving the memory of the Holocaust, including trips to
former concentration camps and bringing Israeli youth together with survivors.
A8

A Redrawing of Balkan Borders
Fifteen years after ethnic conflict broke out in the western Balkans, Montenegro
appears to have voted by a bare margin to separate from Serbia. The move may be
the last phase in redefining borders of the region, possibly leaving Serbia as
the only remaining republic of the six that once formed Yugoslavia.   A10

Debate on Aid to India's Castes
As India prospers it faces a polarizing totem of public policy: a government
proposal to extend quotas for admission to some of the country's prestigious
federally financed universities for the lowest castes on the Hindu social ladder
and indigenous tribes.   A3

Former Opposites Unite in Syria
Abdel Halim Khaddam, Syria's former vice president, and Ali Sadreddin
al-Bayanouni, the leader of the Muslim Brotherhood in Syria, have formed the
National Salvation Front, an alliance with the dual goals of unifying Syria's
opposition and reassuring insiders fearful of change.   A12

Paisley Rejects Leader's Role
Ian Paisley, Northern Ireland's Protestant leader of the Democratic Unionist
party, rejected a proposal by Sinn Fein, the largest Roman Catholic party, that
he should lead a power-sharing executive body to revive the province's peace
effort.   A5

NATIONAL   A16-23

Vast Data Cache On Veterans Stolen
Personal electronic data on up to 26.5 million military veterans, including
their Social Security numbers and birth dates, were stolen from the home of a
Department of Veterans Affairs employee who had taken the information home
without authorization, the agency said.   A1

Democrats Try to Blunt Scandal
Democrats' plans to make Republican corruption a central theme of their election
strategy this year were complicated by accusations of wrongdoing in their own
ranks, leading them to try to blunt the political effects of the unfolding case
against Representative William J. Jefferson.   A18

Challenging Schwarzenegger
Two fixtures of Democratic politics in California -- Phil Angelides, the state
treasurer who made a fortune as a real estate developer, and Steve Westly, the
controller who made even more money as a founder of eBay -- are in a battle to
take on Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, in November.   A16

Congress Looks Back to 1986
As the debate on immigration reaches a boil, Congress is haunted by Senate Bill
1200, the failed amnesty legislation of 1986. Today, senators who favor a path
to citizenship say they have learned from the past.   A20

Disorder in the Courts
In the nine months since Hurricane Katrina, more than a thousand defendants have
languished in jail without access to lawyers. The New Orleans public defender
system is desperately short of money and manpower, says Judge Arthur L. Hunter
Jr.   A1

Busy Hurricane Season Seen
Forecasters predict that 13 to 16 tropical storms will form in the Atlantic
during the six-month hurricane season that begins June 1.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Clintons Display Unity In Separate Public Lives
Since leaving the White House, Bill and Hillary Clinton have built largely
separate lives -- partly because of the demands of their distinct career paths
and partly as a result of political calculations, according to interviews and a
review of their activities.   A1

New Trial in Subway Murder
The mentally ill man who pushed a 32-year-old journalist and photographer to her
death in front of a speeding subway train after he stopped taking his
antipsychotic medication will get a new trial after the U.S. Supreme Court
declined to consider an appeal from New York State.   B1

Ex-Governor's Memoir
Former Gov. James E. McGreevey, who resigned in 2004 after declaring that he was
gay and that he had had an extramarital affair, was so determined to climb New
Jersey's political ladder that he hid the fact that he was gay by masquerading
as a womanizer, according to his memoir.   B2

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Poet Inspires 'Seeing Machine'
A poet and artist has enlisted the help of scientists and engineering students
to create a ''seeing machine'' that may eventually help people like her, with
severely impaired vision, to read.   F5

Health & Fitness   F5

OBITUARIES   B7-8

Katherine Dunham
The dancer, choreographer, teacher and anthropologist whose pioneering work
introduced much of the black heritage in dance to the stage, she was 96.   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Big Board Bids for Euronext
The New York Stock Exchange took a big step toward the creation of a global
market place by offering to acquire the operator of five European stock and
futures exchanges for $10.2 billion.   A1

Decline In Stocks
A three-year bull run in stocks has been fading, as concerns mount about higher
inflation and slower growth. Yet to many investors, the slump only confirms that
an earlier rally may have been hollow to begin with.   C1

Gas Prices Deemed Valid
A federal investigation concluded that the increase in gasoline prices has not
been the result of unlawful price manipulation, despite suspicions among
consumers about rapidly rising prices.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Hold the applause in Iraq; tumbling down; Bloomberg's gun battle; a
broken horse.

Columns: John Tierney, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E2
TV Listings   E9
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); PUBLIC POLICY
(78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); RELIGION
(77%); TALIBAN (77%); POLITICS (76%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (76%); BRITISH
PRIME MINISTERS (76%); VETERANS (75%); ARMED FORCES (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (72%); GOVERNORS (71%); PEACE PROCESS (50%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (58%); FELIPE CALDERON (53%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); SYRIA (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); UNITED STATES (93%);
ISRAEL (93%); INDIA (92%); SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             385 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Muslims Say Terror Fears Hamper Their Right to Travel

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1434 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 31


Azhar Usman, a burly American-born Muslim with a heavy black beard, says he
elicits an almost universal reaction when he boards an airplane at any United
States airport: conversations stop in midsentence and the look in the eyes of
his fellow passengers says, ''We're all going to die!''

For Ahmed Ahmed, a comedian, it is even worse. His double-barreled name matches
an occasional alias used by a henchman of Osama bin Laden. ''It's a bad time to
be named Ahmed right now,'' he riffs in his stand-up routine, before describing
being hauled through the Las Vegas airport in handcuffs.

Taleb Salhab and his wife say they too were dragged away in handcuffs at the
border crossing in Port Huron, Mich., as their two preschool daughters wailed in
the back seat of their car. The Salhabs were discharged after four hours of
questioning, with no explanation from customs officers.

Getting through United States airports and border crossings has grown more
difficult for everyone since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11. But Muslim
Americans say they are having a harder time than most, sometimes facing an
intimidating maze of barriers, if not outright discrimination. Advocacy groups
have taken to labeling their predicament ''traveling while Muslim,'' and accuse
the government of ignoring a serious erosion of civil rights. Next month, the
American Civil Liberties Union will go back to court to broaden a suit on behalf
of Muslims and Arab-Americans who are demanding the United States government
come up with a better system for screening travelers.

The delays, humiliation and periodic roughing up have prompted some American
Muslims to avoid traveling as much as possible. Some even skip meeting anyone at
the airport for fear of a nasty encounter with a law-enforcement officer. Those
who do venture forth say they are always nervous.

''I find myself enunciating English like never before, totally over-enunciating
just because I want the guy to know that I am an American,'' says Maz Jobrani,
an Iranian-born, Berkeley-educated actor. ''Middle Easterners are just as scared
of Al Qaeda as everybody else, but we also have to be worried about being
profiled as Al Qaeda. It's a double whammy.''

Many Muslim Americans fault the Department of Homeland Security and its various
agencies, chiefly the Transportation Security Administration, as failing to
develop an efficient system to screen travelers. In particular, they deplore the
lack of a workable means for those on the federal watch list by mistake -- or
those whose names match that of someone on the list -- to get themselves off.

Mr. Salhab, 36, says his family remains shaken by their treatment at the border.
Officers, their hands on their guns, swarmed around his vehicle, barking at him
to get out as alarm bells clanged, he said.

''If I had sneezed or looked the wrong way, who knows what would have
happened,'' Mr. Salhab said in a telephone interview. ''I feared for my life.''

Now, he said, every time his daughter, 4, sees uniformed officers, she asks if
they are going to take him away.

''What happened to me at the border is inexcusable,'' Mr. Salhab said.

A complaint filed with the Department of Homeland Security in January got Mr.
Salhab a form letter saying the government was looking into the situation. There
has been no further response.

A number of American Muslims similarly upset by how federal agents treated them
and their families are seeking relief through the courts. About eight men with
Muslim or Arab roots are joining a suit already filed last year by the American
Civil Liberties Union branch in Illinois demanding that the government improve
its treatment of returning American citizens.

But similar suits have made little headway. In general, the Constitution
protects all Americans against unreasonable search and seizure. But much more
aggressive searches have been deemed reasonable at airports and at the border
than elsewhere. Just how elastic that standard can be is what the lawsuits are
addressing.

The Department of Homeland Security denies engaging in racial profiling. Agents
should not base their decisions on a face or a name, said Dan Sutherland, head
of the Office for Civil Rights and Civil Liberties. ''They should look at
behavior, concrete action, observable activities,'' he said.

Mr. Sutherland said the department was aware of some problems with the watch
list, but he argued that many Muslim Americans traveled without encountering
difficulties.

Still, traveling makes many Muslim Americans feel like second-class citizens.
Mr. Ahmed, the comedian, often travels wearing a T-shirt that says ''Got
rights?''

''That's the whole question of my existence right now,'' he said. ''Do we have
rights? I'm a taxpayer and I'm an American, and I want to be treated like one.''

The problem has become such a part of being a Muslim American that some
comedians have built routines around it. Mr. Ahmed and Mr. Jobrani both perform
on The Axis of Evil Comedy Tour. Mr. Jobrani jokes about his heightened state of
anxiety as he passes through security.

He says, ''If anything beeps in the metal detector, I think, 'Dammit, I'm a
terrorist! I knew it!''

But underneath the one-liners, the treatment grates. Mr. Ahmed, 35, now avoids
flying on the day of a show lest he be barred from his flight. The stress
reached a level that the whiskers in his beard started to fall out, he says.
(''Your body is trying to de-Muslimize,'' Mr. Jobrani said jokingly, sitting
next to him in a Los Angeles coffee shop. ''Next, your skin will get lighter.'')

Mr. Ahmed was handcuffed in the Las Vegas airport in November 2004, and, he
said, a young black police officer leaned over and said, ''Yo man, now you know
what it was like to be a black man in the 60's.''

It is an apt comparison, Mr. Ahmed feels, noting that after the 1995 Oklahoma
City terrorist bombing by a white former soldier, Timothy J. McVeigh, not every
blond with a buzz cut was pulled over.

''I know I have to be demure and humble when I approach a ticket agent,'' Mr.
Ahmed said. ''If you show any ounce of negativity or righteousness, they'll deny
you, they'll say, 'You're not getting on this flight, I don't like your
attitude.'''

When he called a phone line for those with travel problems like his, he said, he
got no response. ''I understand the need for security, but they go overboard,
they always have to put on this public display,'' he said. Mr. Usman, 30, and
part of a different comedy act called Allah Made Me Funny, draws big laughs when
joking about his obviously Muslim appearance. ''If I was a crazy Muslim
fundamentalist, this is not the disguise I would go with,'' he cracks.

He refuses to shave his beard. ''I have a problem that people associate a
certain look with Muslim terrorists,'' he said by telephone from his native
Chicago. ''The look of someone trying to live a religious life, having a long
beard, has been around a lot longer than Osama bin Laden and will be around a
lot longer than Osama bin Laden.''

Most of those wrongly placed on the watch list seethe with frustration and
anger, finding it unbelievable that a technologically advanced country like the
United States has been unable to develop a list that can distinguish between a
lurking terrorist and a harmless citizen with a Muslim name.

Khurrum Wahid, a lawyer, said that the Transportation Security Administration
had made empty promises for years about making improvements. ''If the name John
Smith was on the designated list,'' Mr. Wahid said, ''I guarantee they would
have come up with some way to check that list.''

Dr. Sam Hamade, 33, was born in Lebanon and carries a Canadian passport but is a
permanent United States resident and is seeking citizenship. A senior resident
at Upstate Medical University in Syracuse, Dr. Hamade legally changed his name
from Osama to Sam to make his patients more comfortable.

In the last two years, driving back from Canada after visiting relatives or his
fiancee, Dr. Hamade said, he has been detained at least six times. He has found
himself weeping with frustration, he said, because the same thing happens every
time -- he is photographed, fingerprinted and his body groped -- and every time
the border police say that they are just following procedures.

Dr. Hamade was handed a ''Fact Sheet'' instructing him to write to the Border
Patrol's ''Customer Satisfaction Unit'' in Washington. He wrote, but has
received no answer. A complaint filed with the Department of Homeland Security
in April has also elicited no response.

''It's a nightmare,'' Dr. Hamade said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: ''If I was a crazy Muslim fundamentalist, this is not the
disguise I would go with,'' says Azhar Usman, who performed recently in
Carrollton, Tex. But what is funny on stage hurts the comedian in real life.
(Photo by Erin Trieb for The New York Times)
 Ahmed Ahmed, whose name matches an alias of a colleague of Osama bin Laden,
jokes about his visits to airports, but underneath the one-liners, the treatment
grates. He performed recently in Orland Park, Ill. (Photo by Kenneth Dickerman
for The New York Times)(pg. A22)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIM AMERICANS (94%); AIRPORTS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); BORDER CONTROL (90%); AIRLINES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); AL-QAEDA (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); RELIGION (89%); ARAB AMERICANS (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(89%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); FUNDAMENTALISM (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%); LITIGATION (71%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (68%) Airlines and
Airplanes; Arab-Americans; Muslim-Americans; Security and Warning Systems;
Discrimination; Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and Litigation; Airlines and
Airplanes; Terrorism; Airports; Airlines and Airplanes

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (82%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (59%); US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (59%) American Civil
Liberties Union; Homeland Security Department; Transportation Security
Administration

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (70%) Neil Macfarquhar

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%)

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             389 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justices Let U.S. Transfer Padilla to Civilian Custody

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1041 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 4


The Supreme Court late Wednesday granted the Bush administration's request to
transfer the terrorism suspect Jose Padilla from military to civilian custody,
ending an odd two-week standoff over where he should be held while the justices
decide whether to hear his case.

The court's order means that Mr. Padilla will be held in a federal prison in
Miami rather than a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., while he waits to learn
whether the justices will take up his appeal of a decision that upheld, in
sweeping terms, the government's authority to keep citizens it designates enemy
combatants in open-ended military confinement.

While the immediate practical effect was minimal, and the court did not suggest
how it might ultimately act in Mr. Padilla's case, the action was something of a
victory for the administration after an embarrassing rebuff by a usually
friendly federal appeals court that had refused to permit Mr. Padilla's
transfer.

The Supreme Court's unsigned one-page order reviewed the recent convoluted
history of the case and concluded by noting only that the court would consider
Mr. Padilla's pending petition ''in due course.''

That petition, seeking review of a federal appeals court decision that upheld
the government's authority to keep Mr. Padilla in open-ended military detention
as an enemy combatant, is scheduled to go before the justices at their
closed-door conference on Jan. 13.

The administration is arguing that his appeal has been rendered moot by the
government's decision to try him on terrorism charges in the Federal District
Court in Miami, where he was indicted by a grand jury on Nov. 17.

Mr. Padilla's lawyers are arguing, to the contrary, that the indictment has not
made his appeal moot because the administration has not withdrawn his
designation as an enemy combatant and has not foreclosed the prospect of sending
him back to military detention if he is acquitted in a civilian trial.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, which includes South
Carolina and which had earlier issued the decision upholding Mr. Padilla's
military detention, refused to authorize the transfer from the brig, where he
has been held for more than three years. It issued an opinion on Dec. 21 that
suggested in stinging terms that the administration was now manipulating the
federal court system, with ''intentional mooting,'' in order to avoid Supreme
Court review of the case.

In his opinion for the appeals court, Judge J. Michael Luttig said that while
there might be valid reasons for the administration's request for an
''eleventh-hour transfer'' of Mr. Padilla, ''any legitimate reasons are not
evident, and the government has not offered explanation.'' He continued: ''On an
issue of such surpassing importance, we believe that the rule of law is best
served by maintaining on appeal the status quo in all respects and allowing
Supreme Court consideration of the case in the ordinary course.''

Judge Luttig, the author of the Fourth Circuit decision that Mr. Padilla has
appealed to the Supreme Court, has generally been supportive of the
administration's claims of broad executive authority and was on the short list
for the court's recent vacancies. His opinion this time set off a flurry of new
Supreme Court filings, led by the administration, which a week ago asked the
justices to ''recognize the release and transfer of Jose Padilla'' from the
Charleston brig to the federal prison in Miami.

Solicitor General Paul D. Clement told the court that the Fourth Circuit's order
refusing the transfer ''is based on a mischaracterization of events and an
unwarranted attack on the exercise of executive discretion, and, if given
effect, would raise profound separation-of-powers concerns.''

In response, Mr. Padilla's lawyers told the court on Friday that while their
client was ''certainly eager to be released from the military brig where he has
been held virtually incommunicado and in solitary confinement for the past three
and a half years,'' the justices should wait the two weeks that it would take to
consider his underlying appeal ''in an orderly fashion.''

The lawyers said ''it would be highly imprudent for this court to hold that the
government has an unlimited ability to transfer prisoners in military custody
while their habeas petitions are pending.'' Mr. Padilla's Supreme Court appeal,
Padilla v. Hanft, No. 05-533, began as a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, a
challenge to the constitutionality of his confinement.

On Tuesday, the administration filed another brief with the court, reiterating
the request for a transfer while conceding that Mr. Padilla's case would still
be eligible for Supreme Court review even if he were no longer in military
custody. ''Granting the application will not prejudice this court's
consideration of Padilla's petition,'' the brief said, adding, ''It would,
however, eliminate the anomaly of a citizen being held by the military against
the wishes of both the executive and the detainee (at least in all but the short
run).''

With the Supreme Court still technically on its Christmas recess, its action
late Wednesday afternoon came as something of a surprise. ''The government's
application presented to the chief justice and by him referred to the court is
granted,'' the order said.

Mr. Padilla, an American convert to Islam, was arrested in May 2002 at O'Hare
International Airport in Chicago and transferred to military custody the next
month. Initially, the administration described him as a trained operative of Al
Qaeda on a mission to detonate a radioactive ''dirty bomb'' and blow up
apartment buildings. His indictment in November mentioned neither of those
accusations, instead charging him with ''material support'' to terrorists.

In his Dec. 21 opinion, Judge Luttig was critical of the government's failure to
explain ''the difference in the facts asserted to justify Padilla's military
detention and those for which Padilla was indicted.'' The government ''surely
must understand,'' he said, that its actions had left ''the impression that
Padilla may have been held for these years, even if justifiably, by mistake --
an impression we would have thought the government could ill afford to leave
extant.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS
(90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); APPEALS COURTS (90%);
APPEALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); PETITIONS (78%); LAWYERS
(75%); ACQUITTAL (73%); JUDGES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CORRECTIONS (73%);
PRISONS (71%); GRAND JURY (64%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; United
States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: Linda Greenhouse; George W (Pres) Bush; Jose Padilla

CITY: CHARLESTON, SC, USA (90%)

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             397 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 29, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Beth Formidoni and Juan Mendez

BYLINE: By GERIT QUEALY

SECTION: Section 9; Column 2; Society Desk; WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 990 words


FROM a young age, being surrounded by family became a pressing concern to Juan
Francisco Mendez -- not in the least because he came so close to losing his.

The Mendez family was forced to flee their quiet home in Mar del Plata,
Argentina, for Buenos Aires in 1975, when a military dictatorship was tightening
its grip. After his father, Juan Ernesto Mendez, was arrested and tortured by
the military, the family continued moving, first to Sao Paulo, Brazil, and then
to Paris, where they were all reunited after the senior Mr. Mendez's
incarceration ended.

Soon after, they all ended up in Mount Carroll, Ill., a place where Juan
Francisco Mendez's curly mop of black hair, he vividly remembers, stood out in a
sea of blond children in his kindergarten class-- a visual imprint of how his
young life differed from those around him.

His warm brown eyes still fill with amazement when he relates how his family was
able to make its way to the United States. But Mr. Mendez, 34, who spent his
childhood in Washington, where his father became a human rights advocate, admits
that he still feels ''sort of in between'' going from ''being in the mainstream
of a culture, to foreigners in a different country.'' And that the tug of his
extended family in Argentina -- grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins -- is still
strong. ''We went from a family of 50 people to 4,'' he said.

Nevertheless, once young Mr. Mendez had graduated with a law degree from
Columbia, he elected to remain in New York, taking on the role of an overworked
associate at the law firm of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett.

In October 2000, he took a few hours away from a long evening of work to join a
birthday dinner for Suellen Ratliff, a friend since they had worked together on
a war crimes tribunal in The Hague two years earlier. The only other celebrator
was Elizabeth Marlyn Formidoni, a pert blond law associate with a big anchovy
and capers pizza.

Mr. Mendez, who arrived on crutches because of an injury during a soccer game,
shortly began eating off the plate of Ms. Formidoni.

''I was flirting with Beth through her food,'' he said, something he's made a
habit of doing. ''Also, my food was also considerably duller.''

Ms. Formidoni, however, was not a fan of sharing her food. ''I was a little
startled,'' she admitted, ''but it was a big pizza so I figured it was O.K.''
Plus, she said, ''He had this pity thing going with the crutches.'' So much so
that she ended up walking him back to his office after dinner.

A few weeks later, when a crutchless Mr. Mendez met again with the two women for
dinner on the Upper East Side, it became an all-night affair as he took them to
his old stomping grounds around Columbia to hear jazz, and then down to the
Lower East Side, where he introduced them to mojitos and salsa dancing. It was
then that Ms. Ratliff noticed ''when they were dancing together, that there was
something going on between them,'' she recalled.

Passionate about food, Ms. Formidoni, 31, grew up in a large, boisterous
Irish-Italian family in which you had to stake your claim whenever food was set
before you. ''I was a small person; they were big and ate fast, so I learned to
divide everything evenly,'' Ms. Formidoni said of dining with her three
brothers.

She slowly began to introduce Mr. Mendez to her family, eventually inviting him
on their summer retreats in Maine, where a primary activity was planning the
meals. ''They really know how to enjoy themselves and each other,'' Mr. Mendez
said. ''It's a big support network. I guess it's fair to say that it's something
I always longed for.''

For Ms. Formidoni, there is something about ''Juan's quiet and reserve'' that
she finds compelling, and they find it easy to support each other's goals. Mr.
Mendez cites his father, who is now president of the International Center for
Transitional Justice in New York, as a huge inspiration. So he has spent his
spare time doing pro bono work for political asylum applicants and working with
Habitat for Humanity, and he is now working on a master's degree in
international law at New York University.

Ms. Formidoni, meanwhile, has given up her job as an associate in the New York
office of the law firm of McDermott Will & Emery to indulge her passion for
food. Next month she is to begin her formal training at the Institute of
Culinary Education. ''I dreaded going to work,'' she said of her time as a law
associate. ''I'd sit at the office and plan all day for the dinner I was going
to make afterward.''

Mr. Mendez has come to appreciate Ms. Formidoni's possessive bent toward her
food. ''She's very fair,'' he said ''She'll count out the number of Tater Tots
we each get.''

The couple were married on Jan. 15 by the Rev. Paul William Bradley, a minister
of the United Church of Christ, in a short and simple ceremony in a side chapel
of Riverside Church in Manhattan. Ms. Formidoni, in a white strapless gown with
a demure pink sash, was truly a blushing bride. ''Beth doesn't like being the
center of attention,'' explained Jennifer Fuges, a grade-school friend known as
Fudge. Yet in a bold move, the bride enthusiastically dived in for the kiss at
the end of the ceremony.

And of course she was looking forward to their reception at the Red Cat in
Chelsea, which the bride had chosen as much for its summerhouse feel as its
delicious food, which she delighted in having had a hand in choosing.

After their wedding day they departed for Argentina, a trip that included a stop
in Buenos Aires to introduce Ms. Formidoni to Mr. Mendez's extended family,
including his 92-year-old grandfather, and to a barbecue, South American style.

At the ceremony, some of the guests had mused about why the couple had exited
the church to an organ rendition of ''You Can't Always Get What You Want,'' the
Rolling Stones tune. The bridegroom explained, ''It's when you figure out that
what you want and what you need are the same thing.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: RIVERSIDE CHURCH, NEW YORK, JAN. 15 -- Top, the couple,
surrounded by family and friends at the wedding reception and, above, during the
ceremony. (Photographs by John Marshall Mantel for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); FAMILY (78%); CHILDREN
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); TORTURE (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(76%); MILITARY RULE (72%); ARRESTS (71%); LEGAL SERVICES (69%); MAJOR US LAW
FIRMS (69%); LAWYERS (65%); SOCCER (50%) Weddings and Engagements

COMPANY: SIMPSON THACHER & BARTLETT LLP (82%)

ORGANIZATION: Riverside Church (NYC)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (82%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (82%)

PERSON: Juan Francisco Mendez; Beth Formidoni

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (91%); SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (57%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(53%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (53%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); BRAZIL (92%); NETHERLANDS (53%)

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             399 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Human Trafficking

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 179 words



To the Editor:

Nicholas D. Kristof's persistence on the issue of human trafficking (column,
Jan. 24) is heartening, especially when the problem is increasing. But
concentrating on capturing the criminals who perpetuate trafficking, or trying
to push them into other businesses, takes the focus away from protecting the
survivors.

A solution must confront the socioeconomic conditions in countries of origin
that make people vulnerable. A recent intergovernmental organization survey of
women and girls who had been trafficked from Moldova, for example, found that
only 17 percent had completed secondary education; 68 percent characterized
themselves as poor or very poor.

Traffickers promise a world of opportunity to those who are affected by poverty,
discrimination and violence. The international community must address the
economic, social and cultural rights of people in ''source'' countries in order
to make them less vulnerable to trafficking.

Maureen Greenwood
Washington, Jan. 25, 2006

The writer is advocacy director for Europe and Eurasia, Amnesty International
USA.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (91%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); CHILD TRAFFICKING
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); WRITERS (73%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(67%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (53%) Prostitution

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%)

PERSON: Maureen Greenwood; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: EUROPE (79%); MOLDOVA, REPUBLIC OF (69%)

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             400 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Modern-Day Abolitionist Battles Slavery Worldwide

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1277 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


YOU can find Ambassador John R. Miller's office on the second floor of an
unmarked, nondescript government office building in downtown Washington, at the
end of a very long, empty hall.

There, Mr. Miller, a voluble former Republican congressman who is now a senior
adviser to Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice, waved his arms with a theatrical
flourish one recent afternoon as he declaimed about his mission, ''to help
nurture a 21st-century abolitionist movement against slavery.''

Within the State Department, it is virtually a one-man campaign, and Mr. Miller
spends much of his time grasping for strategies that bring attention to his
cause.

One recent morning he met with his staff to discuss giving the trafficking issue
a boost by trying to link it to a more prominent priority of the Bush
administration, the international fight against H.I.V./AIDS. Mr. Miller listened
as his aides made the case, his tall, lanky frame spilling out of his chair.
Trafficking victims often contract AIDS. But at one point Mr. Miller said he
chastened his staff: ''The research is not that focused. They don't seem to have
zeroed in on it.'' Maybe this will prove to be useful, he said he told his staff
at the end, maybe not. In the trafficking office, that is often as good as it
gets.

Late last year, though, he did a little better, making up a new award,
''abolitionist of the year,'' and bestowing it on Michelle J. Sison, the United
States ambassador to the United Arab Emirates. She earned the little plaque,
bought at a local trophy shop, for her efforts to end the practice of enslaving
young boys to work as jockeys in camel races.

''Is every ambassador like that?'' Mr. Miller asked rhetorically. ''No.'' In
fact, cooperation from embassy staffs around the world remains problematic, he
acknowledged, as many Foreign Service officers do not take the issue seriously.

Mr. Miller, a New York native, was teaching high school English in Seattle two
years ago, when the State Department called to ask whether he would be
interested in running the Office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons.

Mr. Miller's name came up during a meeting to find a successor to Nancy
Ely-Raphel, the former ambassador to Slovenia, the first person to hold the
office. Representative Frank R. Wolf, a Republican from Virginia, said he had
told members of Congress and representatives of religious and feminist groups --
who together have pushed hard to have the issue taken seriously -- that his
friend, Mr. Miller, would be a great choice.

''He is either the most foolhardy or saintly colleague I've ever met,'' Mr. Wolf
said he had told the group. ''He fought for human rights in China, even though
Boeing was the largest employer in his district.''

That was enough for Michael Horowitz, a senior fellow at the Hudson Institute,
who was representing a coalition of religious and feminist groups at the
meeting, even though he said he had never heard of Mr. Miller before then. Since
then, the religious and feminist groups have been his most enthusiastic
supporters.

AT that time, Mr. Miller, who grew up in Manhattan, the son of a lawyer, had
been out of Congress for a decade and admits that his knowledge of the issue
''was damn near zero.'' He read up, including news reports about the trafficking
law enacted in 2000 that set up his office at the State Department. The popular
perception of the time, repeated in numerous news articles, was that the office
would direct and coordinate disjointed federal efforts to combat modern-day
slave trafficking.

But Mr. Miller soon realized that the office had little real authority. As it
turned out, perhaps his most valuable tool would be the force of his
personality, which is considerable. Mr. Miller, 67, is a near-perfect politician
-- personable, infectiously friendly and quick to laugh. With those talents, he
plunged into the job with characteristic ebullience.

Slave trafficking, as it manifests itself today, is the transporting of victims
under false pretenses from one nation, or province, to another, where they are
subjugated to forced labor or prostitution. The Central Intelligence Agency
estimates that as many as 800,000 people around the world are enslaved each
year, including nearly 20,000 in the United States.

President Bush has spoken out about the problem, most notably in a speech to the
United Nations in September 2003 that was largely about the war in Iraq, and
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell was openly supportive of the trafficking
office's work. As for Ms. Rice, Mr. Miller said, ''when we hear there is a
trip'' to one of the problem countries, ''we try to get her to mention it.''
They have not had much success.

''We've got to do better,'' Mr. Miller said.

His office is half a mile from the State Department, in a building that also
houses low-profile agencies like the Department of Veterans Affairs' credit
union. Some people see that as symbolic, but Mr. Miller said the location ''has
pluses and minuses.''

This fall the trafficking office did gain a measure of prominence when the State
Department was looking for ways to pressure Sudan to end the violence against
women in Darfur.

Another important source of influence is a report the office issues each year
rating other nations' efforts to stop slave trafficking. Ms. Rice had shown
concern about rapes, assaults and other violence against women in Darfur. So
this fall, his department decided to tinker with Sudan's rating as a means of
applying pressure on the government in Khartoum to end the violence.

STRICTLY speaking, of course, violence against women and slave trafficking are
different issues. Mr. Miller contorted his hands as he tried to describe how
rape ''might be a precursor to slavery.'' Asked if his office opposed using the
trafficking report in this way, he said only, ''We are not going to get into
internal arguments.''

Those arguments, particularly over the contention by evangelicals and feminists
that all prostitution is a form of slavery, made life miserable for Mr. Miller's
predecessor, Ms. Ely-Raphel. ''I must confess I was happy to leave,'' she said
in an interview. The interest groups lobbied the administration to attack
prostitution as a core problem, but Ms. Ely-Raphel and others disagreed.

''It was so ideological,'' she recalled.

Mr. Miller tries to finesse the prostitution debate. In a letter to the editor
of The New York Times late last year, he noted that ''in addition to being
inherently harmful and dehumanizing, prostitution and related activities fuel
the modern-day slavery known as sex trafficking.''

WHILE it has been an uphill battle, he believes he has made a difference, both
on the slave trafficking issue and in the State Department's regard for it. He
said he had played ''some small role'' in Japan's recent decision to reduce the
number of entertainment visas for young women from the Philippines -- to fewer
than 5,000, from a high of 80,000 a year.

Mohamed Mattar, executive director of the Protection Project, an antitrafficking
office at Johns Hopkins University, said that whatever the limits of Mr.
Miller's office, no one does more.

''I make the argument that they are making a difference, and no one else is
making any difference,'' he said.

The bane of Mr. Miller's job, he acknowledges -- only when asked -- is the
paperwork, the need to get approval, or ''clearance,'' from a dozen or more
State Department offices before he does anything.

One recent afternoon, an aide recalled with a smile, Mr. Miller charged down the
hall, flapping his arms as he exhorted his staff, ''Have we saved any victims
today, or just done clearances?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (U.S.)

PERSON: JOHN R. MILLER

GRAPHIC: Photo: JOHN R. MILLER (Photo by Stephen Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%);
LABOR TRAFFICKING (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%);
CHILD TRAFFICKING (89%); SLAVERY (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); AIDS & HIV
(69%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (60%); RELIGION (50%) Slavery; Labor;
Prostitution; Slavery

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%) Office to Monitor and Combat
Trafficking in Persons; Central Intelligence Agency

CONDOLEEZZA RICE (88%); BARNEY FRANK (57%); FRANK R WOLF (57%) Joel Brinkley;
John R (State Dept) Miller; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice

CITY: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%)

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (79%); SLOVENIA (79%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
(79%)

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             404 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Is Urged To Intervene For Detainee Held in Iraq

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 687 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 7


Lawyers for a 44-year-old naturalized American citizen have been pressing a
federal district judge to intervene in their client's case, saying that he had
been arrested and held in Iraq for more than a year without being charged or
given access to a lawyer.

But the Justice Department, in its first formal response, said on Tuesday that
the prisoner, Shawqi Ahmad Omar, was not a businessman who was in Iraq simply
looking for construction contracts, as his lawyers assert. He is, department
officials said in a brief, a close associate of Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the leader
of Al Qaeda in Iraq, and he may be guilty of war crimes.

In its papers, the officials said that Mr. Omar had been captured in Baghdad
harboring an Iraqi insurgent and four Jordanian foreign fighters who entered
Iraq illegally and admitted that they went there to fight American forces.

The officials added that the Jordanians said that Mr. Omar was plotting to
kidnap foreigners from Baghdad hotels, using his fluency in English gained
during his years in the United States. The government said that when he was
arrested, his house contained weapons and materials for making improvised bombs.

Mr. Omar's lawyers have asked Judge Ricardo M. Urbina to review his case, which
they have asserted has resulted in wide-scale violations of the rights to which
he is entitled as a United States citizen. They have also asked Judge Urbina to
block any transfer of Mr. Omar to Iraqi government custody, which they said
would be a ruse by the United States to avoid federal court jurisdiction.

The Justice Department argued that Mr. Omar was not in military custody, the
basis under which his lawyers say a federal judge has jurisdiction over his
case. The officials asserted that he was held by the Multi-National Force, a
coalition of 27 nations that is assisting Iraq at the request of the United
Nations.

To support that argument, the Justice Department included an affidavit from Maj.
Gen. John D. Gardner, who describes himself as the commander of detainee
operations for the multinational force. While there are, in fact, other nations
represented in the military coalition in Iraq, the detention system run by the
military in Baghdad is widely regarded as an essentially American-led system.
General Gardner has been described regularly in news reports as commander of the
American-managed detention system in Iraq.

Nonetheless, the case of Mr. Omar -- an American citizen arrested in Iraq by the
military authorities -- presents a new situation for the courts, which are
already grappling with several questions involving the conflict between national
security interests and civil liberties. Courts have had to deal with issues
involving American citizens arrested in the United States and Afghanistan and
those held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, but Mr. Omar's case appears to be the first
one before a federal court of an American citizen detained in Iraq.

Jonathan Hafetz of the Brennan Center for Justice at New York University, one of
several American lawyers representing Mr. Omar, said before the government
filing that ''neither we nor his family know why he is being held.'' He added,
''We're asking the court to provide him with the due process rights he is
entitled to as an American citizen.''

Mr. Hafetz said that Mr. Omar's wife had been told by American consular
officials that her husband was to be transferred to Iraqi custody. ''As an
interim matter, we're trying to prevent any middle-of-the-night transfer to
circumvent the federal court's jurisdiction,'' Mr. Hafetz said.

The lawsuit, which was filed against the secretary of the Army, is being brought
in Mrs. Omar's name because her husband is unavailable to sign papers, the
lawyers said.

The papers filed on Mrs. Omar's behalf say that her husband had gone to Iraq
after the overthrow of Saddam Hussein in hope of obtaining contracts on
reconstruction work. His lawyers say that Mr. Omar was born in Kuwait to
Jordanian parents and he served in the Minnesota National Guard and became a
citizen in 1986. The government said he retained his Jordanian citizenship as
well.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); LAWYERS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); NATURALIZATION (90%); JUDGES
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); RIGHT TO
COUNSEL (79%); JURISDICTION (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); WAR CRIMES
(76%); AL-QAEDA (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (69%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (68%); NATIONAL SECURITY (63%)
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Prisoners of War; Freedom and Human Rights

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (59%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(58%); JAMA'AT AL-TAWHID WAL-JIHAD (AL-QAIDA IN IRAQ) (57%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist
Group)

PERSON: Neil A Lewis; Shawqi Ahmad Omar; Abu Musab Al- Zarqawi; Ricardo M
(Judge) Urbina

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (95%); CUBA (84%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             405 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

What Should the Democrats Do?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 155 words



To the Editor:

The Democrats should be sensing missed opportunities.

While they've been sitting on their hands, worried that saying too much gets
them painted as soft on terrorism, the Bush administration has been making the
world more dangerous and destroying our liberties.

The Democrats must stand up for the Bill of Rights. They should put forth
proposals for real security changes; the safety of ports comes to mind. They
should insist on serious financing of Afghanistan reconstruction (and Katrina
reconstruction), even if it means a tax increase. And they should come up with a
reasonable solution to the Iraq war.

The Bush administration -- dominated by people who refuse to admit that they
messed up -- won't do that. The Democrats can.

I'll tell you what: Why don't the Democrats just do the right thing, instead of
worrying about re-election? The American people might follow.

Nancy Jane Moore
Washington, Feb. 8, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ELECTIONS (88%); TERRORISM (88%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (88%); IRAQ WAR (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); HARBOR & PORT SECURITY (72%); TAX LAW (70%) Election Issues  ; Terrorism;
Freedom and Human Rights; Security and Warning Systems

PERSON: Nancy Jane Moore; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             411 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 20, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The U.N.'s Plea on Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 109 words



To the Editor:

The United Nations report about Guantanamo Bay, Cuba (''Investigators for U.N.
Urge U.S. to Close Guantanamo,'' news article, Feb. 17), makes it clearer than
ever that the Bush administration needs to hear the following message from the
American people: Not only is it possible to defeat terrorism while keeping our
civil liberties, but also the only way we will ever defeat terrorism is by
keeping those civil liberties.

We must lead by example. If we continue to shame our country by sacrificing the
very hope we should bring the world, we will lose the war on terror, by joining
it on the wrong side.

George Stetten
Pittsburgh, Feb. 17, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR ON TERROR (88%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); NAVIES (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Terrorism; Freedom
and Human Rights; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) United Nations

PERSON: George Stetten

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             416 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Judicial Green Light for Torture

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 464 words


The administration's tendency to dodge accountability for lawless actions by
resorting to secrecy and claims of national security is on sharp display in the
case of a Syrian-born Canadian, Maher Arar, who spent months under torture
because of United States action. A federal trial judge in Brooklyn has refused
to stand up to the executive branch, in a decision that is both chilling and
ripe for prompt overturning.

Mr. Arar, a 35-year-old software engineer whose case has been detailed in a pair
of columns by Bob Herbert, was detained at Kennedy Airport in 2002 while on his
way home from a family vacation. He was held in solitary confinement in a
Brooklyn detention center and interrogated without proper access to legal
counsel. Finally, he was shipped off to a Syrian prison. There, he was held for
10 months in an underground rat-infested dungeon and brutally tortured because
officials suspected that he was a member of Al Qaeda. All this was part of a
morally and legally unsupportable United States practice known as
''extraordinary rendition,'' in which the federal government outsources
interrogations to regimes known to use torture and lacking fundamental human
rights protections.

The maltreatment of Mr. Arar would be reprehensible -- and illegal under the
United States Constitution and applicable treaties -- even had the suspicions of
terrorist involvement proven true. But no link to any terrorist organization or
activity emerged, which is why the Syrians eventually released him. Mr. Arar
then sued for damages.

The judge in the case, David Trager of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, did
not dispute that United States officials had reason to know that Mr. Arar faced
a likelihood of torture in Syria. But he took the rare step of blocking the
lawsuit entirely, saying that the use of torture in rendition cases is a foreign
policy question not appropriate for court review, and that going forward would
mean disclosing state secrets.

It is hard to see why resolving Mr. Arar's case would necessitate the revelation
of privileged material. Moreover, as the Supreme Court made clear in a pair of
2004 decisions rebuking the government for its policies of holding foreign
terrorism suspects in an indefinite legal limbo in Guantanamo and elsewhere,
even during the war on terror, the government's actions are subject to court
review and must adhere to the rule of law.

With the Bush administration claiming imperial powers to detain, spy on and even
torture people, and the Republican Congress stuck largely in enabling mode, the
role of judges in checking executive branch excesses becomes all the more
crucial. If the courts collapse when confronted with spurious government claims
about the needs of national security, so will basic American liberties.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); PRISONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); JUDGES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); ESPIONAGE (78%); RULE
OF LAW (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); US PRESIDENTS (77%); SUPREME COURTS
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); DEPORTATION (75%);
LAWYERS (74%); DAMAGES (73%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (73%); WAR ON TERROR (72%);
AL-QAEDA (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (71%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (66%); FOREIGN POLICY (62%) Terrorism; Editorials; Torture;
Suits and Litigation; Deportation; Surveillance of Citizens by Government;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: David G (Judge) Trager; Maher Arar; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SYRIA (94%)

REGION: Syria

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             421 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Captors Tortured American, Then Killed Him, Iraq Says

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi contributed reporting from
Baghdad for this article, and Jen McCaffery from Clear Brook, Va.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 731 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, March 11


Tom Fox, the kidnapped American peace worker whose body was found this week, had
apparently been tortured by his captors before being shot multiple times in the
head and dumped on a trash heap next to a railway line in western Baghdad, an
official at the Iraqi Interior Ministry said Saturday.

The body was discovered Thursday afternoon dressed in a gray track suit and
stuffed in a large plastic bag, the official said, adding that Mr. Fox, 54, of
Clear Brook, Va., had been bound at the wrists and ankles.

Apparently in response to the discovery, the American military raided homes in
Jamiya, a middle-class residential neighborhood near where Mr. Fox's body was
found. The authorities said the body was being flown back to the United States
for intensive forensic analysis.

Iraqi and American officials said they had no further information on the
location or well-being of the three other peace workers kidnapped with Mr. Fox.

Mr. Fox and his colleagues -- James Loney, 41, and Harmeet Singh Sooden, 32, of
Canada; and Norman Kember, 74, of Britain -- were kidnapped on Nov. 26. They
were in Iraq working for Christian Peacemaker Teams, which promotes peace and
human rights in conflict zones.

On March 7, all but Mr. Fox appeared on a tape shown by the Arab television
network Al Jazeera. The tape was dated Feb. 28 and showed the three men talking,
though the video was silent. Before that, the hostages, including Mr. Fox, were
seen on a video released Jan. 28.

The Swords of Righteousness Brigade, an insurgent group, has said it was holding
the men and threatened to kill them if all Iraqi prisoners were not released.

Mr. Fox, who had two grown children, ''was the gentlest soul that I think I have
known in my life,'' said Bob Sekinger, who said he had known Mr. Fox for many
years as part of the Quaker community.

Mr. Sekinger said Mr. Fox once told him that if he died in Iraq, his death would
be insignificant compared with the number of Iraqis killed who were no more
guilty of anything than he was.

''He wasn't a guy for talking about politics, sports and the weather,'' Mr.
Sekinger said. ''What interested him was people's lives and what was happening
in our world.''

In two separate shootings in Baghdad on Saturday, gunmen driving a sedan killed
five people in the Dawra neighborhood, the police said, and in a third shooting,
a manager of the Iraqia television station was fatally shot by unidentified
gunmen as he headed to work in the capital.

Six more bodies were discovered shot and dumped around the city: two in Dawra,
two in Baya and two in Sadr City, a large Shiite neighborhood.

At least 37 bodies have been recovered in the capital this week, according to
the police. Many of the victims had their limbs bound and suffered
execution-style killings by garroting or gunshots.

Sunni Arab and Shiite leaders on Saturday met in face-to-face talks in an effort
to break a deadlock over the selection of a new prime minister, an issue that
has stalled the formation of a government.

At the meeting, which lasted about two hours, the negotiators discussed their
agendas and agreed to meet daily to move the political process forward,
according to two participants, Salam al-Maliki, a representative of the
political bloc controlled by Moktada al-Sadr, the popular Shiite cleric, and
Mahmoud al-Mashedani, a leader of the largest Sunni Arab bloc.

Both politicians said they were optimistic about quick progress.

But the Kurds, who have opposed the Shiite candidate for prime minister, were
noticeably left out of the meeting. Mr. Maliki said the Shiites hoped to widen
the discussion by meeting with their Kurdish counterparts in the next few days.

On Friday, Zalmay Khalilzad, the American ambassador, urged the nation's
political leaders to hold a conference to broker a grand coalition. Massoud
Barzani, head of the Kurdish regional government, invited them to hold it in
Kurdistan.

The proposals met with a generally positive response from other Iraqi political
leaders on Saturday. Mr. Maliki said the Shiite preference would be to continue
the discussions in Baghdad, but Salman al-Jumaili, a spokesman for the Sunni
Arab bloc, said he welcomed the idea of a summit conference outside the capital,
and maybe even abroad.

''We would prefer to hold the conference inside Iraq, but we will study if we
can make it outside,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE (90%); SHOOTINGS (89%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY (75%);
EVIDENCE (73%); VIDEO INDUSTRY (70%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (70%); WAR & CONFLICT
(70%); TERRORISM (69%); FORENSICS (68%) Torture; Kidnapping; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

PERSON: Kirk Semple; Tom Fox

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             427 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 26, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Nigeria Will End Asylum For Warlord

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and MARC LACEY; Lydia Polgreen reported from Freetown,
Sierra Leone, for this article, and Marc Lacey from Nairobi, Kenya.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 652 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 25


Nigeria said Saturday that it would end the asylum of the deposed Liberian
dictator Charles G. Taylor and turn him over to the Liberian government for
trial.

Mr. Taylor, a warlord-turned-president, spawned a bloody cycle of civil wars
that killed 300,000 people across West Africa in the 1990's. He was indicted by
the United Nations-backed Special Court here in Sierra Leone in 2003 for war
crimes and crimes against humanity during this country's decade-long insurgency.

But the court has been unable to arrest Mr. Taylor, who left Liberia as rebels
narrowed in on him in 2003. Instead, he went into exile in Nigeria, where
authorities agreed in an internationally brokered deal to grant him safe haven
in order to end 14 years of civil war in Liberia.

''God willing, I will be back,'' the flamboyant Mr. Taylor said as he bid
farewell to his country.

Since agreeing to accept Mr. Taylor, the Nigerian government has rebuffed many
attempts to put him on trial before the international court, saying it was
awaiting a request from an elected Liberian government. Liberia's new president,
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, raised the issue this month with President Olusegun
Obasanjo of Nigeria, describing it as an important part of bringing stability to
Liberia.

''Liberia's peace is fragile,'' she said this month after announcing her
extradition request. ''There are many loyalists in our country to Mr. Taylor.''

In Sierra Leone, where a cell has sat empty awaiting Mr. Taylor's arrival, there
was fear and awe of the man who let loose so much misery in a nation smaller
than South Carolina and home to 5 million people.

''We are very afraid of Charles Taylor coming here,'' said Jerry Nyuma Bongay, a
25-year-old student in Freetown. ''But we want him to face justice. He hurt us
too much.''

Desmond De Silva, the chief prosecutor for the Sierra Leone court, hailed the
announcement. ''This is a remarkable day for justice,'' he said. ''This is very
important because it is all part of the fight against impunity.''

In a statement on Saturday, Mr. Obasanjo said Liberia was free to take Mr.
Taylor into custody. Although he is not under indictment in Liberia, United
Nations peacekeepers there have been authorized by the Security Council to
transfer him to Sierra Leone.

The statement gave no date or details for the transfer, but Mr. Obasanjo said he
had never been against surrendering Mr. Taylor to a democratically elected
government in Liberia. Ms. Johnson Sirleaf was sworn in as Liberia's president
in January, becoming Africa's first woman to be elected head of state.

Mr. Taylor was forbidden from leaving Nigeria during his exile, but he continued
to meddle in his former country's affairs from his government guest house in
Calabar, on Nigeria's southern coast, using some of the millions of dollars he
is accused of stealing from Liberia's coffers.

Security around Mr. Taylor's villa has been lax, said Corinne Dufka, a
researcher for Human Rights Watch based in Dakar, Senegal, prompting fears that
Mr. Taylor may try to escape. ''We are calling on Nigeria to tighten security
around Taylor,'' Ms. Dufka said. ''I think there will be a great sense of relief
when Charles Taylor is actually in the custody of the special court.''

The court, set up in 2000, had issued an arrest warrant for Mr. Taylor on 17
counts in 2003 but Nigeria ignored it. Mr. Obasanjo had said that he would honor
a request by Liberia's government to relinquish Mr. Taylor, but until this year
Liberia had only transitional leaders.

With the backing of Libya and other regional powers, Mr. Taylor unleashed his
horrific brand of warfare across the region for the better part of two decades,
dragooning young boys into combat, first with violence, then with drugs, money
and sex.

In Sierra Leone, he is accused of training and arming Sierra Leone's rebels in a
bloody conflict left tens of thousands of people dead.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles Taylor, former president. (Photo by Nic Bothma/European
Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
CIVIL WAR (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INDICTMENTS (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); ARRESTS (76%);
GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Asylum (Political)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (58%) Lydia Polgreen; Marc Lacey; Charles Taylor

CITY: FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (72%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (99%); SIERRA LEONE (96%); NIGERIA (94%); AFRICA (93%); WESTERN
AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             431 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 3, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

9/11 Detainees Describe Abuse Involving Dogs

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1212 words


The photograph, seen worldwide, is one of the defining images from Abu Ghraib: a
dog strains at its leash, lunging at a terrified prisoner in an orange jumpsuit.
One United States military dog handler was recently convicted of abusing
detainees at Abu Ghraib, the prison in Iraq, and the court-martial of another is
to start in May.

But for Ibrahim Turkmen and Akhil Sachdeva, the image evokes something closer to
home: the dogs used inside the Passaic County Jail in New Jersey. The two men,
plaintiffs in a pending class-action lawsuit known as Turkmen v. Ashcroft, were
among hundreds of immigrant detainees held in the Passaic jail for months after
9/11 before they were cleared of links to terrorism and deported on visa
violations.

Until now, lawsuits brought by former detainees against top American officials
have focused attention on the maximum security unit of a federal detention
center in Brooklyn where the Justice Department's inspector general found
widespread abuse. But today in Toronto, as Mr. Sachdeva, a Canadian citizen born
in India, gives his first deposition for the class-action lawsuit, the spotlight
will shift to the New Jersey jail.

There, about 400 of the 762 mainly Muslim detainees rounded up in the United
States after 9/11 were held. The lawsuit charges that the detainees' confinement
was arbitrary, illegally based on their religion or national origin, and that
guards routinely terrorized them with aggressive dogs.

In November 2004, federal officials who oversee the detention of immigrants
facing deportation said they would no longer send detainees to jails that used
dogs to patrol inside. That decision by the Department of Homeland Security came
a day after National Public Radio broadcast an investigative report saying that
the dogs had been used over a three-year period to intimidate, attack and, in at
least two cases, bite immigrant detainees in the Passaic County Jail.

''To hear about the use of dogs in this way within the United States is truly
shocking,'' said Jonathan Turley, a professor of national security and
constitutional law at George Washington University, who is not involved in the
case. ''But Abu Ghraib didn't spring from the head of Zeus.''

Mr. Turley, an expert in prison law, said in an interview on Friday that the use
of the dogs to frighten detainees in the New Jersey jail underscored ''the
trickle-down effect'' of the disregard for immigrants' civil rights that top
government officials showed after 9/11. ''It trickled down through military
intelligence, through low-level personnel and to sheriffs,'' he said. ''Suddenly
people who were predisposed to the use of such harsh measures thought they had
license to use them, and 9/11 gave them a great appetite.''

While dozens of jails and prisons that house federal immigrant detainees use
dogs, largely to search for drugs, only seven used them to control prisoners.
Jail officials defended the dog patrols, which were used before 9/11 and
continue for control of other inmates. Bill Maer, a spokesman for the Passaic
County sheriff, Jerry Speziale, denied that the post-9/11 detainees had been
mistreated and said that the dog teams are used ''strictly for security and
contraband detection purposes'' and ''act in a professional manner when
interacting with inmates.''

But the dogs were described as part of a nightmarish form of psychological
torture by the two plaintiffs, who spoke in separate telephone interviews last
week -- Mr. Turkmen from Konia, Turkey, and Mr. Sachdeva from Toronto.

Two or three times a week, they said, often around 3 a.m. when the detainees
were fast asleep in dormitory cells housing about 50 men, the electronic doors
would open and 10 to 20 officers would rush in with four to six unmuzzled,
barking dogs on leashes. The dogs, mostly German shepherds, would strain to
within inches of the detainees' faces, they said.

''The guards would barely be able to hold the dogs back,'' said Mr. Turkmen, who
could not come for his scheduled deposition because he was denied a visa by the
Canadian government, without explanation. ''The day of judgment would begin for
me -- that's what it would feel like.''

Mr. Sachdeva said that he found himself trembling uncontrollably, and that some
detainees started to cry. ''The guards who were holding the dogs used to always
laugh,'' he recalled. ''There were like four or five dogs, barking, terrorizing,
and the officers shouting: 'Get up! Raise your hands! Against the wall!' One
time the dog was so close his tongue touched me.''

It was worst, they said, for detainees who, like Mr. Turkmen, lacked English to
understand the officers. Once, Mr. Sachdeva said, a Pakistani man of 51 who did
not speak a word of English was beaten bloody by guards because he had stayed on
his bed after twice being ordered off.

. Government officials will not discuss the lawsuit, brought in 2002 by the
Center for Constitutional Rights. But when the Justice Department's inspector
general criticized the post-9/11 detentions of immigrants in a scathing 2003
report, John Ashcroft, then the attorney general, said he had ''no apologies''
for measures taken to protect the public.

Nevertheless, after the inspector general's report, ''there were changes made
and new detention standards issued nationwide,'' said Dean Boyd, a spokesman for
Immigration and Customs Enforcement, part of Homeland Security.

The report found conditions at Passaic considerably less harsh than those at the
Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn, where solitary confinement was the
norm and beatings of shackled detainees were caught on videotape. But it
criticized Passaic for mingling immigrant detainees with felons, and it said
that immigration officials had failed to properly monitor the jail and to
investigate complaints of abuse.

It told of a detainee with a black eye and a limp who told investigators that he
had been assaulted by guards and put in an isolation cell, where guards brought
a dog. He said the guards told him ''that if he did not get out of bed by the
next day, they were going to 'let the dog loose.' ''

The report criticized the way federal authorities swept up immigrants after 9/11
as ''indiscriminate and haphazard.''

Mr. Turkmen, who has four daughters, now 7 to 19, had overstayed a tourist visa
to work at a gas station in West Babylon, N.Y., when federal agents came to his
apartment. Though an immigration judge agreed to let him leave voluntarily, a
standard option in minor immigration violations, he was held for four months
more.

Two years after his return to Turkey, he said, he saw a news report about Abu
Ghraib and the dogs. ''I told my children that this exact form of torture is
what I experienced,'' he said through a translator. ''All my children were
completely shocked.''

Mr. Sachdeva, who is Hindu, had returned to the United States to complete his
divorce from an American woman who owned a gas station in Port Washington, N.Y.,
when F.B.I agents came there looking for someone else.

''At this point I have no faith in the system,'' said Mr. Sachdeva, 34, who said
he was now self-employed as a metals trader because his arrest and deportation
made it impossible to get a job. ''I'm glad at least I can speak what really
happened.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Akhil Sachdeva, detained after 9/11, is giving a deposition in
a lawsuit challenging his detention. (Photo by Steve Payne for The New York
Times)(pg. B3)
 Ibrahim Turkmen, arrested after Sept. 11 because of an expired tourist visa,
spent four months in the Passaic County Jail, where, he said, dogs were used to
scare prisoners. (Photo by Yoray Liberman/Getty Images, for The New York
Times)(pg. B1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (92%); DOGS (92%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%);
CORRECTIONS (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CLASS ACTIONS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); DEPORTATION (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(88%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); TESTIMONY
(77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); REFUGEES (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (74%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (72%); ARMED FORCES (72%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(69%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (69%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (68%); RELIGION (66%);
PUBLIC BROADCASTING (63%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (63%); INTERVIEWS (63%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (61%); PUBLIC RADIO (50%) Terrorism; Prisons and
Prisoners; Guards; Dogs; Suits and Litigation; Illegal Immigrants; Immigration
and Refugees; Terrorism; Deportation; Freedom and Human Rights

COMPANY: NATIONAL PUBLIC RADIO INC (53%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%) Passaic County Jail (NJ)

INDUSTRY: NAICS515111 RADIO NETWORKS (53%); SIC4832 RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS
(53%)

PERSON: Ibrahim Turkmen; Akhil Sachdeva; Nina Bernstein

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TORONTO, ON, CANADA (75%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (91%); INDIA (79%); CANADA (75%)

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             439 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 15, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iranian Leader Renews Attack On Israel at Palestinian Rally

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 465 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, April 14


President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad said Friday that Israel was a ''constant threat''
and predicted that it was on the verge of ''being eliminated.''

His comments, which echoed his remark last year about ''wiping Israel off the
map,'' were made at a three-day conference on Palestine that has brought
together Palestinian militant leaders and their supporters from Muslim
countries.

''The Zionist regime is an injustice and by its very nature a permanent
threat,'' Mr. Ahmadinejad said during his speech at the conference. ''Whether
you like it or not, the Zionist regime is on the road to being eliminated.'' He
referred to Israel as a ''rotten, dried tree'' that would collapse in ''one
storm.''

Mr. Ahmadinejad also said: ''If there is serious doubt over the Holocaust, there
is no doubt over the catastrophe and holocaust being faced by the Palestinians.
Holocaust has been continuing in Palestine over the past 60 years.''

Mr. Ahmadinejad produced outrage in the West last year when he threatened Israel
and called the Holocaust a ''myth.'' Although his comments Friday were somewhat
more temperate, they were largely in keeping with his strategy of appealing to
the Arab world and to conservative forces in Iran.

Among the participants in the conference were Khaled Mashaal, a top figure in
Hamas, and Ramadan Abdullah Shalah, the head of the militant group Islamic
Jihad, which is supported by Iran. At the conference, Tehran urged other Muslim
nations to join it in sending money to Hamas to make up for the withdrawal of
donations by the United States and the European Union after the group's election
victory and control of the Palestinian government.

Ahmad Zeidabadi, a political analyst in Tehran, said the conference seemed to be
part of the Iranian government's strategy of building political support by
appealing to its conservative base.

''Israel is the best issue they can point to in order to mobilize their
supporters,'' Mr. Zeidabadi said, referring to the Iranian leadership. ''Israel
has occupied part of the Islamic and Arab land and the West supports it. This
way they can question the whole Western culture and say that what the West says
about democracy and human rights is a lie and therefore what we have is right.
This argument gives legitimacy to the Iranian regime.''

In an opening speech to the gathering, Iran's supreme religious leader,
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, denounced the policies of the United States in Iraq and
Afghanistan, as well as its support for Israel.

''The bitter taste of liberal democracy, which the United States wanted to
present as a solution, has hurt the Islamic nations,'' he said, pointing to the
prisoner abuse scandals at Abu Ghraib prison in Baghdad, Iraq, and at the United
States detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(90%); HAMAS (90%); RELIGION (89%); CONSERVATISM (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (79%); POLITICS (79%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);
LIBERALISM (70%); SCANDALS (50%) Palestinians; Islam

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (54%); HEZBOLLAH (54%); AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (54%)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (94%); ALI KHAMENEI (58%) Nazila Fathi; Mahmoud
(Pres) Ahmadinejad

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (86%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%);
ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAQ (92%); IRAN (86%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (53%)

REGION: Israel; Iran

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             442 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Slaughter Spreads

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 738 words


Last month villagers along Chad's border with Sudan told me how brutal militias
were attacking their towns, murdering their babies, raping their daughters and
burning their huts, while shouting racial slurs against blacks. Now those
impoverished Chadians may find themselves not only attacked by genocidal
marauders but also ruled by them.

Over the past week, Sudan has sponsored a full-scale invasion of Chad, seeking
to oust Chad's president and replace him with the warlord who has overseen the
murder, rape and pillage in those border areas.

Sudan seems determined to extend its genocide to Chad, and the upshot is that
the catastrophe of Darfur may now be multiplied manyfold.

One of the towns I stayed in during my visit to Chad last month was Adre, which
by some accounts -- denied by the government -- has now been seized by this
Sudanese proxy force known for throwing babies into bonfires. So I wonder what
happened to the children I met in the Adre hospital, like Fatima Juma, a
13-year-old girl who would have been unable to flee because she had been shot in
the chest and arm while fetching water.

That the fighting has spread to Chad underscores that our policy in Darfur has
not only been morally bankrupt, but also catastrophic in a practical sense.
Appeasing Sudan has allowed the situation to worsen, because our policy has
essentially consisted, after every outrage, of making the Darfuris turn the
other cheek.

Chad's president, Idriss Deby, is a corrupt dictator. But he at least had the
gumption to show some discontent at the genocide next door, and Sudan is taking
aim at him precisely for that reason. If we let Sudan get away with ousting him
for refusing to applaud a mass slaughter, we will have compounded our own
shameful record.

It's not that President Deby was even very active against the genocide. Worried
about offending Sudan, his government threatened to arrest me if I again sneaked
into Darfur illegally from Chad to cover the genocide. But Mr. Deby did have the
guts to grant Darfur refugees a safe haven in Chad, saving their lives --
although now, disgracefully, he has threatened to expel them if the Darfur
conflict is not resolved by June.

The fighting in Chad, including a battle in the capital, Ndjamena, that
reportedly killed 350 people on Thursday, is nominally between the government
and rebels. But make no mistake: those ''rebels'' are simply a proxy force of
Sudan, made up in part by the Sudanese janjaweed militias that orchestrated the
killing of several black African tribes in Darfur.

The Chadian rebels operate from a base that journalists have visited in Sudan.
The rebels' guns, vehicles and uniforms come from the Sudanese government.

Their leader, Mohamed Nour, was handpicked by Sudan to lead this invading force.
Sudan's vice president, Ali Osman Taha, has visited Mr. Nour at his base. And
the ''rebels'' often drop by the town of Geneina, where everybody sees that they
include some Chadians but also many Sudanese janjaweed fighters.

''Even a kid of 5 years old in Geneina knows that the Sudanese government is
organizing the militias,'' said Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, a heroic Sudanese who leads
an independent human rights group active in Darfur.

The danger now is threefold.

First, Chad may collapse into civil war, chaos and banditry, like Darfur itself
but on a much larger scale.

Second, the 200,000 refugees who fled Darfur and are living in U.N.-run camps in
Chad may be specifically targeted for mass slaughter.

Third, the unrest may force international aid workers to pull out of Chad. Then
the refugees will starve to death more gradually.

The U.S. has called on ''all parties  to reduce those levels of violence'' --
which is a bit like suggesting in 1943 that Nazis and Jews alike cease
hostilities. The U.S. and other major powers need to be much more forceful in
shoring up Chad against the invaders.

France has a major military base in eastern Chad and should start strafing the
invaders. The U.S. should back France, send a top envoy to Chad to show support,
and provide intelligence to Chad and France about the invaders' whereabouts.

President Bush and millions of Americans today will celebrate Easter and the end
of Holy Week. But where is the piety in reading the Bible while averting one's
eyes from genocide? Mr. Bush, how about showing your faith by doing something a
bit more meaningful -- like standing up to the butchers?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INFANTS & TODDLERS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);
SEX OFFENSES (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (72%); POLITICS (71%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (67%); MURDER (58%) Sex Crimes; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; Politics and
Government

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Idriss (Pres) Deby; Mohamed Nour

CITY: NDJAMENA, CHAD (73%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (99%)

REGION: Sudan; Chad; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             446 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 23, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

'Suite Francaise'

SECTION: Section 7; Column 3; Book Review Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 148 words


To the Editor:

Paul Gray offers a lively, literate review of the translation of Irene
Nemirovsky's Vichy-era ''Suite Francaise'' (April 9). This makes it all the more
troubling that he hands out the inaccurate canard about ''French policemen
enforcing the German race laws.'' Nemirovsky and her family were arrested under
French racial laws, originating in Vichy as early as October 1940. These
anti-Semitic laws, enforced throughout the war by French judges and police,
proved so appealing to the Nazis that they imported them into the Occupied Zone.
The French, to their credit, have finally come to grips with this sad reality.
Let us drop the cliche that the French were merely enforcing German policies
against the Jews.

Eric Freedman

Richard Weisberg

New York

The writers are professors in the Program on Holocaust and Human Rights Studies,
Cardozo School of Law, Yeshiva University.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); WRITERS (88%); HOLOCAUST (87%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA
(87%); GENOCIDE (85%); LAW SCHOOLS (84%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (84%);
ARRESTS (71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (69%); LITERATURE (65%); RACE & RACISM (55%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (50%) Books and Literature

PERSON: Eric M (Prof) Freedman; Richard Weisberg; Paul Gray; Irene Nemirovsky

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (73%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (73%)

LOAD-DATE: April 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             454 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 10, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Gaza's Plight: Who Is to Blame?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 95 words



To the Editor:

Physicians for Human Rights/Israel, one of the sources you cite, has written
about the collective punishment and brutalities inflicted on the Palestinian
people, who have desperately tried to survive under Israel's occupation for
almost four decades.

With funds now cut, that punishment has only worsened.

The United States cannot maintain any credibility by claiming that it wants to
bring democracy to the Middle East and then punish an entire society of people
for their democratic choices because it does not approve.

Marlene Newesri
New York, May 8, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (88%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (86%); POLITICS (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
United States International Relations; Foreign Aid  ; Palestinians; Politics and
Government

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); HAMAS (59%) Hamas

PERSON: Marlene Newesri

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); ISRAEL
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (91%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             459 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 14, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Family Business

BYLINE: By DAVID S. REYNOLDS.

David S. Reynolds, a university distinguished professor at Baruch College, is
the author of ''John Brown, Abolitionist: The Man Who Killed Slavery, Sparked
the Civil War, and Seeded Civil Rights.''

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 920 words


SONS OF PROVIDENCE

The Brown Brothers, the Slave Trade,

and the American Revolution.

By Charles Rappleye.

Illustrated. 400 pp. Simon & Schuster. $27.

I grew up in Rhode Island, thinking of my native state as the cradle of freedom.
Rhode Island boasted some important firsts: it was the first British colony in
North America to separate church from state, the first to have a democratic form
of government and among the first to declare independence from the mother
country. It was democratic America in the making, the future nation in
miniature.

Having briefly attended the Moses Brown School and lived for a time near Brown
University, I had a hazy idea of the Browns of Rhode Island as a clan of
forward-looking patriots who paved the way to human rights. But reading Charles
Rappleye's ''Sons of Providence: The Brown Brothers, the Slave Trade, and the
American Revolution,'' a biography of Moses and John Brown, gave me the same
kind of jolt I felt when I learned that 12 of America's presidents, including
Washington and Jefferson, were slave owners. Rappleye's book provides vivid
testimony to the painful fact that the Browns and the tiny state they helped
form were indeed all too much like America, fractured between the ideal of
liberty and the reality of chattel slavery.

The pugnacious, high-spirited John Brown, born in 1736 (and definitely not to be
confused with the later abolitionist), was a Rhode Island business leader and
politician whose commercial interests included shipping, rum, banking, iron
production -- and the slave trade. John's milder younger brother, Moses,
participated in all of these businesses. Like John, Moses owned slaves, but a
conversion to the Quaker faith in the early 1770's inspired him to set them
free. Thereafter Moses was an ardent abolitionist dead set against the traffic
in humans that swelled the coffers of his brother.

Rappleye, a journalist whose one previous book was about organized crime,
skillfully details the complex relationship between these brothers, whose
differences over slavery tested but never destroyed their friendship. Their
loyalty to each other surfaced dramatically during the American Revolution. In
1773 John helped trigger the Revolution by leading a band of Rhode Islanders
that destroyed the Gaspee, a British revenue ship. Moses, a pacifist and
conscientious objector, was horrified by the war. Still, when John was later
captured by the British, Moses boldly entered the fray, sneaking behind enemy
lines and negotiating his brother's release with the British general Thomas
Gage.

Of the two, John was the more adventurous and entrepreneurial. With breathtaking
energy, he started one business after another, rarely missing a chance to turn a
profit. Moses, before his religious awakening, proved a capable business
partner, and it was not long before the brothers were participating in the
so-called triangle trade, in which New England rum was shipped to Africa and
exchanged there for blacks, who were chained below decks and taken on a
miserable voyage across the Atlantic to the Caribbean, where they were sold into
slavery. The proceeds of the slave sales were invested in molasses and sugar
that was shipped back to New England to be made into more rum.

By the mid-18th century Rhode Island had the dubious distinction of being the
leader in the North American slave trade. Newport's ships carried more than 70
percent of America's traffic in slaves. Many of the state's leading citizens
were slaveholders. By running slave voyages, the Browns were doing what came
naturally to enterprising Rhode Island merchants.

The brothers' first venture in this hazardous but profitable business came in
1764, when they loaded the ship Sally with rum and other goods and sent it to
the Windward Coast of Africa in search of human cargo. For months, the Sally was
anchored near the African coast as black captives were steadily taken aboard.
Then came the horrors of the middle passage. Rappleye evokes the suffering of
the enslaved Africans before and during the voyage with understated power. He
reproduces stark entries in the ship's log like ''a boye slave died'' and a
''woman slave hanged herself between decks.'' In the end, about 100 of 167
blacks aboard the Sally died of disease, starvation or suicide.

Undeterred by this disastrous episode, John Brown continued to finance slave
ships. In newspaper writings and later as a United States congressman he became
one of America's most fervent defenders of the trade. Slavery, he declared, was
''right, just and lawful, and consequently practiced every day.'' America, he
argued, was doing Africans a huge favor by removing them from what he described
as their barbaric homeland.

But by then Moses had become equally prominent as an opponent of slavery.
Influenced by Quaker principles of human justice, Moses manumitted his six
slaves and made himself a pioneer in the antislavery movement. He formed the
first abolitionist society in New England and led the successful campaign to ban
the slave trade in Rhode Island.

The Brown brothers engaged in public squabbles, with John indicting abolitionism
as ''wicked and abominable'' and Moses replying in kind. In one of their
newspaper exchanges, John predicted that slavery would lead the nation to civil
war. ''Many bloody wars,'' he wrote, ''have ensued from less beginnings. A
little fuel has sometimes kindled a great fire.'' He wrote those words in 1789,
72 years before they came true and America tore itself apart.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 28, 2006



CORRECTION: A review on May 14 about ''Sons of Providence: The Brown Brothers,
the Slave Trade, and the American Revolution,'' by Charles Rappleye, misstated
the year that a band of Rhode Islanders destroyed the Gaspee, a British revenue
ship. It was 1772, not 1773.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (91%); SLAVERY (91%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (77%); CHURCH & STATE (76%); LITERATURE
(73%); WRITERS (73%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (73%); ENTREPRENEURSHIP (69%);
FAMILY COMPANIES (69%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (68%); ORGANIZED CRIME (62%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (56%) Books and Literature; Reviews

COMPANY: SIMON & SCHUSTER INC (58%)

ORGANIZATION: BROWN UNIVERSITY (92%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%)

PERSON: David S Reynolds; Charles Rappleye

CITY: PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (92%)

STATE: RHODE ISLAND, USA (94%); NORTHEAST USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); NORTH AMERICA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             460 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Belarus: Bush Imposes Travel Ban

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 56 words


President Bush barred members of Belarus's government from traveling to the
United States, citing electoral fraud, human rights abuses and corruption. His
action followed the recent crackdown on the Belarussian opposition by the
government of President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko, whom the administration has
called ''Europe's last dictator.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLITICAL CORRUPTION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); CORRUPTION (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(85%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%) George W (Pres) Bush; Aleksandr G (Pres) Lukashenko

COUNTRY: BELARUS (94%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Belarus

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             465 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Surprise. Hussein Acts as if He's on Trial.

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq


AS Saddam Hussein entered the courtroom last Monday after a three-week recess,
he strolled to the dock with the self-conscious gait of a man eager to sustain
the illusion that he remains the lawful president of Iraq. But it wasn't long
before his broad smile vanished.

After months of dominating the courtroom with his mocking protestations, Mr.
Hussein had come to earth with a thud. In a 20-minute statement, the chief
judge, Raouf Abdel-Rahman, confirmed that Mr. Hussein and the other seven
defendants would face formal charges of crimes against humanity for their role
in a ''widespread and systematic attack'' on the people of Dujail, a mainly
Shiite town, after a failed assassination attempt against Mr. Hussein in 1982.

The indictments meant that the five-judge panel, after weighing testimony and
evidence given over seven months, had decided there was a strong case for the
defendants to answer on the harshest of all the possible charges.

It was a watershed moment, and one that reflected how far the court has
progressed since Judge Raouf joined the panel in January, taking charge of a
case that was at risk of imploding under the buffeting of chaotic events within
the courtroom and outside.

And with the formal indictments, even Mr. Hussein and the three other
high-ranking defendants showed signs of a new, more cautious approach to the
proceedings.

According to American legal experts working with the Iraqi High Tribunal, the
special court created by American and Iraqi authorities to try Mr. Hussein and
his highest-ranking associates, it could take another year to 18 months before
the court's appellate division makes a final ruling on the Dujail case.

But the sense that pervaded the courtroom during the three days that the
tribunal sat last week, moving from the formal indictments to the testimony of
the first defense witnesses, was that a new sense of order had settled on the
court, and with it at least a fragile credibility that was painfully absent in
the first months after the Dujail trial began in October.

At the outset, and through most of the 23 days of evidence the court had taken
before last week, the principal purpose of Mr. Hussein, his associates and their
lawyers appeared to be to make a political theater of the trial.

With his finger-pointing denunciations of the judges and the prosecution lawyers
as agents of the American occupation, his menacing attacks on witnesses against
him and, above all, in his encouragement of the insurgents who have tied down
130,000 American troops, the former ruler acted more like a man seeking to
reverse the political tides than one on trial for his life.

Now that he faces a formal charge that carries the death sentence, Mr. Hussein
may find cause to take the trial more seriously. He has told the court he does
not fear death, and boasted of how he cheated it once, fleeing to Egypt after
participating in a failed assassination attempt in 1959 against Iraq's ruler,
Abdul Karim Kassem.

But after Judge Raouf pronounced the indictment on Monday, and allowed Mr.
Hussein to argue anew about his right to immunity as Iraq's lawful president, a
striking thing occurred: When the judge ordered him to sit down, he did so
promptly, and remained pensive, and unobstructive, for the balance of the day.

When American and Iraqi officials decided to hold the trials of Mr. Hussein and
his associates in Iraq, rather than in an international court, Western human
rights and legal-monitoring groups condemned the decision.

They focused on four issues: the availability of the death sentence in Iraq (at
international trials, life imprisonment is the maximum); the degree of American
influence over the proceedings; the difficulty of ensuring a fair defense in any
court convened in Iraq so soon after the bloodshed the country suffered under
Mr. Hussein; and the risks and constraints of conducting a trial in the midst of
a war.

The death penalty objection has been addressed in polls of Iraqis showing
overwhelming support for hanging those responsible for the suffering of the
Hussein years, and a corresponding support for holding the trials in Iraq.

The American influence has been undeniably pervasive, with about 90 percent of
the $145 million in annual costs for the court and associated investigations
paid for by the United States Justice Department, and lawyers sent by Washington
acting as advisers.

As for holding the trial during an insurgency, the death toll tells its own
story: a drumbeat of unsolved assassinations has killed five tribunal employees,
including a judge, as well as two defense lawyers.

At this stage, the concerns about a fair defense are still hard to evaluate. The
quality of defense representation has been generally weak, even scandalously so,
with cross-examination of prosecution witnesses taking a back seat to political
arguments.

When the first defense witnesses appeared last week, on behalf of four
low-ranking defendants from Dujail, Judge Raouf was moved to incredulity on
learning that many of the 21 men who took the oath were brothers or sons or
close friends of the accused, with little to contribute beyond assurances that,
in the words of one defendant's son, his father ''couldn't hurt an ant.''

''Did you come here to read us a poem?'' the judge asked one witness.

But it was a telling sign of the new order at the trial that the walkouts by
defense attorneys that characterized the trial's earlier stages gave way, last
week, to a full defense bench, with 12 lawyers in all, occupying every available
seat. Mr. Hussein's lawyers even argued for more seats, prompting the
prosecution to counter with demands for more space for ''public interest''
lawyers representing all of Mr. Hussein's victims, at Dujail and everywhere
else.

When Judge Raouf called the prosecution attorney to order, telling him to curb
the ''political rhetoric,'' Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, Mr. Hussein's
half-brother, hitherto the most disruptive defendant, stepped forward in the
unlikely guise of a champion of free speech. ''Let everybody have their say,''
he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Still Unbowed? After hearing he might actually face the
hangman, Saddam Hussein seemed to take a more sober approach in court. (Pool
Photo by Marco Di Lauro)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); WITNESSES (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAWYERS (76%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (76%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS
(74%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); APPEALS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (72%);
ASSASSINATION (72%); GENOCIDE (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (65%); RANKINGS (65%); DEATH
& DYING (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) John F Burns; Raouf (Judge) Abdel-Rahman; Saddam
Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Dujail (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             474 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 6, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Politics Of Gay Marriage

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 120 words



To the Editor:

As an immigrant and a gay woman, I have never felt so sad, angry and humiliated
since George W. Bush became our president.

Twenty years ago, on receiving the honor of becoming an American citizen, I
pledged ''allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the
Republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty
and justice for all.''

I never imagined that the country I knew for preaching equality and fighting for
human rights all over the world would have a leader determined to write
discrimination into the Constitution in the form of an amendment.

If President Bush succeeds, how can I be proud to be an American?

Monique Frugier
Ardmore, Pa., June 4, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); MARRIAGE (89%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%) Marriages; Homosexuality

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%) George W (Pres) Bush; Monique Frugier

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             478 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Against Sweatshops: The Students' Case

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 199 words



To the Editor:

Re ''In Praise of the Maligned Sweatshop'' (column, June 6):

Nicholas D. Kristof urges American students not to seek wage increases for
African workers, but rather to urge manufacturers to move jobs to Africa rather
than to places like China.

He writes, ''The anti-sweatshop movement isn't a prime obstacle, but it's one
more reason not to manufacture in Africa.''

I don't take seriously the idea that manufacturers are producing in China rather
than Africa to avoid student protests, in light of the horrendous labor rights
violations in China.

In any event, doesn't it make sense to campaign for both more jobs and better
wages for the poorest workers? In fact, this is what students are seeking.

Their innovative proposal -- called the Designated Supplier Program -- would
require manufacturers of collegiate merchandise to maintain well-monitored,
better-paying factories in the poorest countries rather than move all production
to China.

Mark Barenberg
New York, June 6, 2006

The writer, a professor of international labor law at Columbia Law School, is a
director of the Worker Rights Consortium, which monitors labor conditions in
factories producing collegiate apparel.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SWEATSHOPS (92%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
(90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WRITERS (78%); DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (77%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); APPAREL MFG (73%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS
(72%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); LAWYERS (66%); COLLEGES &
UNIVERSITIES (65%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (65%) Labor; Wages and Salaries;
Third World and Developing Countries; Demonstrations and Riots; Colleges and
Universities; Freedom and Human Rights; Sweatshops

PERSON: Mark (Prof) Barenberg; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: CHINA (93%); AFRICA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: China; Africa

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             479 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Faults Europe in C.I.A. Detainee 'Web'

BYLINE: By DAN BILEFSKY; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: BRUSSELS, June 7


Fourteen European countries worked with the Central Intelligence Agency in the
secret transfer of terrorism suspects, and two of them -- Romania and Poland --
probably harbored secret C.I.A. detention centers, the Council of Europe
contends in a report issued Wednesday.

In its 67-page report, the Council, which enforces the European Convention on
Human Rights, said it was disingenuous for Europe to portray itself as an
unwilling victim of an operation led by the United States because European
countries played an active role in transfers orchestrated by the C.I.A.

The United States ''created this reprehensible network,'' the report's author,
Dick Marty, a member of the Swiss Parliament, said in the report. ''But we also
believe to have established that it is only through the intentional or grossly
negligent collusion of the European partners that the 'web' was able to spread
over Europe.''

But the report concedes that the Council has no hard evidence.

The report drew swift denials. Romania rejected it as ''pure speculation,''
while Prime Minister Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz of Poland dismissed it as
''libel.''

''These accusations are slanderous,'' Mr. Marcinkiewicz said. ''They are not
based on facts.'' But he said he had heard of a few cases of secret landings by
C.I.A. planes in Poland, saying that was ''natural'' in the global fight against
terrorism.

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain said the report contained ''absolutely
nothing new,'' while Spain's Foreign Ministry denied that the country had
participated in prisoner transfers, also known as rendition.

The report said seven countries -- Britain, Italy, Germany, Sweden, Macedonia,
Bosnia and Herzegovina and Turkey -- could be held responsible for violating
prisoners' rights to ''varying degrees.'' Others, it found, ''could be held
responsible for collusion -- active or passive'' in the matters of secret
prisons and transfers. It mentioned Poland, Romania, Spain, Cyprus, Ireland,
Portugal and Greece.

The report follows up similar accounts from the European Parliament and the
Council itself.

Tracing ''a global spider web'' of presumed prisons and transfer points, the
report suggests that European involvement was deeper than previously surmised.
Mr. Marty, a former prosecutor, describes an elaborate and organized system for
the abduction and interrogation of terrorism suspects, consisting of several
landing points, where civilian and military planes either stopped or refueled on
their way to and from detention centers in Cuba, Afghanistan and Iraq.

The report, however, puts the number of clandestine C.I.A. flights it contends
stopped on European territory since Sept. 11, 2001, at far fewer than the 1,000
flights previously suggested by the European Parliament.

It repeats accusations that Romania and Poland ran secret detention centers,
saying there is ''now a preponderance of indications'' that the centers existed.
It also contends that Britain gave the C.I.A. information about its citizens and
residents that resulted in their being detained and moved to places where they
were possibly tortured.

The White House press secretary, Tony Snow, said in response to a question at a
news briefing on Wednesday that ''the United States does not condone torture,
does not practice torture.''

''Furthermore,'' he said, ''we will not agree to send anybody to a nation or
place that practices torture.

''It's also important to remember again that international cooperation in the
war on terror is essential for winning, and rendition is not something that
began with this administration, and it's certainly going to be practiced, I'm
sure, in the future.''

In the report, Mr. Marty defended the conclusions he formed, despite lacking
explicit evidence, saying, ''Even if proof, in the classical meaning of the
term, is not as yet available, a number of coherent and converging elements
indicate that such secret detention centers did indeed exist in Europe.'' He
said his panel had done all it could, considering it lacked investigatory
powers, including the right to subpoena documents.

For the claim that Romania was a likely dropoff point for detainees, Mr. Marty
cited as an example the flight path of a plane with the tail number N313P, which
arrived in Timisoara, Romania, from Kabul, Afghanistan, on the night of Jan. 25,
2004. He speculated that it might have been carrying Khaled el-Masri, a German
who said he was abducted by foreign agents in Skopje, Macedonia, and taken to
Kabul.

''Having eliminated other explanations, including that of a simple logistics
flight, the most likely hypothesis of the purpose of this flight was to
transport one or several detainees from Kabul to Romania,'' Mr. Marty said,
offering no further explanation. Similarly, he said he believed that the Szymany
airport in northeastern Poland was used for a rendition flight in 2003.

Mr. Marty acknowledged that his evidence for the existence of secret C.I.A.
prisons in Romania and Poland was circumstantial but said it was strong enough
to justify further investigation. He relied primarily on flight logs provided by
the European Union's traffic agency, Eurocontrol, witness statements by people
who said they had been victims of abduction by the C.I.A. and judicial and
parliamentary inquiries in various countries.

The report said that Spain, Turkey, Germany and Cyprus provided ''staging
posts,'' where rendition operations were begun, and that Britain, Portugal,
Ireland and Greece were ''stopover points,'' where planes landed to refuel. It
concludes that Italy, Sweden, Macedonia and Bosnia allowed the abduction of
residents from their soil.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Dick Marty, a Swiss lawmaker and the author of the Council of
Europe's report on the secret transfer of terrorism suspects. (Photo by Mal
Langsdon/Reuters)Map of North America, Europe and Asia highlighting flight
routes: A map released by the Council of Europe with the routes of flights it
said transferred terrorism suspects.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PRISONS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (89%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (77%);
LIBEL & SLANDER (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (71%);
MILITARY AIRCRAFT (64%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%); COUNCIL OF EUROPE (91%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (53%)

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (79%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (99%); POLAND (95%); SPAIN (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CYPRUS (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%);
BELGIUM (79%); IRAQ (79%); TURKEY (79%); GREECE (79%); ASIA (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); SWEDEN (79%); GERMANY (79%); PORTUGAL (79%); NORTH AMERICA
(79%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%); CUBA (77%); CENTRAL
EUROPE (58%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             481 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2006 Monday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

PRISONERS' RUSE IS INQUIRY FOCUS AT GUANTANAMO

BYLINE: By DAVID S. CLOUD and NEIL A. LEWIS; David E. Sanger contributed
reporting from Washington for this article, Hassan M. Fattah from France, and
Alan Cowell from London.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1610 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 11


Three detainees at the United States military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba,
tried to conceal themselves in their cells -- behind laundry and through other
means -- to prevent guards from seeing them commit suicide, a senior military
official said Sunday.

One of the prisoners hanged himself behind laundry drying from the ceiling of
the cell, and had arranged his bed to make it look as if he was still sleeping,
said the official, Lt. Cmdr. Robert T. Durand of the Navy. The other two
detainees who committed suicide also took steps to prevent guards from seeing
that they had put nooses around their necks, he added.

The deception by the prisoners raises questions about how long it took military
guards to discover the bodies. Regulations at Guantanamo call for guards to
check on each inmate every two minutes.

Military officials said one focus of an investigation into the suicides would be
the need for procedural changes, like barring prisoners from doing laundry in
their cells.

Gen. Bantz J. Craddock of the Army, who oversees Guantanamo as commander of the
United States Southern Command, told reporters on Sunday that the investigation
into the deaths ''kind of boils down to two things: Are the procedures that you
have in place adequate, and then were the procedures followed to the
standards?''

The Pentagon identified the three detainees as two Saudis, Mani bin Shaman bin
Turki al-Habardi, 30, and Yasser Talal Abdulah Yahya al-Zahrani, 22, and a
Yemeni, Ali Abdullah Ahmed, 33.

Reaction around the world seemed muted, though the Liberal Democratic leader in
Britain, Sir Menzies Campbell, said he was thinking about touring Guantanamo and
repeated his criticism of the policy of detaining suspects without sending them
to trial.

Democrats in the United States said little, apparently concerned about appearing
to be sympathizing with detainees who could turn out to have significant
terrorist connections.

White House officials described the three men as committed terrorists, and
military officials said that none had been among the handful of prisoners whose
cases had been brought before military commissions for prosecution.

The Pentagon released a statement describing Mr. Ahmed, the Yemeni, as a ''mid
to high-level Al Qaeda operative'' who was close to Abu al-Zubaydah, a senior
figure for Al Qaeda who has since been captured. The statement also said that
Mr. Habardi was a member of a terrorist group that recruits for Al Qaeda, and
had been recommended for transfer to another country, presumably Saudi Arabia.
The Pentagon said that Mr. Zahrani had been ''a frontline fighter for the
Taliban'' and had participated in the prison uprising in 2001 at Mazar-i-Sharif
in Afghanistan that resulted in the death of Johnny Micheal Spann, a C.I.A.
operative.

The suicides renew the question of what the Bush administration will do with the
detention center at Guantanamo, which President Bush has told interviewers
recently that he would like to close at some point in the future.

The timing appears postponed, however.

''You can't have a final disposition about Guantanamo until the Supreme Court
has ruled on the Hamdan case,'' said Tony Snow, the White House spokesman,
referring to a pending decision on whether detainees at Guantanamo may be tried
as war criminals before military commissions and whether they may challenge
their detentions in federal courts.

Military officials said they had translated notes left by the prisoners, but the
officials refused to describe the contents of the messages. All three men were
in the same cellblock in 6-by-8-foot cells that were not adjoining but had
wire-mesh walls, which might have enabled them to communicate, officials said.

Speaking by telephone from the Saudi holy city of Medina, Talal Abdallah
al-Zahrani, 50, the father of Mr. Zahrani, said that when he heard from his son
in a recent letter, he sounded in good spirits and appeared to be more
optimistic than before about being released soon.

''Nothing suggested that he would commit suicide, nothing,'' Mr. Zahrani said.

He said that the account of his son's suicide was ''100 percent concocted.''

His son was 17 in 2001 when he was apprehended in Afghanistan, where he worked
with Islamic charities, he said. He had memorized the Koran since his
imprisonment and said he had been behaving, Mr. Zahrani added.

Mr. Zahrani said hundreds of people attended a wake for his son on Sunday night
after he had received word of his death from Saudi authorities. His comments
about the turnout of mourners underscored the possibility that the return of the
bodies to Saudi Arabia and Yemen -- should the government allow it -- could turn
into anti-American events.

Jennifer Daskal, advocacy director for Human Rights Watch, said Sunday that the
three suicides ''are an indication of the incredible despair that the prisoners
are experiencing'' after many of them have been ''completely cut off from the
world.''

Her comments were echoed by other critics as well.

General Craddock speculated that the suicides may have been timed to affect the
Supreme Court decision on the Hamdan case.

''This may be an attempt to influence the judicial proceedings in that
perspective,'' he told reporters, according to a transcript of his comments
during a brief visit to Guantanamo on Sunday.

The investigation into how the three prisoners were able to hang themselves and
whether changes in procedures are necessary will be conducted by the commander
of the prison, Rear Adm. Harry B. Harris.

''There will be an after-action report that will look at whether there was
failure of S.O.P.'s or adequate S.O.P.'s that were not followed,'' said
Lieutenant Commander Durand, using the military acronym for standard operating
procedures.

The inquiry will probably look at whether procedures requiring guards to observe
prisoners at least every two minutes were followed the night of the suicides.
Until now, prison officials have voiced confidence that the safeguards were
adequate, pointing to the fact that despite dozens of attempted suicides in the
last four years, none had been successful.

Guards will now collect bed linens every morning to prevent prisoners from
secretly making nooses, Lieutenant Commander Durand said. In addition to
possibly revoking permission for detainees to do their own laundry, prison
officials are looking at withholding toiletries and other items that might be
used in suicide attempts, he added.

''We've got to determine and find the balance between the comfort items that we
would like to provide and the point at which comfort items in the possession of
a few determined detainees will be turned into something that could contribute
to taking their lives,'' General Craddock said.

There have been recent signs of growing unrest among the prisoners, including an
episode in May in which at least two prisoners attempted suicide and another was
said to have faked a suicide to lure guards into an ambush.

Several Guantanamo officers said some prisoners had spread the idea of suicide,
claiming to have had visions that the prison would not be closed until after
three prisoners had died, a possible explanation for the decision by the three
men to kill themselves at the same time.

James Yee, a former Islamic chaplain at Guantanamo, said the suicides signaled
''an important failure there.''

Mr. Yee, who served at Guantanamo when the first of 41 previous suicide attempts
occurred said, ''The military guards on the block are supposed to check each
detainee visually every two minutes or so.''

The suicide attempt that came closest to being successful, involving a Saudi
schoolteacher who was arrested in Pakistan, where he had attended a militant
training camp, was foiled by those procedures, he said.

''At least one guard would have to walk up and down the corridor,'' he said.
''That saved the Saudi detainee. who was in a coma for months.'' Although the
Saudi detainee was not expected to survive, he recovered and has since been sent
home.

Mr. Yee, a West Point graduate, was arrested on suspicion of espionage but the
charges were dropped. He left the Army after being found guilty of minor
infractions and amid overwhelming evidence that the suspicions of espionage were
groundless.

Joshua Colangelo-Bryan, a lawyer representing Jumah Dossari, a Guantanamo inmate
who has attempted suicide numerous times, said he had been told that guards were
expected to keep close watch on prisoners, observing them every 30 seconds. But
he said the procedures were difficult to follow in practice.

While visiting his client last November, he said he found Mr. Dossari in a
bathroom trying to hang himself and slit his wrists. Even though a video camera
had been installed in the bathroom, Mr. Colangelo-Bryan said guards did not
respond until he called them.

Though the Bush administration has been under pressure -- from the United
Nations, European countries and the International Committee of the Red Cross --
about the Guantanamo detention center, White House officials did not indicate
that they viewed the suicides as a major political problem. The State Department
alerted American embassies in Europe and the Middle East, and asked them to
contact government officials. But White House officials said Mr. Bush did not
make calls to world leaders.

''We haven't heard much response,'' one senior official said.

The United Nations was also notified of the suicides, the White House said. The
U.N.'s Human Rights Commission declined to visit the detention center last year
after the Bush administration refused to allow commission members to interview
or talk with detainees.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 16, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Monday about suicides at the United States
military prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, misstated the legal record of James
Yee, a former chaplain at the prison, who said the suicides signaled ''an
important failure there.'' Mr. Yee, a former Army captain, was indeed found
guilty of minor infractions, and received a written reprimand. But after Mr. Yee
appealed, a senior officer overturned the convictions and the reprimand was
withdrawn.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Gen. Bantz J. Craddock, commander of the United States Southern
Command, at a news conference on Saturday addressing the suicides of three
prisoners at the detention center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. (Photo by Joe
Raedle/Getty Images)
 Yasser Talal Abdulah Yahya al-Zahrani, one of the detainees who committed
suicide early Saturday. (pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SUICIDE (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA
(85%); ARMIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); NAVIES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%) Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba);
Suicides and Suicide Attempts; Public Opinion; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (57%)

PERSON: David S Cloud; Neil A Lewis; George W (Pres) Bush; Robert T (Lt Cmdr)
Durand; Menzies (Sir) Campbell; Ali Abdullah Ahmed; Mani bin Shaman bin Turki
al- Habardi; Yasser Talal Abdulah Yahya al- Zahrani

CITY: MAZAR-E SHARIF, AFGHANISTAN (75%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); CUBA (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM
(92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%)

REGION: Great Britain; Saudi Arabia; Yemen

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             482 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 13, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The 3 Suicides at Guantanamo

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 154 words



To the Editor:

As a federal court-appointed monitor of health care in prisons for more than 20
years, I have reviewed the medical records of prisoners who killed themselves in
prisons and jails throughout the United States.

Prisoners kill themselves when they are hopeless, when they have no contact with
their families, and when faced with a terrifying future.

Prisoners at Guantanamo are subject to torture and to cruel, inhuman and
degrading punishment intended to drive men to madness, which leads to suicide.

For the sake of humanity, for the sake of the prisoners at Guantanamo and to
divert our country from its course of infamy, the prison at Guantanamo must be
closed immediately.

Robert L. Cohen, M.D.
New York, June 11, 2006

The writer, the medical director of Rikers Island Health Services from 1982 to
1985, is a federal court-appointed monitor of medical care for prisoners in
Michigan, New York, and Connecticut.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); SUICIDE (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); MEDICAL RECORDS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
(88%); TORTURE (88%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%); TERRORISM (72%) Terrorism; Suicides and Suicide Attempts;
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: Robert L (Dr) Cohen

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); CUBA (87%)

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             485 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

How Clumsy, Inaccurate Gaza Rockets Could Start a War

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1061 words

DATELINE: SDEROT, Israel, June 15


The Qassam rocket is not much to look at: a 70-pound tube of rough steel and
hand-mixed explosive, like the one that pounded through the roof of Universe
Packaging here on Thursday. Tons of falling concrete just missed Lior Levi, 28,
a worker there.

''My ears were ringing, so it took me a few seconds to realize what really
happened,'' said Mr. Levi, who counts himself a lucky man. ''I didn't realize it
was a direct hit.''

However crude, the Qassam rocket, fired by Palestinian militants from Gaza into
Israel, has nonetheless won its spot as symbol of the moment in the long
conflict here. At a delicate time, the rocket is not only raising tensions
between Palestinians and Israelis, as usual, but is also dividing Palestinian
from Palestinian, Israeli from Israeli.

Most immediately, the number of rockets fired by Palestinians from Gaza, and
whether they happen to hit anyone, will be crucial in determining whether the
Israeli-Palestinian conflict explodes again into high-intensity warfare.

On Thursday, after a week in which at least 16 Palestinian civilians were killed
and several Israelis wounded, there were signs that Israel and the Palestinian
government, now led by the militant group Hamas, did not want that to happen.

After several Qassams landed here and elsewhere in the Negev, a Hamas spokesman
said the group was willing to reinstate a 16-month cease-fire that it had
proclaimed invalid last week after seven members of a Palestinian family were
killed on a beach during an Israeli retaliatory bombardment.

''I spoke today with the prime minister and he said we definitely want quiet
everywhere,'' the spokesman, Ghazi Hamad, said Thursday on Israeli radio,
referring to Ismail Haniya, the top Hamas leader. ''We are interested in a
cease-fire everywhere.''

He later qualified that, saying Israel would have to stop all attacks against
Palestinians in both Gaza and the West Bank.

But he also said that in that case, Hamas would attempt the difficult task of
restraining other Palestinian militants from firing Qassams on their own. In
Gaza the launchings are generally regarded as legitimate resistance in the wider
war against Israel.

Israel responded with its own condition -- that the rocket attacks end -- but
did not dismiss the offer.

''If this terrorist activity ceases, of course we will be more than happy to
cease our defensive measures,'' said Mark Regev, a spokesman for the Foreign
Ministry.

For such a simple rocket, with low accuracy and a range of less than five miles,
the Qassam has raised complicated issues.

On the Palestinian side, Hamas is being forced to evaluate the transition it has
made from a resistance group that carried out deadly attacks against Israeli
civilians, to leader of the Palestinian government. Already, a lack of money is
weakening Hamas's grip on power, and more rockets and wider fighting are
unlikely to persuade Western governments to resume financial aid.

Israel is divided by the question of its military response, whether it has been
disproportionate to the threat of the Qassams, and whether the lives of innocent
Palestinians could have been spared.

As with many issues here, the Qassam problem began in earnest with the Israeli
pullout of settlers from Gaza, completed last September.

For many Israelis, full disengagement should have begun the moment Gaza, finally
free from Israeli soldiers, ceased to be a threat. But according to the Israeli
military, more than 600 rockets have fallen since then. They have killed one
person inside Israel and injured many more, including a friend of the Israeli
defense minister, Amir Peretz, who lives here in Sderot.

But even with relatively few casualties, the barrage has infuriated residents,
many of them working poor Israelis with roots in Morocco and Ethiopia.

''Disengagement blew up in our faces, in the faces of our children,'' said Alon
David, 32, a leader of a group of Sderot residents who have been camped out in
front of Mr. Peretz's house here.

Mr. David and five other people have been on a liquids-only protest diet for the
past five days. Since a barrage of Qassams that peaked at 30 or 40 last week,
children have stopped going to school, and residents have complained that the
government has abandoned them in the name of its international image.

''The children are sleeping in bed with us,'' said Sima Hadad, 33, one of the
hunger strikers. ''Every boom -- even things that are not Qassams -- scares
them.''

Another hunger striker, Sharon Ben Abu, 33, added, ''Even if the watermelon
salesman screams 'Watermelon!' on the street, they get scared.''

The mayor and others have called for a huge military assault on Gaza. But human
rights groups, and some Israelis, contend that has already happened: Israel has
fired nearly 6,000 artillery shells into Gaza over roughly the past year in
retaliation for the Qassams, and the United Nations says that more than 80
Palestinians have been killed by Israeli attacks since the beginning of the
year. Since 2004, eight people have died in Israel from Qassam fire, the
military says.

The issue came into tragic focus last week when seven members of a Palestinian
family were killed on the beach as Israel attacked Gaza. (An eighth person was
also killed.)

On Tuesday the military said its internal investigation showed the blast that
killed them was not from an Israeli explosive. But Israel has been plunged into
introspection, highlighted in dueling commentaries on Thursday in the newspaper
Maariv.

One writer said that when such tragedies occurred, ''we regret it, but we must
not condemn and vilify those who do it.'' Another sarcastically bemoaned
avoidable death: ''When they kill us, it is a massacre. When we kill them, it is
a pinpointed killing.''

Peter Bouckaert, a Human Rights Watch official who investigated both the Qassam
firing and the Israeli response, said neither side was adequately safeguarding
civilians.

''The Qassams are ineffective from a military perspective, but it doesn't matter
how many people they kill because they indiscriminately target civilians,'' he
said. ''On the other hand, the Israeli response has been a lot more deadly in
terms of the civilians killed in Gaza.

''Both sides justify their methods by the abuses committed by the other side,
but I think we need to get out of this cycle of violence.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At the police station in Sderot, near the Gaza border, an
officer yesterday cataloged spent rockets, some labeled Al Quds, or
''Jerusalem.''
 Seemingly random attacks on Israel by Gazans using Qassam rockets keep nerves
on a knife edge. A worker at this factory had a narrow escape yesterday when one
rocket caused a large piece of the roof to fall. (Photographs by Rina
Castelnuovo for The New York Times) Map of Israel highlighting Gaza Strip:
Sderot is well within range of the mostly homemade Qassams.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORISM (75%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN
CONFLICTS (75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (63%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             490 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein Thinks He Will Get Death Penalty but Sees Escape Hatch, His Lawyer Says

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG; Ranya Kadri contributed reporting from Amman for this
article, Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi from New York, and John F. Burns from Baghdad.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1287 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan, June 24


Saddam Hussein has no illusions, his chief lawyer says. As he sits in his prison
cell reading the Koran and writing poetry, Mr. Hussein knows the inevitable is
coming -- a death sentence handed down by the Iraqi court trying him on charges
of crimes against humanity.

''Saddam Hussein is convinced of this,'' the lawyer, Khalil al-Dulaimi, said in
an interview here. ''He's told us many times we won't be able to change this. He
knows the sentence has been issued from Washington, and if there's an even
greater punishment than the death sentence, he'll get it.''

Yet Mr. Hussein refuses simply to submit to the fate that awaits him, Mr.
Dulaimi said, for he believes there is a way out. According to Mr. Hussein's
logic, President Bush will use the court's sentence as leverage to try to
persuade him to tamp down the insurgency, so desperate are the Americans to
stanch their losses. Mr. Hussein believes the Americans might even reinstall him
as president of Iraq, his lawyer said.

''He'll be the last resort; they'll knock on his door,'' Mr. Dulaimi said,
tapping a pair of gold-rimmed glasses against his knee. ''The United States will
use this sentence to pressure Saddam to save it from its mess.''

Such are the thoughts that appear to be meandering through the mind of Mr.
Hussein, 69, as his first trial nears its end. Though the idea of salvation may
seem quixotic at best, the latest in a long line of delusions that have helped
land Mr. Hussein where he is today, Mr. Dulaimi asserts that Mr. Hussein's hopes
do not lie merely in the realm of fantasy. On the contrary, he said, it is the
Americans who are now beginning to wake up from a dream world, realizing that
their invasion has delivered Iraq into the hands of conservative Shiites in both
Iraq and Iran.

''The Iranian influence is a threat to American interests,'' Mr. Dulaimi said.
''The only person standing in the face of Iran, which is an enemy of America, is
Saddam Hussein.''

Since October, Mr. Hussein and seven co-defendants have been standing trial for
the imprisonment and executions of 148 men and boys from the Shiite village of
Dujail following what Mr. Hussein said was an assassination attempt there on him
in 1982. Lawyers for each side are making closing arguments, but the trial
continues to be racked by violence, raising questions about whether justice can
be delivered in the middle of a war zone. The latest convulsions occurred
Wednesday, when a lead defense lawyer, Khamis al-Obeidi, was abducted from his
home in Baghdad, beaten and executed.

Mr. Obeidi was the third defense lawyer to be killed since the trial started.
Some witnesses said Shiite militiamen carted Mr. Obeidi, a Sunni Arab, through
the streets of a vast Shiite slum in eastern Baghdad before executing him. Mr.
Dulaimi said he first heard the news when another lawyer called him in the early
morning in Amman. ''Straightaway I called his wife,'' he said, ''and she was
crying and shouting.''

Mr. Dulaimi, 44, also a Sunni Arab, spoke in a two-hour interview in a private
home here in the Jordanian capital, where he spends most of his time. Perched on
the edge of a baroque sofa, dressed in a black pinstripe suit, he tried to lay
out the mentality of Mr. Hussein, the failures of the American war and the
travails of the defense lawyers. He leads a team of a dozen that includes a
Lebanese woman and a prominent American.

The most obvious problem is security. Mr. Dulaimi accused the Iraqi court of
bearing responsibility for all the assassinations linked to the trial. It has
refused to give adequate protection for the lawyers and others, he contended,
and perhaps even directly aids the Shiite militias. ''They hate Saddam and the
Baath Party,'' he said of the judges.

American officials say that the leading defense lawyers have been offered safe
accommodations in the fortified Green Zone in Baghdad, or, as an alternative,
24-hour protection by Interior Ministry bodyguards.

But Mr. Dulaimi said that the lack of security had forced him to move to Amman
and to fly into Baghdad only for trial sessions. Even then, he will stay only in
the Green Zone, where the courthouse is located. His wife and seven children
move from house to house in the provincial capital of Ramadi, an insurgent
stronghold, rarely staying in one place for more than a night, he said. Mr.
Dulaimi is from the largest tribe in that province and studied law at the
university in Ramadi.

''My family believes in justice and they're sympathetic,'' Mr. Dulaimi said,
when asked whether his family wanted him to drop the case. ''My wife knows that
when a nation is occupied, the price of its liberty is great.''

Mr. Dulaimi said he had proposed to the American government that each lawyer get
$500,000 to cover the cost of guards, housing and transportation. He said Ramsey
Clark, the American lawyer on the defense team, had passed this request on to
American officials several times, but had received no answer.

No arrests have been made in any of the trial-related assassinations, including
those of a judge and his son, also a court employee. Some American officials
strongly suspect that members of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party may have played a
role with the aim of discrediting the court. Indeed, each killing has been
followed by an upsurge of demands, from Western human rights organizations as
well as Baathists, for the trial to be moved out of Iraq.

Judges on the court bristle at any suggestion that they have failed to meet the
needs of the defense lawyers, much less collude with militias to have the
lawyers killed. Raid Juhi, the chief investigative judge, said in a telephone
interview that the court had offered Mr. Obeidi, the slain lawyer, the
protection of policemen, but that Mr. Obeidi had refused because he distrusted
the Shiite-run Interior Ministry. The court paid Mr. Obeidi to hire his own
bodyguards.

''He said, 'I don't need police, I need my people,' '' Mr. Juhi said. ''We
treated them as policemen in terms of benefits and salaries.''

Mr. Dulaimi said there had been a dozen attempts on his own life in Baghdad,
mostly in drive-by shootings. But here in Amman, he seemed unconcerned about the
possibility of death. Unaccompanied except by an American reporter, he walked
into the street on Friday evening to hail a taxi. ''I will defend him even if I
am martyred,'' he said of Mr. Hussein.

Mr. Dulaimi said he had never met Mr. Hussein before taking the case and had
never received any favors from the former president. (Some court officials
gossip, without evidence, that Mr. Dulaimi is an ex-intelligence officer.) A
criminal lawyer since 1992, he said he had approached the imprisoned Mr. Hussein
out of a desire to defend the legitimate ruler of Iraq and expose the sham of
the American occupation. He claimed Mr. Hussein had no money to pay his lawyers,
though it is well known that Mr. Hussein's daughters in Amman have supported the
lawyers.

Mr. Hussein may believe there is no way to avert a death sentence, but the
lawyers will not slink away without making their final arguments, Mr. Dulaimi
said. One strategy is to try to persuade the court that the prosecutors have
wrongfully accused Mr. Hussein of nearly a third of the 148 deaths -- 45 are
still alive or died under other circumstances, Mr. Dulaimi said. (Officials have
accused the defense of falsifying evidence to make that claim.)

As for the others? Mr. Hussein did order their executions, and had every right
to do so, he said.

''They deserved to die, according to Iraqi law,'' Mr. Dulaimi said. ''They were
part of an illegal organization, plotting to kill a president, and they killed
some of his bodyguards. They were threatening the stability of the country.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khalil al-Dulaimi, Saddam Hussein's chief lawyer, in Jordan.
(Photo by Muhammad Hamed/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (93%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (93%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
PRISONS (78%); POETRY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (73%); US PRESIDENTS
(73%); GENOCIDE (72%); ASSASSINATION (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (61%); TERRORISM
(60%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States Armament and Defense; United States International Relations;
Terrorism; Capital Punishment

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%); GEORGE W BUSH (74%) Edward Wong; Saddam Hussein;
George W (Pres) Bush; Khalil al- Dulaimi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); AMMAN, JORDAN (59%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (94%); JORDAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (92%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             495 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 27, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Is Law on the Side of Guantanamo?

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 627 words



To the Editor:

Re ''A Threat That Belongs Behind Bars,'' by Eric Posner (Op-Ed, June 25):

International law requires that prisoners of war be accorded the same procedural
protections that American soldiers receive under the Uniform Code of Military
Justice and that there be a competent tribunal to determine whether an
individual is a prisoner of war.

This has not been provided to any of the Guantanamo detainees.

The United States Constitution requires that any person being deprived of
liberty by incarceration have significant procedural protections, including
notice of the charges, representation by a lawyer, and a hearing by a judge who
is not a part of the executive branch.

More important, elemental human rights and human decency require these basic
protections, which have not been provided to those at Guantanamo, hundreds of
whom have been there for several years now.

Mr. Posner assumes that all in Guantanamo are dangerous when we now know that
many have been held there based on mistakes or the flimsiest evidence.

Mr. Posner does not discuss the long-term consequences of the Bush
administration's ill-conceived Guantanamo policy: How can the United States
insist on fair and humane treatment of its soldiers who are captured when we
have failed to provide it to those held at Guantanamo and other detention
facilities?

Erwin Chemerinsky
Durham, N.C., June 25, 2006

The writer is a professor of law and political science at Duke University.

To the Editor:

Eric Posner bases his analysis on a tissue of premises that are easily exposed
as mere convenience.

One has been put forth by President Bush: the men held in the extralegal prison
at Guantanamo Bay were taken from the battlefield and can be held as dangerous
enemy combatants. Not quite.

In a war on terror (as opposed to a war on a government), the battlefield is
likely to be a town square, where combatants and citizens are indistinguishable.
How does one tell an enemy combatant from a barber without a trial?

Many of the men imprisoned at Guantanamo Bay were brought in by bounty hunters
paid by the head. With no trial, how do you tell a pastry chef brought in for a
lovely piece of cash from a dangerous combatant?

Some 300 detainees have been released after spending an unconscionable amount of
time in this prison. Were they dangerous when they were brought in? Are they
dangerous now?

Sandy Crimmins
Philadelphia, June 25, 2006

To the Editor:

Finally a clear and concise explanation that anyone can understand explaining
how and why terrorists can (and should be) detained legally!

S. Johnson
Spring, Tex., June 25, 2006

To the Editor:

Eric Posner cites legal examples of civil detentions, like involuntary
hospitalization of mentally ill individuals, to argue that legal criticisms of
the Guantanamo detentions rest on a half-truth.

It is true that people with psychiatric disorders can be legally detained
without a jury trial if they appear dangerous to themselves or others.

In New York State, however, involuntary psychiatric patients are allowed
telephone calls, visitors and unfettered access to lawyers provided by the
Office of Mental Health. Involuntary hospitalizations are time-limited and
regularly reviewed.

Also, in contrast to Guantanamo, the burden of proving a patient's dangerousness
ultimately falls upon the psychiatrist requesting civil commitment. Judges
rarely rubber-stamp psychiatrists' decisions.

Unlike Guantanamo detainees, the hospitalized mentally ill are offered many
civil rights protections during their legal detention. Mr. Posner's analogy
rests on a narrow parsing of law and principle.

Jack Drescher, M.D.
New York, June 25, 2006

The writer is a past president of the New York County District Branch, American
Psychiatric Association.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); POWS & MIAS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); PRISONS
(89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (88%); MENTAL ILLNESS (87%);
WRITERS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); MILITARY BASES
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ARMED FORCES (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (76%);
NAVIES (72%); WAR ON TERROR (71%); PSYCHIATRY (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(67%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (64%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); AL-QAEDA
(62%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Law and
Legislation; Terrorism; Mental Health and Disorders

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (91%); AL-QAEDA (59%); DUKE UNIVERSITY (54%) Al
Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (72%) Erwin Chemerinsky; Sandy Crimmins; S (Lr Writer)
Johnson; Jack (Dr) Drescher; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: DURHAM, NC, USA (54%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Iraq; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United States

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             497 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 29, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 849 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

Israel Continues to Batter Gaza in Search of Soldier
Israel stepped up its confrontation with Palestinian militants over the capture
of an Israeli soldier, battering northern Gazan towns with artillery and sending
warplanes over the house of the Syrian president. In the West Bank, Israeli
forces reportedly detained the Palestinian deputy prime minister, 7 other
cabinet ministers and 20 lawmakers in Ramallah.   A1

Putin Issues Blunt Order


President Vladimir V. Putin ordered Russia's secret services to find and kill
those who had kidnapped and killed four Russian Embassy employees in Iraq, the
Kremlin said.   A9

An Iraqi affiliated with Al Qaeda led the team that carried out the February
bombing of a Shiite shrine, unleashing waves of sectarian violence that still
convulse Iraq, an Iraqi security official said.   A10

Unusual Partners Tackle Malaria
Through a combination of better medicines, better bed nets and better
identification of the most afflicted areas, a partnership of the world's largest
aluminum producer and three African governments has turned malaria into a
manageable threat in a part of Africa that was once a hot spot.   A1

Vatican Delegation Visits China
For the first time in more than five years, an official Vatican delegation is
visiting China and meeting with government officials, experts said, signaling a
warming between two parties that have been at odds in recent months.   A15

Fury Despite 2001 Vow
Ever since President Bush vowed days after the Sept. 11 attacks to ''follow the
money,'' the government has made no secret of its efforts to hunt down the bank
accounts of terrrorists. But that has not muted the fury of Mr. Bush and members
of Congress at the decision by The New York Times and other newspapers to
disclose details about that hunt.   A12

Ruling on British Detentions
Throwing down a challenge to a British tactic to fight terrorism, a High Court
judge ruled that so-called control orders, a form of house arrest without trial,
were incompatible with European human rights laws.   A14

Campaigning Ends in Mexico
Mexico's polarizing presidential campaign ended officially and, four days before
balloting, the vote has come down to a contest between a charismatic advocate
for the poor and a well-educated technocrat.   A3

OBITUARIES   A23

Al Brounstein
A Napa Valley vintner who was an early proponent of both making wines from a
single vineyard and charging high prices for them, he was 86.   A23

NATIONAL   A16-22

Court Rejects Challenge To Texas Redistricting Plan
The Supreme Court rejected a broad challenge to Texas's controversial
Congressional redistricting plan, giving a victory to the Republican Party and
the architect of the plan, Tom DeLay, the former House majority leader.   A1

The Supreme Court ruled that foreign criminal defendants who have not been
notified of their right under an international treaty to contact one of their
country's diplomats are nonetheless not entitled to any special accommodation
from courts in the United States.   A22

Insurance Rates Rise in Florida
Florida is losing its luster for many residents, who are scouring for
homeowners' insurance after two ferocious hurricane seasons.   A16

A Mayor Is Asked to Resign
In a sharp rebuke, the City Council of San Jose, Calif., formally asked the
city's mayor, Ron Gonzales, to resign, just days after he was arraigned on
fraud, bribery and conspiracy charges.   A20

Maine Sees Drop in Economy
Maine was the only state besides Louisiana to see a decline in economic activity
last year, according to a new Federal Reserve study.   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Floods Hit East Coast After Days of Steady Rain
A network of swollen rivers, heavy from days of steady rain, spilled across
their banks, threatening to inundate small towns and big cities from Virginia to
Vermont and causing thousands of evacuations along the banks of the Susquehanna,
Delaware and Schuylkill Rivers in New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania.   A1

Kerik Close to Plea Bargain
Bernard B. Kerik, the former New York police commissioner, is close to an
agreement to plead guilty to having accepted improper gifts totaling tens of
thousands of dollars while he was a city official in the late 1990's, two people
with information on the plea negotiations said.   A1

Redesign for Freedom Tower
The architects of the Freedom Tower, eager to avoid creating a fortress that
overshadows the World Trade Center memorial, announced refinements to the
design.   B1

Legal Aid to Poor Criticized
Judith S. Kaye, New York State's chief judge, said the legal services provided
by local governments to the poor were grossly inadequate and called on the state
to take over the job.   B1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Summer Auto Discounts
American car shoppers have learned that summer is the season of big discounts,
and this year is shaping up no differently.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: A loss for competitive elections; Hamas provokes a fight; the whir
of the political casino; billing Holocaust victims.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E6
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E8
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (86%); LITIGATION (86%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (85%); APPEALS (85%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (82%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (79%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); REDISTRICTING (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); BANKING & FINANCE (77%); VOTERS & VOTING (77%); HEADS
OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); MALARIA (73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (72%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); WINERIES (72%); HOUSE ARREST (67%);
JUDGES (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS (62%); ARRESTS (61%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(56%); ALUMINA & ALUMINUM PRODUCTION (52%); ALUMINUM INDUSTRY (52%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (57%)

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (72%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

CITY: NAPA VALLEY, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (96%); IRAQ (94%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); AFRICA (92%); SYRIA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             500 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court's Ruling Is Likely To Force Negotiations Over Presidential Power

BYLINE: By DAVID E. SANGER and SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; THE RULING ON TRIBUNALS: THE
CONTEXT; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 1150 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 29


The Supreme Court's Guantanamo ruling on Thursday was the most significant
setback yet for the Bush administration's contention that the Sept. 11 attacks
and their aftermath have justified one of the broadest expansions of
presidential power in American history.

President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney spent much of their first term
bypassing Congress in the service of what they labeled a ''different kind of
war.'' Now they will almost certainly plunge into negotiations they previously
spurned, over the extent of the president's powers, this time in the midst of a
midterm election in which Mr. Bush's wartime strategies and their consequences
have emerged as a potent issue.

The ruling bolsters those in Congress who for months have been trying to force
the White House into a retreat from its claims that Mr. Bush not only has the
unilateral authority as commander in chief to determine how suspected terrorists
are tried, but also to set the rules for domestic wiretapping, for interrogating
prisoners and for pursuing a global fight against terror that many suspect could
stretch for as long as the cold war did.

What the court's 5-to-3 decision declared, in essence, was that Mr. Bush and Mr.
Cheney had overreached and must now either use the established rules of
courts-martial or go back to Congress -- this time with vastly diminished
leverage -- to win approval for the military commissions that Mr. Bush argues
are the best way to keep the nation safe.

For Mr. Bush, this is not the first such setback. The court ruled two years ago
that the giant prison at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, was not beyond the reach of
American courts and that prisoners there had some minimal rights.

Then, last year, came the overwhelming 90-to-9 vote in the Senate, over Mr.
Cheney's strong objections, to ban ''cruel, inhumane and degrading'' treatment
of prisoners. That forced Mr. Bush, grudgingly, to reach an accord with Senator
John McCain, Republican of Arizona, on principles for interrogation, which are
still being turned into rules.

As seen by Mr. Bush's critics, the court has finally reined in an executive who
used the Sept. 11 attacks as a justification -- or an excuse -- to tilt the
balance of power decidedly toward the White House.

''This is a great triumph for the rule of law and the separation of powers,''
said Bruce Ackerman, a professor of law and political science at Yale. ''The
administration will have to go back to Congress and talk in a much more
discriminating fashion about what we need to do.''

Some allies of Mr. Bush reacted bitterly on Thursday, asserting that it was the
court, rather than Mr. Bush, that had overreacted.

''Nothing about the administration's solution was radical or even particularly
aggressive,'' said Bradford A. Berenson, who served from 2001 to 2003 as
associate White House counsel. ''What is truly radical is the Supreme Court's
willingness to bend to world opinion and undermine some of the most important
foundations of American national security law in the middle of a war.''

At least rhetorically, the administration is giving no ground about the reach of
the president's powers. Just 10 days ago, speaking here in Washington, Mr.
Cheney cited the responses to Watergate and the Vietnam War as examples of where
he thought Congress had ''begun to encroach upon the power and responsibilities
of the president,'' and said he had come to the White House with the view that
''it was important to go back and try to restore that balance.''

Since taking office, Mr. Bush and Mr. Cheney have largely tried to do so by
fiat, sometimes with public declarations, sometimes with highly classified
directives governing how suspects could be plucked from the battlefield or, in
the case decided on Thursday, how they would be tried. The president's tone on
Thursday, during a news conference with Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi of
Japan, suggested that he recognized he might now have to give ground.

Mr. Bush said he would be taking ''the findings'' of the Supreme Court ''very
seriously.''

''One thing I'm not going to do, though, is I'm not going to jeopardize the
safety of the American people,'' he said. But then he backtracked a bit, saying
he would ''work with Congress'' to give legal foundation to the system he had
already put in place.

To some degree, the court may have helped Mr. Bush out of a political
predicament. He has repeatedly said he would like to close the detention center
at Guantanamo, a recognition that the indefinite imprisonment of suspects
without trial and the accusations that they have been mistreated were seriously
undercutting American credibility abroad. But he set no schedule and said he was
waiting for the court to rule.

''The court really rescued the administration by taking it out of this quagmire
it's been in,'' said Michael Greenberger, who teaches the law of
counterterrorism at the University of Maryland law school.

Now Congress, with the court's encouragement, may help the president find a way
forward. For Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, who said a
legislative proposal on military commissions he sent to the White House 18
months ago ''went nowhere,'' the ruling was a welcome restoration of the balance
of power.

''The Supreme Court has set the rules of the road,'' Mr. Graham, a former
military lawyer, said, ''and the Congress and the president can drive to the
destination together.''

Supporters of the president emphasized that the question of how to balance
suspects' rights against the need for intelligence on imminent attacks was
always a daunting challenge, and that the ruling did not change that.

In fact, said Jack Goldsmith, who headed the Justice Department's Office of
Legal Counsel in 2003 and 2004, the fact that no second attack has occurred on
American soil is an achievement of the administration that is now complicating
its political situation.

''The longer the president and the administration successfully prevent another
attack,'' Mr. Goldsmith said, ''the more people think the threat has abated and
the more they demand that the administration adhere to traditional civil
liberties protections.''

In today's less panicky national mood, tough measures that few dared question as
American forces first moved into Afghanistan, and then Iraq, are now the subject
of nightly debate on cable television and of a small flotilla of court
challenges.

But history suggests that this pendulum swing was inevitable. It took years, but
history came to condemn the internment of Japanese-Americans during World War
II, and to question Lincoln's suspension of habeas corpus during the Civil War.

Sooner or later, that same reversal was bound to happen to Mr. Bush and Mr.
Cheney.

The question is how far it will swing back while they are still in office and
while what Mr. Bush calls ''the long war'' continues around the globe.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lt. Cmdr. Charles Swift and Neal K. Katyal, lawyers for a
Guantanamo Bay detainee, after yesterday's Supreme Court ruling on military
tribunals. (Photo by Jamie Rose for the New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
US PRESIDENTS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
MILITARY COURTS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR ON TERROR (78%);
PRISONS (78%); RULE OF LAW (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HISTORY (77%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (77%); MIDTERM ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); COLD WAR (77%); HUMANITIES
& SOCIAL SCIENCE (77%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (75%); ARMED FORCES (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (72%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (71%); NAVIES (71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%);
APPROVALS (68%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (67%); WIRETAPPING (52%) Terrorism;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Election Issues; Elections; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism; Decisions and
Verdicts; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY (77%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%) David E
Sanger; Scott Shane; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (92%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             502 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Excerpts From Opinions on the Use of Military Commissions to Try Detainees

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 677 words


Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court opinion in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld by
Justice John Paul Stevens and a dissent by Justice Clarence Thomas. A full text
is at nytimes.com/washington.

From the Ruling

  At a minimum, the government must make a substantial showing that the crime
for which it seeks to try a defendant by military commission is acknowledged to
be an offense against the law of war. That burden is far from satisfied here.
The crime of ''conspiracy'' has rarely if ever been tried as such in this
country by any law-of-war military commission not exercising some other form of
jurisdiction, and does not appear in either the Geneva Conventions or the Hague
Conventions -- the major treaties on the law of war.

The conflict with Al Qaeda is not, according to the government, a conflict to
which the full protections afforded detainees under the 1949 Geneva Conventions
apply because Article 2 of those conventions (which appears in all four
conventions) renders the full protections applicable only to ''all cases of
declared war or of any other armed conflict which may arise between two or more
of the high contracting parties.'' Since Hamdan was captured and detained
incident to the conflict with Al Qaeda and not the conflict with the Taliban,
and since Al Qaeda, unlike Afghanistan, is not a ''high contracting party'' --
i.e., a signatory of the conventions, the protections of those conventions are
not, it is argued, applicable to Hamdan.

We need not decide the merits of this argument because there is at least one
provision of the Geneva Conventions that applies here even if the relevant
conflict is not one between signatories. Article 3  provides that in a
''conflict not of an international character occurring in the territory of one
of the high contracting parties, each party to the conflict shall be bound to
apply, as a minimum, ''certain provisions protecting ''[p]ersons taking no
active part in the hostilities, including members of armed forces who have laid
down their arms and those placed hors de combat by ... detention.'' One such
provision prohibits ''the passing of sentences and the carrying out of
executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court
affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by
civilized peoples.''

From the Dissent

  The plurality's newly minted clear-statement rule is also fundamentally
inconsistent with the nature of the common law which, by definition, evolves and
develops over time and does not, in all cases, ''say what may be done.''
Similarly, it is inconsistent with the nature of warfare, which also evolves and
changes over time, and for which a flexible, evolutionary common-law system is
uniquely appropriate. Though the charge against Hamdan easily satisfies even the
plurality's manufactured rule, the plurality's inflexible approach has dangerous
implications for the executive's ability to discharge his duties as commander in
chief in future cases. We should undertake to determine whether an unlawful
combatant has been charged with an offense against the law of war with an
understanding that the common law of war is flexible, responsive to the
exigencies of the present conflict, and deferential to the judgment of military
commanders.

Under either the correct, flexible approach to evaluating the adequacy of
Hamdan's charge, or under the plurality's new, clear-statement approach, Hamdan
has been charged with conduct constituting two distinct violations of the law of
war cognizable before a military commission: membership in a war-criminal
enterprise and conspiracy to commit war crimes. The charging section of the
indictment alleges both that Hamdan ''willfully and knowingly joined an
enterprise of persons who shared a common criminal purpose,'' and that he
''conspired and agreed with [Al Qaeda] to commit ... offenses triable by
military commission.''

The common law of war establishes that Hamdan's willful and knowing membership
in Al Qaeda is a war crime chargeable before a military commission.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW OF WAR (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
MILITARY COURTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); JURISDICTION (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CONSPIRACY (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%);
TALIBAN (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); NAVIES (71%) Terrorism; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Freedom and Human
Rights; Decisions and Verdicts; Suits and Litigation; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base
(Cuba)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (83%) Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: CLARENCE THOMAS (73%); JOHN PAUL STEVENS (73%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (89%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             503 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 30, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

On Arab Streets and Airwaves, Shock Over Seizures by Israel

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Suha Maayeh contributed reporting from Amman,
Jordan, for this article, and Mandi Fahmy from Cairo.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 517 words

DATELINE: RIYADH, Saudi Arabia, June 29


Arab streets and airwaves reacted with shock on Thursday over Israel's seizure
of many Hamas members and the continued bombardment of Gaza.

Many deplored Israeli attacks on civilian targets in response to what they
characterized as a legitimate military campaign that resulted in the capture on
Sunday of Cpl. Gilad Shalit of the Israeli Army. Many also contended the latest
wave of violence was a pretext for hampering an agreement among Palestinian
factions on a unified political program in preparation for talks with Israel.

Yet despite the finger pointing and accusations of Israeli human rights
violations in the latest round of violence, at least some in the Arab world
acknowledged Thursday that Hamas had made a strategic mistake in capturing
Corporal Shalit.

''Using an Israeli prisoner as a pawn to release Palestinian prisoners wasn't a
wise move, because Israel was waiting for a pretext,'' said Hassan Barrari,
senior researcher at the Center for Strategic Studies at the University of
Jordan. ''The Palestinian position is now helpless, and all the Palestinians can
do now is make declarations of outrage.''

Mohammad al-Ameer, political editor at the Saudi daily Al Riyadh, said, ''It's
natural for people to resist when they are under occupation.'' But, he added,
speaking of the capture of Corporal Shalit, ''the question is this: Would the
operation have changed the outcome of what has been happening?''

Many editorials dismissed the capture as a pretext for the Israeli Army's return
to Gaza. In effect, they said, Israel did not want to negotiate with the
Palestinians and needed to prevent any agreement among Palestinian factions as
much as it needed to recover Corporal Shalit.

''The kidnapped Israeli soldier is a good pretext for the Israeli troops' next
exercise in bloodletting,'' wrote Abdel Wahab Badrakhan in the pan-Arab daily Al
Hayat. ''It seems Israel has decided to make him a victim in order to sweep into
the Palestinian territories and do whatever they want and kill and imprison
whoever they liked.'' Even in dovish Arab circles, Israeli soldiers are seen as
a legitimate military target for Palestinian fighters.

''It is a legitimate act of resistance against occupation forces,'' said Said
Okasha, director of the Israeli studies unit at Al Ahram Center for Political
and Strategic Studies in Cairo. ''These incidents allow Israel to say that it
will not negotiate as long as there are terrorist acts.''

Arab commentators placed blame all around for the wave of violence, many
singling out the United States for what they said was its silence over Israel's
attacks on civilians and infrastructure. Many also blamed Arab governments for
pressuring Hamas to drop its tough stance on Israel.

''The kidnappings of government ministers, legislative council members and heads
of municipalities will take Hamas back to square one,'' Samih Maayteh, a
columnist with the Jordanian daily Al Ghad, said in an interview. Hamas is being
forced to resort to the kind of violence it has used in the past, he insisted.
''Ultimately this should matter a lot to Israel.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); TERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (76%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (60%)

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%) Hamas

PERSON: Hassan M Fattah; Gilad (Cpl) Shalit

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (87%); CAIRO, EGYPT (74%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (98%); SAUDI ARABIA
(92%); JORDAN (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); EGYPT (74%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             506 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 4, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 950 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-7

Iran Announces Restart Of Nuclear Research
Iran announced that it planned to restart nuclear research, a move that
jeopardized an agreement with the Europeans, prompted an American threat and
complicated a Russian initiative to break the deadlock over whether Iran has the
right to enrich uranium.   A1

U.S. Airstrike Kills 9 Iraqis


American warplanes killed nine members of an Iraqi family, including women and
young children, during a strike that obliterated a home near the city of Bayji,
Iraqi officials said. American officials said the warplanes were pursuing
insurgents who had been observed placing a roadside bomb.   A7

Bush Calls for Unusual Meeting
President Bush will meet with a bipartisan group of former secretaries of state
and defense, some of whom think Mr. Bush has dangerously mishandled Iraq, in a
briefing on the war and other issues.   A7

Europe Feels Russia Gas Dispute
Russia's shutdown of natural gas lines to Ukraine has exposed a deep European
dependence on Russia, public officials and energy experts said, and should move
Europe to seek out other gas suppliers and develop alternative fuel sources.
A6

Ukraine conceded that it had withdrawn natural gas from its pipeline system that
Russia said was intended for export to Europe, but said it had a right to the
fuel under an agreement with the Central Asian nation of Turkmenistan.   A6

Girl Rescued From Rink Debris
A 5-year-old girl was rescued after lying pinned to the ice of a collapsed
skating rink in Germany for nearly eight hours, she is the only survivor of the
accident that killed 11 others.   A6

Palestinian Vote Uncertainty
Campaigning for Palestinian legislative elections got under way despite doubts
about whether the vote would actually take place as scheduled.   A3

India Fears Terror Attacks
The police in southern India announced the arrest of a suspect in the shooting
of a well-known scholar in Bangalore as anxiety increased over the possibility
of terror attacks aimed at the region's high-technology industries.   A7

Peru Seeks Fujimori Extradition
The government of Peru formally requested that Chile extradite former President
Alberto Fujimori, who governed Peru during the 1990's and is wanted in Peru on
more than a dozen counts of corruption and violating human rights.   A5

Caviar Market Ordered Closed
The global export trade in caviar, one of the world's most coveted wildlife
products, was ordered closed under the international convention that helps
nations manage threatened species, in an effort to save the sturgeon.   A3

NATIONAL   A10-13

Lobbyist Pleads Guilty To Three Felony Counts
The lobbyist Jack Abramoff pleaded guilty to three felony counts as part of a
settlement with federal prosecutors, instantly becoming the star witness in a
sweeping federal investigation into public corruption in Washington.   A1

Mr. Abramoff secretly netted more than $20 million in three years from tribes in
five states, in addition to the $43.3 million he and a partner received from
them.   A12

12 Miners Found Alive
Forty-one hours after an explosion trapped 13 men in a West Virginia coal mine,
family members and a state official said 12 of the miners had been found alive.
Earlier in the evening, the body of one miner was found.   A1

Agency Acted Alone After 9/11
The National Security Agency acted on its own authority, without a formal
directive from President Bush, to expand its domestic surveillance operations in
the weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks, according to declassified documents.   A1

Bush Renews Patriot Act Push
President Bush assembled many United States attorneys at the White House to
bolster his calls for Congress to renew the antiterrorism bill known as the USA
Patriot Act.   A10

EDUCATION

New Orleans Schools Reopen
For the first time since Hurricane Katrina inundated vast stretches of New
Orleans, hundreds of children returned to schools that survived on dry ground.
A13

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Next Council Speaker Will Be a Trailblazer
Councilwoman Christine C. Quinn, set to be elected today as the next speaker of
the New York City Council, confronts Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg with a
strong-willed opponent with firm convictions, but also one who is welcomed by
the administration as a straightforward adversary. As an openly gay woman she is
a trailblazer for other gay politicians.   A1

Harlem Choir Losing Home
The Boys Choir of Harlem is facing its most serious crisis since its founding
nearly four decades ago: eviction from its home, a public school. Its landlord,
the City Department of Education, has accused the choir of financial and
managerial improprieties.   B1

Neediest Cases   B4

EDUCATION   B7

SPORTSWEDNESDAY   D1-6

ARTS   E1-10

DINING IN   F1-10

OBITUARIES   C15

Candy Barr
An exotic dancer whose life became a Texas legend as she befriended Jack Ruby,
dated a mobster, starred in a stag film and shot her husband, she was 70.   C15

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Rate Increases May End
The Federal Reserve set the stage for ending its 18-month campaign of raising
interest rates, but officials signaled that they are entering a new period of
uncertainty at the same time as Alan Greenspan prepares to retire as Fed
chairman.   C1

Shake-Up at Dow Jones
Dow Jones & Company, which publishes The Wall Street Journal, named its chief
operating officer, Richard F. Zannino, to succeed Peter R. Kann as chief
executive. The move bypasses Mr. Kann's wife, Karen Elliot House, publisher of
The Journal, who is leaving the company.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A14-15

Editorials: Risk wins a round over politics; on the subject of leaks; Russia
shoots itself in the foot; cronyism and crises.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E6
TV Listings   E10
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NATURAL GAS (90%); NUCLEAR SCIENCE (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); NATURAL
GAS PRODUCTS (90%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); LOBBYING (88%); CORRUPTION
(85%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (85%); FELONIES (85%); GUILTY PLEAS (84%); EXPORT TRADE
(79%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (78%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (76%); US PRESIDENTS (76%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (76%); ELECTIONS (75%); ALTERNATIVE FUEL PROGRAMS (73%); NATURAL
GAS PIPELINES (73%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (72%); WAR & CONFLICT (72%); CHILDREN
(71%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); ACCIDENTAL FATALITIES (71%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (70%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); POLICE FORCES (70%);
STADIUMS & ARENAS (69%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (68%); ENERGY & UTILITY POLICY
(68%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (68%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (67%); SPORTS &
RECREATION FACILITIES & VENUES (64%); SEAFOOD (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(62%); WITNESSES (62%); THREATENED & SENSITIVE SPECIES (60%) Terms not available
from NYTimes

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%)

CITY: BANGALORE, KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%)

STATE: KARNATAKA, INDIA (79%); SOUTH INDIA (79%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE
(94%); PERU (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); INDIA (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); UKRAINE (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%);
GERMANY (79%); TURKMENISTAN (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (56%)

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             512 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 9, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Armed Men, Lacking Jobs, Fuel Gaza's 'Violent Energy'

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; CRISIS IN ISRAEL: MILITANTS; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1266 words

DATELINE: GAZA, Jan. 8


Virtually sealed off from the outside world, residents of this violence-riddled
strip of land along the Mediterranean Sea liken it to a giant, deteriorating
prison, and at its worst it feels like the film ''Escape From New York,'' where
inmates ran the show.

The economy beats feebly, filling the streets with armed men and markets and
chaotic traffic during the day and emptying them but for scattered police
patrols and idle young men at night. The Palestinian Authority, charged with
governing the territory together with the West Bank, maintains tenuous control.

''The intifada has ended, but the violent energy is still there,'' said Eyad
Sarraj, a psychiatrist and human rights activist living here.

In Gaza City on Saturday night, one man was killed during a gun battle between
armed militants and the police, while elsewhere in town another armed group
threatened to destroy the local offices of the satellite television station Al
Arabiya, which is based in Dubai. The men were angry at the station for
broadcasting a documentary that suggested that female Palestinian suicide
bombers had been put under pressure by male relatives.

Farther south that same day, gunmen cordoned off a neighborhood in Khan Yunis,
Gaza's second largest city, while members of a well-known drug-smuggling family
battled with the Palestinian police. Eleven policemen were reported wounded.

And in Rafah, along the Egyptian border, armed men from the Abu Taha family
stopped cars on Sunday, checking identification papers in hopes of catching
members of Al Masri, the rival family with which they have been waging a deadly
feud.

While the world is watching Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's fight for life and
wondering who will govern Israel in his absence, people in Gaza are far more
preoccupied with growing lawlessness and tension between armed factions since
Israel's withdrawal.

''One day, these guys woke up and had nothing to fire rockets at, but they had
no food in the kitchen, so they turned on the Palestinian Authority,'' said
Khalid Abu Hilal, known as Abu Adham, a spokesman for 10 branches of Al Aksa
Martyrs Brigades, an armed wing of the Fatah political faction. ''We are heading
toward civil war.''

That possibility, as much as the uncertainty surrounding Israel's post-Sharon
policies, has cast a pall over the whole peace effort because any progress
toward peace depends on a strong Palestinian negotiating partner.

But the narrow 28-mile swath of chewed-up roads, dusty orange groves and
crumbling concrete buildings covered with graffiti that make up the Gaza Strip,
home to 1.4 million Palestinians, is growing more chaotic by the day.

Part of the problem is Fatah's inability to control the armed men who once did
its bidding.

Take Alla al-Hams, a brooding 32-year-old man with a short beard and heavy
eyebrows. Like tens of thousands of other men in the Gaza Strip, Mr. Hams spent
five years fighting Israel, commanding as many as 200 men in carrying out mortar
and rocket attacks against Israeli forces and the fortified Israeli settlements
that they were here to protect. He says he lost 20 men, 4 of them in suicide
bomb attacks.

But ever since Israel abandoned the settlements and withdrew its troops in
September, Mr. Hams and his men have been idle. They lost the financial support
they enjoyed as opponents of the occupation and have grown increasingly
frustrated by the lack of any reward for what they regard as years of sacrifice.

''The occupation is over, and we have the right to be compensated for the last
five years,'' he said, surrounded by gunmen in the sitting room of his
father-in-law's four-story, cinder-block house in Rafah. ''The least that we
expected after Israel withdrew was a job.''

About two-thirds of the territory's work force is unemployed, entertainment is
scarce and so politics is about the only game around.

Last week, Mr. Hams was seized by masked men while walking alone at night near
his home and was taken to the Palestinian Authority's military intelligence
office in Gaza City where he was accused of kidnapping three Britons in
December.

Gunmen had taken the Britons away by car shortly after they entered Gaza from
Egypt at the Rafah border crossing. As with two other kidnappings of foreigners
last month, the abductions were apparently meant to press the Palestinian
Authority to provide work for former opponents of the occupation. All hostages
were released within a few days.

But Mr. Hams's detention set off a series of confrontations between his men and
the Palestinian Authority. His gun-toting supporters closed government offices
in Rafah and temporarily blocked the crossing into Egypt. Finally, they
bulldozed the concrete border wall, leading to an exchange of gunfire with
Egyptian border guards that left two guards dead.

The Palestinian Authority released Mr. Hams in the wake of the unrest, though
many people insist that he was responsible for the kidnappings. He denies it,
but said the actions by his men won his release. He still argues that the
Palestinian Authority should give him and his men jobs.

''During the intifada, if a fighter was killed their family was adopted by the
factions or the Palestinian Authority would support them, but now, they will die
from hunger,'' he said, cradling his young son between his knees. ''You can
expect me to do anything to guarantee a good life for my family.''

An even more volatile element in the deteriorating security situation is the
increasing desperation that Fatah and its followers feel in the face of the
political challenge by Hamas, the radical Islamic group. Fatah, the Palestinian
government's main faction, is in disarray, consumed with infighting and
corruption, while Hamas appears poised to win a significant slice of political
power in parliamentary elections this month. But few people believe that Fatah
will give up government control easily if it loses.

''They are not ready to leave their positions and the advantages they have with
the projects they've created,'' said Mr. Hilal, a spokesman for Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades. ''That is why Fatah is not interested in holding the elections or why
they won't accept the results if they do.''

One potential reason to postpone elections is Israel's threat to block voting in
East Jerusalem, which Israel claims as its territory. But Fatah officials said
late Sunday that they had received the go-ahead to campaign in the city,
contrary to an earlier decision by Israeli officials.

Campaigning does not mean residents will be allowed to vote in the city, but
Palestinians were allowed to vote there during the legislative election in 1996,
and Israel is under intense international pressure to facilitate the elections
so that they are not postponed.

Many people here believe that violence will eventually break out between Hamas's
armed wing, the Ezzedine al-Qassam Brigade, and Al Aksa Martyrs Brigades, either
because Fatah will force the elections to be postponed or because they will not
accept the results if the elections are held and they lose.

Already, one Qassam fighter was killed last week when members of the two groups
battled over Hamas' efforts to put campaign posters up on the wall of a house
belonging to a Fatah official.

Some people even suggest that Fatah officials orchestrated recent kidnappings in
order to give the Palestinian Authority an excuse to postpone the elections.

''Hamas is trying to take Fatah's place, but we won't let that happen,'' said
Mr. Hams, who, despite his frustration with the Palestinian Authority, remains a
Fatah supporter.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alla al-Hams, a militia leader, with his children and other
militants in the Gaza Strip. With the end of the occupation, the militants seek
rewards. (Photo by Khalil Hamra for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL FATAH
(89%); TERRORISM (78%); SMUGGLING (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); CITY LIFE (76%); HAMAS (75%); BOMBINGS (74%); CIVIL WAR
(74%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (73%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (72%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (70%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); SATELLITE TELEVISION (68%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (68%);
SUICIDE BOMBINGS (68%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); PEACE PROCESS (63%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (51%) Palestinians; Elections; Legislatures and Parliaments

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%) Hamas; Fatah

PERSON: Craig S Smith

STATE: MEDITERRANEAN SEA (92%); DUBAI, UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); ATLANTIC
OCEAN (73%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (98%); ISRAEL (94%); MEDITERRANEAN
(90%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%); EGYPT (79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank; Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             513 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 66 words


An article on Sunday about a federal appeals court ruling that reversed its own
decision and upheld a $54.6 million jury-trial verdict against two retired
Salvadoran generals found responsible for torture during the 1980's civil war
misstated the role of the Center for Justice and Accountability, a human rights
law group. It represented the plaintiffs -- the torture victims -- not the
defendants.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: VERDICTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JURY
TRIALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS COURTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%)
Correction Stories; Suits and Litigation; Torture

ORGANIZATION: Center for Justice and Accountability

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (93%)

REGION: El Salvador

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             516 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 12, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Lawbreaker in the Oval Office

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 31

LENGTH: 740 words


The country has set the bar so low for the performance of George W. Bush as
president that it is effectively on the ground.

No one expects very much from Mr. Bush. He's currently breaking the law by
spying on Americans in America without getting warrants, but for a lot of people
that's just George being George. Forget the complexities of the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act, or even the Fourth Amendment's safeguards against
unwarranted (pun intended) government intrusion into matters that we have a
right to keep private.

On his frequent trips home to his ranch in Texas, the president likes to ride
his bicycle. He's not studying the Constitution.

''People are changing phone numbers and phone calls, and they're moving quick,''
said Mr. Bush, as he defended his authorization of warrantless eavesdropping by
the National Security Agency on phone calls and e-mail into and out of the U.S.

As the president put it, ''If somebody from Al Qaeda is calling you, we'd like
to know why.''

Well, that's true, Mr. President. But Congress and the Constitution have spoken
as clearly as a bright sun on a cloudless afternoon about these matters: if
you're going to eavesdrop on Americans in the U.S., you'd better run out and get
a warrant.

You have to act fast? O.K., do what you have to do -- but you then have to apply
for a warrant within 72 hours. If, after three days, you can't explain to a
court -- a secret court, at that -- why you need to be spying on somebody, then
you need to stop that spying.

It has become fashionable to say that this controversy is about the always
difficult problem of balancing civil liberties and national security. But I
think the issue is starker than that. The real issue is President Bush's
apparent belief -- stoked at every opportunity by that zealot of zealots, Dick
Cheney -- that he can do just about anything he wants (mistreat prisoners, lock
people up forever without filing charges), and justify it in the name of
fighting terror.

''There's an enemy out there,'' said Mr. Bush.

That's also true. But this is not China or the old Soviet Union. The United
States should be the one place on the planet where even a devastating terror
strike by Al Qaeda is unable to shake the foundations of the government, which
is grounded in the rule of law, the separation of powers and a constitution that
guarantees the fundamental rights of the citizenry.

A group of former government officials and law professors from some of the
nation's most distinguished universities sent a letter to Congressional leaders
on Monday expressing their deep concern about the president's domestic spying
program. They said:

''Although the program's secrecy prevents us from being privy to all of its
details, the Justice Department's defense of what it concedes was secret and
warrantless electronic surveillance of persons within the United States fails to
identify any plausible legal authority for such surveillance. Accordingly, the
program appears on its face to violate existing law.''

Among those who signed the letter were William Sessions, the former F.B.I.
director, and Philip Heymann, a former deputy attorney general who is now a
professor at Harvard Law School.

The Congressional Research Service, a nonpartisan arm of Congress, also took
issue with the administration's defense of the warrantless eavesdropping. Its
analysts searched diligently but apparently in vain for a legal justification of
the spying authorized by the president. Their detailed report on the
constitutional and statutory issues raised by the program said, ''It appears
unlikely that a court would hold that Congress has expressly or impliedly
authorized the N.S.A. electronic-surveillance operations here under
discussion.''

The administration's attempt to justify the program, the analysts said, ''does
not seem to be as well grounded'' as the administration seems to believe.

President Bush and others in the administration have repeatedly argued that the
president's wartime powers trump some of the important constitutional guarantees
and civil liberties that Americans had previously taken for granted. They don't
seem to see the irony of fighting on behalf of liberty in Afghanistan and Iraq
while curtailing precious liberties here at home.

The administration should not be allowed to use war as an excuse. The U.S. is a
very special place in large part because no one, not even the president, is
above the law.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PRESIDENTS (91%); ESPIONAGE (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); LAW SCHOOLS (77%);
RULE OF LAW (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%); WIRETAPPING (76%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(60%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); DICK CHENEY (58%) Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             517 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 13, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Bugs in Our System

BYLINE: By Morgan Cloud.

Morgan Cloud is a law professor at Emory University.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 968 words

DATELINE: Atlanta


CAN we trust claims that the unregulated monitoring of telephone conversations
by the executive branch does not threaten our privacy because the president has
authorized spying only upon people linked to terrorist groups? One answer can be
found in a little-remembered domestic spying scandal that took place four
decades ago during the Johnson administration.

In the spring of 1954, Herbert Brownell, President Eisenhower's attorney
general, sent a confidential memorandum to J. Edgar Hoover, director of the
Federal Bureau of Investigation. Prompted by a recent Supreme Court decision
''denouncing the use of microphone surveillances by city police in a gambling
case,'' the memorandum authorized the F.B.I. to conduct ''microphone
surveillance'' in national security investigations. Brownell even approved
trespassing on private property to plant electronic bugs because ''for the
F.B.I. to fulfill its important intelligence function, considerations of
internal security and the national safety are paramount and, therefore, may
compel the unrestricted use of the technique.''

The claim of authority to install illegal bugs was significant. From 1928 to
1967, Supreme Court decisions permitted wiretapping of telephone lines if the
device could be installed without a trespass into a home or other private area;
since 1940, administrations could use this as one basis to tap the telephones of
''suspected spies,'' but not to bug their homes.

Brownell acknowledged that Supreme Court justices had been ''outraged'' that
police officers had installed a microphone in a bedroom in a criminal case. But
he assumed that the executive branch had expansive power to spy in national
security investigations and authorized intrusions into even this ''intimate
location'' if necessary to obtain ''important intelligence or evidence relating
to matters connected with the national security.'' Although Brownell's
memorandum was written years before the Supreme Court and Congress imposed the
current constitutional and legislative limits on electronic surveillance, it
still distinguished between national security investigations and traditional
criminal law enforcement.

In the decade after this authorization, the F.B.I. installed hundreds of
electronic bugs and a large percentage were in criminal investigations having
nothing to do with Communists, the cold war or the nation's foreign enemies. One
figured prominently in the scandal that erupted during Lyndon Johnson's
presidency.

In 1966, an influential Washington lobbyist named Fred Black asked the Supreme
Court to reverse his conviction for tax evasion. The case was potentially
embarrassing to President Johnson because Black was an associate of Bobby Baker,
a Johnson protege. Before Black's legal proceedings were resolved, Solicitor
General Thurgood Marshall advised the Supreme Court that as part of an unrelated
criminal investigation, F.B.I. agents had illegally installed microphones in
Black's hotel suite and recorded conversations between Black and his lawyers,
and that prosecutors in the tax case had unknowingly received information from
those bugs. Although Marshall argued that prosecutors had not used that
information against Black, the Supreme Court ordered the Johnson administration
to submit a report explaining the source of the F.B.I.'s authority to conduct
this electronic surveillance.

The court's order provoked intense press coverage and a high-stakes political
battle involving Johnson, Hoover and Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York. In
an effort to force the Justice Department to report that Kennedy had approved
the bugging during his tenure as attorney general, Hoover lobbied within the
Johnson administration and leaked information to the press. Kennedy, however,
explicitly denied that he had approved the illegal electronic surveillance of
Black or others.

Kennedy was vindicated when the Justice Department report submitted to the
Supreme Court by Attorney General Nicholas deB. Katzenbach named Hoover as the
person who had authorized the illegal bugging. Although Hoover claimed that
every recent administration had informally approved the practice, only the 1954
Brownell memorandum documented an explicit grant of authority for the illegal
installation of electronic bugs. The F.B.I. had turned an administration's
assertion of authority to eavesdrop on the nation's enemies into a justification
for listening to private conversations unrelated to national security.

The Supreme Court reversed Fred Black's conviction. At his second trial, Black
was acquitted. Within months of telling the Supreme Court that Hoover had
authorized the bugging, Katzenbach resigned as attorney general. He later said,
''I could no longer effectively serve as attorney general because of Mr.
Hoover's obvious resentment of me.''

But the fundamental issue was not who would win these power struggles or even
which official had authorized the illegal bugging. It was that an executive
branch agency had engaged in domestic spying free from any oversight by other
government institutions. The courts and Congress soon acted. In 1967, the
Supreme Court decided two cases imposing Fourth Amendment restrictions on
electronic surveillance. One opinion cited the Black case in a discussion of
bugging for ''prosecutorial purposes.'' In 1968, Congress enacted a statute that
established comprehensive restrictions on wiretapping and electronic
surveillance -- including a judicial warrant requirement.

This bit of history shows how, unregulated by either the courts or Congress, the
F.B.I. was free to expand a grant of authority to combat our cold war enemies
into a license to spy on ordinary citizens. With an unchecked executive branch,
we should fear that similar abuses may be occurring today, in our war on
terrorism.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORISM
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WIRETAPPING (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMINAL TRESPASS (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
SCANDALS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); APPEALS (89%); TAX
FRAUD (89%); SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (78%); 2013 MASS SURVEILLANCE SCANDAL
(78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (77%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (77%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (76%); TAX ENFORCEMENT (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (75%); TAX LAW (75%); EVIDENCE (75%); POLICE FORCES (75%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); COLD WAR (73%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (71%); CRIMINAL LAW (70%); LOBBYING (70%); TAXES & TAXATION (63%)
Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Surveillance
of Citizens by Government; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (93%) Federal Bureau of
Investigation

PERSON: Morgan (Prof) Cloud; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             518 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 16, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

For President, Final Say on a Bill Sometimes Comes After the Signing

BYLINE: By ELISABETH BUMILLER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; White House Letter; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 942 words

DATELINE: Washington


Shortly after 8 p.m. on Friday, Dec. 30, the White House sent out an e-mail
message with an innocuous ''Statement by the President'' in the subject line. As
might be expected of a seemingly routine announcement released in the dead time
before New Year's weekend, almost no one paid attention.

But last week, Washington opened its eyes. Mr. Bush's quiet little statement not
only set off fireworks at the Supreme Court nomination hearings of Judge Samuel
A. Alito Jr., but also ignited a new debate about the Bush administration's
drive to expand the powers of the president.

To start at the beginning, Congress late last year passed what became known as
the torture amendment, sponsored by Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona,
to ban cruel, inhumane or degrading treatment of prisoners in American custody.
Mr. Bush at first opposed the amendment, but gave in when it became clear that
it had overwhelming support from the two parties on Capitol Hill. The president
then invited Mr. McCain, his old political nemesis, to the Oval Office to
announce that he agreed with him and ''to make clear to the world that this
government does not torture.''

But on Dec. 30, after signing the legislation into law with no ceremony at his
Texas ranch, Mr. Bush issued an accompanying ''signing statement'' -- the 8 p.m.
e-mail message -- that Democrats and some Republicans say asserted that he could
ignore the law if he wished.

Specifically, the statement said that the administration would interpret the
amendment ''in a manner consistent with the constitutional authority of the
president to supervise the unitary executive branch and as commander in chief
and consistent with the constitutional limitations on judicial power.''

Mr. McCain issued a strong statement rejecting Mr. Bush's assertion, even as the
White House has repeatedly declined to say what the president meant. But Senator
Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, had no doubts, and told Judge
Alito at the hearings that Mr. Bush had in essence stated that ''whatever the
law of the land might be, whatever Congress might have written, the executive
branch has the right to authorize torture without fear of judicial review.''

Judge Alito, Mr. Kennedy pointed out, had in 1986, as a lawyer in the Reagan
administration Justice Department, helped Edwin Meese III, then attorney
general, develop a theory that signing statements could be used to advance the
president's interpretation of legislation. Before then, the statements had
largely been triumphal proclamations. Mr. Alito wrote at the time that the new
signing statements would ''increase the power of the executive to shape the
law'' even as they created resentment in Congress.

At his hearings, Judge Alito distanced himself from the memorandum, calling it
the work of a government employee, and sidestepped questions about his current
view on the statements. At this point, their legality is largely untested.

But one thing is clear: Mr. Bush has issued more than 100 of them, which
scholars believe might be more than any other president. (Signing statements
have been around since at least the administration of Andrew Jackson.) More
significant, scholars say, Mr. Bush has greatly expanded the scope and character
of the signing statement, even from the time of the Reagan administration.

''The whole history of American government is one of trying to figure out what
executive power actually is, so here is the president saying, 'Well, it's my job
to tell you what that power is,' '' said Andrew Rudalevige, an associate
professor of political science at Dickinson College in Pennsylvania and the
author of ''The New Imperial Presidency: Renewing Presidential Power After
Watergate.''

Scholars say that many of Mr. Bush's most significant signing statements have
been attached to national security and intelligence legislation and that he
frequently uses them to assert that the administration regards requirements to
turn over information as purely advisory.

For example, in signing the legislation that created the independent commission
that investigated the Sept. 11 attacks, Mr. Bush said that while the law
established ''new requirements for the executive branch to disclose sensitive
information,'' he would interpret the law ''in a manner consistent with the
president's constitutional authority to withhold information'' for national
security.

Members of the Sept. 11 commission soon learned they would have a difficult time
obtaining information from the White House.

''Now, we can't prove that the reason the administration held back the
information was because of the signing statement, but it announced its
intentions quite clearly,'' said Phillip J. Cooper, a professor of public
administration in the Mark O. Hatfield School of Government at Portland State
University in Oregon and the author of ''By Order of the President: The Use and
Abuse of Executive Direct Action.''

Mr. Bush also used a signing statement in November 2003 to assert that an
inspector general created for oversight of the Coalition Provisional Authority,
the American administration that governed Iraq, should ''refrain'' from audits
or investigations into matters of intelligence or counterintelligence.

In December 2004, Mr. Bush used a signing statement to say that in the act that
created the post of national intelligence director, he considered provisions
setting forth how -- and from whom -- he received intelligence information to be
''advisory.''

Or as Mr. Rudalevige put it, ''The president is basically saying that those
structural changes are nice, but I don't have to listen to anybody in
particular.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush shook Senator John McCain's hand over a torture
ban, but when Mr. Bush signed the bill into law, he also issued a statement
asserting the administration's ability to interpret the law as it saw fit.
(Photo by Doug Mills/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATION (90%); TORTURE (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); LAWYERS (75%); SUPREME
COURTS (75%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (75%); TERRORISM (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);
CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (66%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (65%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (56%) Terrorism;
Torture  ; Law and Legislation; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

PERSON: JOHN MCCAIN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); SAMUEL ALITO (79%); TED KENNEDY
(58%) Elisabeth Bumiller; George W (Pres) Bush; John S (Sen) Mccain

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             522 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 20, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; NEWS SUMMARY; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 771 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Bin Laden Warns U.S., Offers Truce with No Terms
Breaking more than a year's silence, Osama bin Laden warned Americans in an
audiotape that Al Qaeda was planning more attacks on the United States but he
offered a ''long truce'' on undefined terms.   A1

Some Iraq Vote Fraud Is Found


A panel of experts that was asked to investigate allegations of fraud in Iraq's
December elections released a positive report, concluding that some vote-rigging
had been documented but declining to endorse calls for new elections.   A10

In Italy's first formal announcement of plans for its 3,000 troops in Iraq, the
defense minister said they would all be withdrawn by the year's end.   A10

Debate Over Iran Sanctions
Western governments are debating how to punish Iran for its nuclear activities,
without causing hardship or more anti-Western resentment in the Iranian public,
Bush administration and European officials said.   A8

Danger in New Malaria Drug
Warning that misuse of the most promising new malaria drug could create an
incurable strain of the disease, the new chief of the World Health
Organization's malaria program demanded that 18 pharmaceutical companies stop
selling some forms of the drug.   A11

Protest Violence in Ivory Coast
Youth leaders urged their supporters to abandon their deadly protests after
thousands of young people defied a request from the president of Ivory Coast to
end days of rioting and violence.   A8

NATIONAL   A12-15

Presidential Power Cited In Defense of U.S. Spying
The Bush administration offered its fullest defense of the National Security
Agency's domestic eavesdropping program, saying authorization from Congress to
deter future terrorist attacks ''places the president at the zenith of his
powers in authorizing the N.S.A. activities.''   A1

Taliban Soldier's Father Speaks
After years of silence, the father of John Walker Lindh, an American-born
Taliban soldier, called on President Bush to grant clemency to his son, who he
said had been wrongly maligned as a traitor.   A14

Immigration Policy Protested
Dozens of lawyers around the country joined forces to protest the Department of
Homeland Security's decision to continue deporting illegal immigrants to Haiti,
an island nation plagued by instability, violence and human rights violations.
A12

Fertility Clinic Rules Challenged
Largely unregulated, fertility clinics have long operated under the assumption
that preserving anonymity is best for all parties, but as the stigma of
infertility fades both donors and recipients are attacking the secrecy of the
process.   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Spacecraft Headed to Pluto
NASA launched the first space mission to Pluto as a powerful rocket hurled the
New Horizons spacecraft on a nine-year, three-billion-mile journey to the edge
of the solar system.   A13

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Brooklyn Welfare Bureau Has History of Troubles
City officials have known that the child welfare offices in the
Bedford-Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn were troubled for at least a decade.
Studies done in 1996 produced evidence that the offices were full of poor
managers, and were seen as a kind of dumping ground for failed caseworkers.   B1


Cesar Rodriguez, the stepfather of Nixzmary Brown, who was found beaten to death
in her family's Bedford-Stuyvesant home, in an hourlong interview stopped short
of admitting that he beat his stepdaughter to death.   B1

Klein Reveals More Reforms
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein announced that he would undertake another
sweeping reorganization of the school system bureaucracy.   B4

Neediest Cases   B7

WEEKEND   E1-32; E33-42

ESCAPES   F1-14

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-6

OBITUARIES   B8

Wilson Pickett
The soul music pioneer whose shift from singing gospel music to rhythm and blues
and soul led to a string of 1960's classics, including ''Mustang Sally,'' ''Land
of 1,000 Dances'' and ''In the Midnight Hour,'' he was 64.   B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Google Records Sought
The Justice Department has asked a federal judge to make Google turn over
records on millions of its users' search queries as part of an effort to uphold
the Child Online Protection Act, a 1998 law aimed at fighting child pornography.
A1

Disney and Pixar in Talks
The Walt Disney Company and Pixar Animation Studios are said to be in merger
talks that could give Stephen P. Jobs a pivotal role in shaping the convergence
of new media and old at Disney.   A1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Guilty until proven innocent; the grinding halt to an era; looking
at Ukraine more clearly; Dorothy Samuels on judges who love junkets.

Columns: Paul Krugman, Thomas L. Friedman.

CrosswordE25
TV ListingsE31
WeatherD7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); MALARIA (90%); ELECTION FRAUD (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (87%); SPACE EXPLORATION (85%); PLANETS & ASTEROIDS
(83%); IMMIGRATION (79%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION
(76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS
(74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (73%); PUBLIC
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (73%); SCIENCE NEWS (73%); ANTI-INFECTIVES (73%); PUBLIC
POLICY (73%); SPACE & AERONAUTICS AGENCIES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (68%);
PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (68%); IMMIGRATION LAW (68%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (66%); RIOTS (65%); REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CLINICS (64%); SPACECRAFT
(62%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (60%); DEPORTATION (60%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION
MFG (51%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (51%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (55%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

STATE: PLUTO (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%); COTE D'IVOIRE (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (92%); HAITI (79%); EUROPE (79%); ITALY (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Held in 9/11 Net, Muslims Return To Accuse U.S.

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1846 words


Hundreds of noncitizens were swept up on visa violations in the weeks after
9/11, held for months in a much-criticized federal detention center in Brooklyn
as ''persons of interest'' to terror investigators, and then deported. This
week, one of them is back in New York and another is due today -- the first to
return to the United States.

They are no longer the accused but the accusers, among six former detainees who
are coming back to give depositions in their federal lawsuits against top
government officials and detention guards, at a time when the constitutionality
of part of the government's counterterrorism offensive is under new scrutiny.

As in the cases of all the Muslim immigrants rounded up in the New York area
after the terror attacks, the six were never accused of a crime related to 9/11;
officials eventually cleared all of them of links to terrorism. A report by the
inspector general of the Justice Department found systemic problems with
immigrant detentions and widespread abuse at the federal detention center where
the six had been held; several guards have since been disciplined.

But as the six return to the city -- four of them from Egypt, one from Pakistan,
one from London -- the conditions imposed by the United States government
include the requirement that they be in the constant custody of federal
marshals.

They are barred from calling anyone during their weeklong stays at an
undisclosed New York hotel, where 12 days of closed depositions are to begin
today. They can expect hours of questioning by lawyers representing at least 31
defendants in the lawsuits, including John Ashcroft, the former attorney
general, and Robert S. Mueller III, the director of the F.B.I.

The first returning detainees, Yasser and Hany Ibrahim, who are brothers, say
that putting themselves back in the hands of the government they are suing is an
act of faith in America. In recent telephone interviews from Alexandria, Egypt,
the two described themselves as frightened but resolute in pressing a 2002
class-action lawsuit charging that they were abused and deprived of due process
because of their religion or national origin.

''I'm seeking justice,'' said Yasser, 33, who had a Web site design business in
Brooklyn before he and Hany, 29, a deli worker, were delivered in shackles to
the Metropolitan Detention Center in Brooklyn 19 days after 9/11. ''It's from
the same system that did us injustice before. But I have faith in this system. I
know what happened before was a mistake.''

Charles S. Miller, a spokesman for the Justice Department, said officials would
not comment on any aspect of the case, including the conditions of the men's
return to the city and their allegations. But in court papers, the defendants
deny wrongdoing, and department lawyers argue in part that the Sept. 11 attacks
created ''special factors'' -- including the need to detect and deter future
terrorist attacks -- that outweigh the plaintiffs' right to sue for damages for
any constitutional violations.

The detainees' lawyers say that what happened at the Brooklyn detention center
can be recognized four years later as the template for many of the
counterterrorism measures now being fiercely challenged.

''The post-9/11 domestic immigration sweeps were the first example of the Bush
administration's willingness to ignore the law and hold people outside the
judicial system,'' said Rachel Meeropol, a lawyer for the Center for
Constitutional Rights, which represents the Ibrahim brothers. ''The kind of
torture, interrogation and arbitrary detention that we now associate with
Guantanamo and secret C.I.A. facilities really started right here, in
Brooklyn.''

Richard Peter Caro, a lawyer for Stuart Pray, the lieutenant who oversaw the
detainees' arrival at the detention center, said yesterday: ''We're glad that
they're coming in to be deposed so we can really get at the facts and finally
see what the evidence shows. I'm confident that my client will be found to have
committed no wrongdoing at all.''

Last week, the center filed a class-action suit against President Bush and other
administration officials over the National Security Agency's domestic
eavesdropping without warrants. Ms. Meeropol is one of the plaintiffs,
contending that her communications with clients like the Ibrahims may have been
monitored illegally. The government says the surveillance program is a legal and
valuable tool in the war on terror.

Illegal recording of lawyer-client conversations was one of the abuses
documented at the Brooklyn detention center in a scathing 2003 report by the
Justice Department's inspector general. The report also found a pattern of
physical abuse, some of it caught on prison videotape, including beatings and
sexual humiliations like those described by the Ibrahim brothers or other former
detainees. The report said it was Mr. Ashcroft's policy to hold detainees on any
legal pretext until the F.B.I. cleared them, even though such clearances took
months and many detainees were immigrants picked up by chance.

At the time, Mr. Ashcroft said he made ''no apologies'' for finding every legal
way possible to protect the American public. Nonetheless, officials pledged to
work on getting kinks out of the system, and said abuses would be punished.

Critics charge that the authority that Mr. Ashcroft asserted after 9/11 -- to
detain any noncitizen considered a ''person of interest'' secretly and
indefinitely -- is unconstitutional. Government officials argue that secrecy is
needed to keep terrorists in the dark.

Mr. Ashcroft has sought to have the two lawsuits brought by the detainees
dismissed. But in a decision appealed by the government, a federal judge in
Brooklyn ruled in September that he and other defendants would have to answer
questions, at a later deposition, in one of the suits: a 2004 complaint by
another two of the six returning detainees.

Those two men, in their late 30's, are Ehab Elmaghraby, an Egyptian immigrant
who ran a restaurant near Times Square, and Javaid Iqbal, a Pakistani immigrant
whose Long Island customers knew him as ''the cable guy.''

''I am not afraid,'' Mr. Iqbal wrote last week in an e-mail message about his
return. ''I am also sure that justice will be served because peoples of U.S.A.
are justice-loving people regardless of race and religion.''

The Ibrahim brothers are more fearful. They say that their parents begged them
not to return to the country where they were held in maximum security without
charges for eight months and, the brothers charge, beaten and tormented by
guards. ''Part of my motivation is to make sure that what happened to us doesn't
happen to more people in the future,'' said Yasser, who was due to arrive in New
York today, joining his brother, who came on Friday.

Both spoke with nostalgia of the three or four years they lived in New York, on
and off, before 9/11. When they were not working, they said, they hung out
together in Greenwich Village, browsed electronics stores near Times Square and
took friends on the rides at Coney Island. Hany proudly recalled how he worked
his way up from stock boy to grill man and then manager of a deli in Ocean
Parkway, Brooklyn. ''The best I lived in my life was in New York,'' he said.

Right after the World Trade Center attack, they said, their parents urged them
to come home. ''We assured them,'' Yasser recalled: '' 'This is the United
States. They don't arrest people for no charges. We didn't do anything, so
nothing's going to happen to us.' ''

But at 2 p.m. on Sept. 30, 2001, the lawsuit says, a dozen terrorism
investigators from the F.B.I., the police and immigration services knocked at
the door of the Ocean Parkway apartment that the brothers shared with several
Egyptian and Moroccan friends. After questioning, the investigators took away
Yasser, Hany and another man, all of whose tourist visas had expired.

Why investigators showed up is unclear, said their lawyer, Ms. Meeropol. But she
noted that some interrogations were prompted by anonymous tips about
''suspicious-looking'' foreign men. Federal officials have contended that at a
time when a second terror attack seemed imminent, all tips had to be checked. As
a practical matter, once the brothers were labeled ''of interest'' to
investigators, they were destined for the maximum-security unit of the
Metropolitan Detention Center.

Physical abuse, the lawsuit says, began the moment they arrived, chained and
shackled. As Yasser described it, guards supervised by Lieutenant Pray slammed
his brother face-first into a wall where an American flag T-shirt had been
taped, then did the same to him.

Pain became part of the brothers' daily routine, the lawsuit charges. Escort
teams cursing them as Muslims and terrorists slammed them into every available
wall when they were taken from their cells, twisted their wrists and fingers,
and stepped on their leg chains so that they fell, their ankles bruised and
bloody, according to the suit.

But worse than physical or verbal abuse, Yasser said, was ''the feeling that we
are being hidden from the outside world, and nobody knows in the outside world
that we are arrested and in this place.'' Hany, who says he had a nervous
breakdown when he returned to Egypt, recalled that guards and lieutenants
terrified him by saying, ''You're going to stay here the rest of your life.''

At a closed immigration hearing on Nov. 20, three weeks after their arrest, the
brothers agreed to immediate deportation. By Dec. 7, the lawsuit says, F.B.I.
memos stated that clearance checks on the Ibrahims had shown no links to
terrorism. But they were held six more months -- Hany until May 29, 2002, and
Yasser until June 6.

The suit asks the court to declare that all the detentions were unjustified and
illegal, to award compensatory and punitive damages, and to order the government
to return personal property it confiscated.

To prevent unnecessary detentions and abuses of noncitizens in the event of a
new national emergency, the Justice Department's inspector general, Glenn A.
Fine, in 2003 recommended changes in counterterrorism policy as well as
disciplinary action against at least 10 guards and supervisors. In his last
report to Congress, in August 2005, Mr. Fine said that many of his
recommendations had been acted upon but that formal policy changes were still
being negotiated.

The Federal Bureau of Prisons has fired two detention officers, suspended two
for 30 days and demoted one in connection with the Brooklyn inquiry, said Traci
Billingsley, a bureau spokeswoman.

The Ibrahim brothers say that when they finally reached home, they found that
the presumption of guilt had followed them into an Egyptian secret service
dossier that made them unemployable. Yasser, now married with a 2-year-old son,
said he and Hany were eking out a living in a small jewelry business.

''It's going to be very difficult for me to go back for just a week and not to
be able to see the places that I loved before,'' he said of his return.
''America's the land of the free.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hany Ibrahim, left, and his brother Yasser last week in
Alexandria, Egypt, where they were deported in 2002. (Photo by Shawn Baldwin for
The New York Times)(pg. B4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (93%); RELIGION (91%); IMMIGRATION (91%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION
CENTERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); LAWYERS (88%); DUE PROCESS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
HIJACKING (77%); CLASS ACTIONS (75%); REFUGEES (75%); MARSHALS (75%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (72%); INTERVIEWS (68%) Terrorism; Immigration
and Refugees; Islam; Deportation; Suits and Litigation; Airlines and Airplanes;
Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC); Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(55%) Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (73%) Nina Bernstein; Robert S III (Dir) Mueller; John
Ashcroft

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (95%); ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT (90%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EGYPT (94%); PAKISTAN (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: New York City; Egypt; Pakistan; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             531 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2006 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

New Poll Finds Mixed Support For Wiretaps

BYLINE: By ADAM NAGOURNEY and JANET ELDER; Marjorie Connelly, Marina Stefan and
Megan Thee contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1734 words


Americans are willing to tolerate eavesdropping without warrants to fight
terrorism, but are concerned that the aggressive antiterrorism programs
championed by the Bush administration are encroaching on civil liberties,
according to the latest New York Times/CBS News poll.

In a sign that public opinion about the trade-offs between national security and
individual rights is nuanced and remains highly unresolved, responses to
questions about the administration's eavesdropping program varied significantly
depending on how the questions were worded, underlining the importance of the
effort by the White House this week to define the issue on its terms.

The poll, conducted as President Bush defended his surveillance program in the
face of criticism from Democrats and some Republicans that it is illegal, found
that Americans were willing to give the administration some latitude for its
surveillance program if they believed it was intended to protect them.
Fifty-three percent of the respondents said they supported eavesdropping without
warrants ''in order to reduce the threat of terrorism.''

The results suggest that Americans' view of the program depends in large part on
whether they perceive it as a bulwark in the fight against terrorism, as Mr.
Bush has sought to cast it, or as an unnecessary and unwarranted infringement on
civil liberties, as critics have said.

In one striking finding, respondents overwhelmingly supported e-mail and
telephone monitoring directed at ''Americans that the government is suspicious
of;'' they overwhelmingly opposed the same kind of surveillance if it was aimed
at ''ordinary Americans.''

Mr. Bush, at a White House press conference yesterday, twice used the phrase
''terrorist surveillance program'' to describe an operation in which the
administration has eavesdropped on telephone calls and other communications like
e-mail that it says could involve operatives of Al Qaeda overseas talking to
Americans. Critics say the administration could conduct such surveillance while
still getting prior court approval, as spelled out in a 1978 law intended to
guard against governmental abuses.

The findings came in a poll conducted as Mr. Bush prepares to deliver his fifth
State of the Union address on Tuesday. It found that Mr. Bush will face a nation
that has grown sour on Washington and skeptical that he will be able to achieve
significant progress in health care, the economy, the Iraq war and the cost of
prescription drugs for older patients before he leaves office in three years.

The poll also signaled concern for Republicans as they prepare to defend their
control of the House and the Senate in midterm elections this November.
Investigations into Congressional corruption are taking a toll as the elections
approach: 61 percent of Americans now hold an unfavorable view of Congress, the
highest in 10 years.

This finding holds particular peril for Republicans as the party that has been
in charge. More than half of the respondents said they believed that most
members of Congress would exchange votes for money or favors.

Republicans were seen as more likely to be unduly influenced by lobbyists. And
the Republican Party is now viewed unfavorably by 51 percent of the nation, its
worst rating since Mr. Bush took office. By contrast, 53 percent said they held
a favorable view of Democrats.

The telephone poll was conducted with 1,229 adults, starting Friday and ending
Wednesday. Its margin of sampling error was plus or minus three percentage
points.

The poll found that Americans were to a large extent perplexed as they weighed
conflicting forces: the need presented by Mr. Bush to take extraordinary action
to fight terrorism, and a historical aversion to an overly intrusive government.

The poll found that 53 percent of Americans approved of Mr. Bush's authorizing
eavesdropping without prior court approval ''in order to reduce the threat of
terrorism''; 46 percent disapproved. When the question was asked stripped of any
mention of terrorism, 46 percent of those respondents approved, and 50 percent
said they disapproved.

At the same time, 64 percent said they were very or somewhat concerned about
losing civil liberties as a result of antiterrorism measures put in place by Mr.
Bush since the attacks of Sept. 11. And respondents were more likely to be
concerned that the government would enact strong antiterrorism laws that
excessively restrict civil liberties than they were that the government would
fail to enact antiterrorism laws.

The poll was conducted just as the White House commenced an elaborate campaign
to defend the surveillance program, and thus may have been too early to offer a
full measure of that campaign's effectiveness. There were no measurable changes
in the poll findings from one day to the next.

The findings, and follow-up interviews with some participants, clearly suggest
that Mr. Bush has an opportunity to make the dispute over the program play to
his political advantage. He has been pointing to the threat of another terrorist
attack to justify the eavesdropping program and is trying, for the third
election in a row, to suggest that he and his party are more aggressive about
protecting the nation than are Democrats.

''Say they're targeting someone in Al Qaeda outside the country, and that person
then calls someone in the United States about a plot or something really bad: I
don't have a problem with that phone being monitored,'' Debbie Viebranz, 51, a
Republican from Ohio, said in a follow-up interview. ''But I don't think they
should do it for no reason.''

Donnis Wells, 69, a Republican from Florence, Miss., said: ''I don't think civil
liberties are the more important thing we need to handle right now. I think we
need to protect our people.''

Still, interviews reflected clear apprehension about the program. ''If there is
a warrant and done by the courts, I would agree,'' said Robert Ray, 54, an
independent from Kentucky. ''But they're trying to do it without using the
courts. I just don't trust them.''

In the poll, 70 percent of respondents said they would not be willing to support
governmental monitoring of the communications of ''ordinary Americans''; 68
percent said they would be willing to support such monitoring of ''Americans the
government is suspicious of.''

Beyond surveillance, the poll found that Americans hold unfavorable views of the
president and the Republican-controlled Congress as Mr. Bush prepares to give
his State of the Union speech. Americans, while declaring themselves generally
optimistic about the next three years under Mr. Bush, do not expect him to
accomplish very much in that time.

When Mr. Bush leaves office, respondents said, the deficit will be larger than
it is today, the elderly will be being paying more for prescription drugs, and
the economy and the health care system will be the same as today, or worse.

Mr. Bush is viewed favorably by 42 percent of the respondents, statistically the
same as in the last Times/CBS News poll, in early December, a lackluster rating
that could hamper his ability to rally public opinion behind his agenda and push
legislation through a divided Congress. Beyond that, nearly two-thirds of the
country thinks the nation is on the wrong track, a level that has historically
proved to be a matter of concern for a party in power.

A majority said they were dissatisfied with the way Mr. Bush was managing the
economy and the war in Iraq. Public approval for his handling of the campaign
against terrorism, once one of his greatest political strengths, has rebounded
somewhat from last fall, but remains well belowwhere it was for the first two
years after the Sept. 11 attacks.

Most strikingly, the poll found abundant evidence of public unhappiness with
Congress. While it is risky to draw conclusions about Congressional elections
from national measurements of discontent -- for example, more than half of all
Americans said they were satisfied with the job their member of Congress was
doing -- the findings underscored the tough electoral environment that has led
some analysts to predict significant Republican losses this fall.

The corruption investigations appear to account for a lot of the
dissatisfaction. Nearly 80 percent of respondents said that the kind of
influence-peddling revelations that have emerged in the investigation of the
lobbyist Jack Abramoff reflected the ''way things work in Congress'' and were
not isolated incidents. More than 50 percent said most members of Congress
''accept bribes or gifts that affect their votes.''

''It seems like the integrity of Congress members in the last few years has just
gone to pot,'' said Donald Pertuis, 54, an independent voter from Hot Springs,
Ark. Mr. Pertuis added: ''In the last 20 years, greed has accelerated. People
expect more, I suppose, and want to work less.''

How the Poll Was Conducted

  The latest New York Times/CBS News poll is based on telephone interviews
conducted Jan. 20 through Jan. 25 with 1,229 adults throughout the United
States.

The sample of telephone exchanges called was randomly selected by a computer
from a complete list of more than 42,000 active residential exchanges across the
country. Within each exchange, random digits were added to form a complete
telephone number, thus permitting access to listed and unlisted numbers alike.

Within each household, one adult was designated by a random procedure to be the
respondent for the survey.

The results have been weighted to take account of household size and number of
telephone lines into the residence and to adjust for variation in the sample
relating to geographic region, sex, race, marital status, age and education.

In theory, in 19 cases out of 20, overall results based on such samples will
differ by no more than three percentage points in either direction from what
would have been obtained by seeking out all American adults. For smaller
subgroups, the margin of sampling error is larger.

In addition to sampling error, the practical difficulties of conducting any
survey of public opinion may introduce other sources of error into the poll.
Variation in the wording and order of questions, for example, may lead to
somewhat different results.

Dr. Michael R. Kagay of Princeton, N. J., assisted The Times in its polling
analysis.

Complete questions and results are available at nytimes.com/polls.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 28, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article yesterday describing the results of the most
recent New York Times/CBS News poll referred imprecisely to Americans' favorable
opinions of President Bush. The 42 percent of respondents who said they viewed
him favorably were referring specifically to how he handles his job. On another
question -- about how he is liked over all -- the result was 37 percent
favorable.

A front-page article yesterday describing the results of the most recent New
York Times/CBS News poll referred imprecisely to Americans' favorable opinions
of President Bush. The 42 percent of respondents who said they viewed him
favorably were referring specifically to how he handles his job. On another
question -- about how he is liked over all -- the result was 37 percent
favorable.

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Bush at his news conference yesterday. The latest poll
shows that public opinion on Mr. Bush's surveillance program is still
unresolved. (Photo by David Scull for The New York Times)(pg. A21)ChartIn order
to reduce the threat of terrorism, would you be willing to allow government
agencies to monitor the telephone calls and e-mail of . . .. . . ordinary
Americans on a regular basis?: WILLING 28%. . . Americans that the government is
suspicious of?: WILLING 68%The complete polling sample was split
 each half was asked one question.(Source by The New York Times/CBS News
Poll)(pg. A1)ChartPublic Sentiment on EavesdroppingHow concerned are you about
losing some of your civil liberties as a result of the measures enacted by the
Bush Administration to fight terrorism?Very: 34%Not very: 17Not at all: 18No
opinion: 1Which concerns you more -- that the government will fail to enact
strong anti-terrorism laws or that the government will enact new anti-terrorism
laws which will excessively restrict the average person's civil liberties?Fail
to enact: 40%Enact laws that restrict civil liberties: 48Neither: 2No opinion:
8Both: 2After 9/11, President Bush authorized government wiretaps on some phone
calls in the U.S. without getting court warrants, saying this was necessary to
reduce the threat of terrorism. Do you approve or disapprove of this?Approve:
53Disapprove: 46No opinion: 1After 9/11, George W. Bush authorized government
wiretaps on some phone calls in the U.S. without getting court warrants. Do you
approve or disapprove of this?Approve: 46Disapprove: 50No opinion: 3Public
Expectations of the Second TermBy the end of George W. Bush's second term in
office . . .the economy will be better: 22Worse: 28About the same: 49No opinion:
1the health care system in this country will be better: 9Worse: 40About the
same: 50No opinion: 1seniors will pay more for their prescription drugs than
they do today: 51Less: 11Same: 35No opinion: 4the federal budget deficit will be
bigger than it is now: 70Smaller: 6Same: 22No opinion: 3the office of the
presidency will be more powerful: 21Less powerful: 22About the same: 55No
opinion: 3most abortions will be legal: 47Against the law: 41No opinion:
12Public Perceptions of CongressDo you approve or disapprove of the way Congress
is handling its job?Approve: 29Disapprove: 61No opinion: 11Do you think that
recent reports that lobbyists may have bribed members of Congress are isolated
incidents or is this the way things work in Congress?Isolated incidents: 16Way
things work: 77No opinion: 7Who is more likely to accept bribes or gifts that
affect their votes -- Republicans or Democrats in Congress?Republicans:
28Democrats: 13Both equal: 36Neither: 3No opinion: 20Totals may not add to 100
because of rounding.Based on nationwide telephone interviews conducted by The
New York Times and CBS News January 20-25 with 1,229 adults.(pg. A21)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: POLLS & SURVEYS (93%); TERRORISM (92%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); WIRETAPPING (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); ELECTIONS (89%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (79%); HEALTH CARE (78%); WAR ON TERROR (78%); IRAQ WAR (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); MIDTERM
ELECTIONS (75%); CORRUPTION (74%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); AL-QAEDA (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(72%); HEALTH CARE COSTS (64%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (64%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (50%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (50%) Terrorism; New York Times/cbs News
Poll; Public Opinion; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Electronic Mail; Freedom and Human
Rights; Terrorism; Terrorism

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (94%) Adam Nagourney; Janet Elder; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             534 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why We Listen

BYLINE: By Philip Bobbitt.

Philip Bobbitt, a professor at the University of Texas Law School and a former
National Security Council senior director, is the author of the forthcoming
''Wars Against Terror.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: London


IN the debate over whether the National Security Agency's eavesdropping violated
the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act, we must not lose sight of the fact
that the world we entered on 9/11 will require rewriting that statute and other
laws. The tiresome pas de deux between rigid civil libertarians in denial of
reality and an overaggressive executive branch seemingly heedless of the law,
while comforting to partisans of both groups, is not in the national interest.

Owing to the globalization of telecommunications, many telephone calls between
parties in foreign countries or with an American at one end are routed through
American networks. By analyzing this traffic, the National Security Agency has
been gathering clues to possible terrorist activities.

The agency was authorized by the president, we are told, to intercept messages
if one of its supervisors believed there was a link to Al Qaeda -- rather than
requiring the usual statutory showing before a special court of probable
involvement in terrorist activity when one party to the exchange is a ''U.S.
person'' (a person in America or at an American corporation abroad). This would
appear contrary to the provisions of the surveillance act.

The N.S.A. is our most important intelligence agency. Typically, about 60
percent of the president's daily brief comes from its intercepts. But the agency
was created during the cold war to collect against enemy countries, and that
war, indeed that kind of war, has now been superseded. Signals intelligence in
the 20th century meant intercepting analog signals along dedicated voice
channels, connecting two discrete and known target points. In the 21st century,
communications are mostly digital, carry billions of bits of data, are
dynamically routed in packets to be reassembled and are globally networked.

Consider that on Sept. 10, 2001, the N.S.A. intercepted two messages: ''The
match begins tomorrow'' and ''Tomorrow is zero hour.'' These were not picked up
through surveillance of suspected individuals but from random monitoring of pay
phones in areas of Afghanistan where Al Qaeda was active. Not surprisingly,
these messages were not translated or disseminated until Sept. 12th.

Nor was the fact that we knew the identities of two of the terrorists sufficient
to thwart the attack the next day. But had we at the time cross-referenced
credit card accounts, frequent-flyer programs and a cellphone number shared by
those two men, data mining might easily have picked up on the 17 other men
linked to them and flying on the same day at the same time on four flights. Such
intelligence collection would not have been based on probable cause, and yet the
presence of the hijackers in the country would have qualified them as ''U.S.
persons.''

Clearly, ''random'' information is likely to be useless when it is not linked to
surveillance focused on an individual, while that focused intelligence is much
less useful when it is not linked to data mining collected in broad surveillance
of ''U.S. persons.''

If we agree that the National Security Agency now needs to trace and analyze
large volumes of phone and Internet traffic looking for particular patterns and
to cross-reference leads, then it seems clear that traditional, specific
warrants may sometimes not be appropriate.

Furthermore, not only are there presumably conspirators within the United
States, but conversations between two foreign persons could be routed, via the
Internet, through American switches to give the appearance of a
domestic-to-international connection. It is difficult to imagine getting
warrants now in such situations, because the standard of probable cause to
conclude that the target is a terrorist cannot be met.

Indeed, trying to determine just who qualifies as a terrorist agent is the point
of the unfocused cross-hatching collection work of the security agency. In such
a world, we will need new techniques to protect the identities and privacy of
innocent people here and abroad.

This is not to play down the damage done to our war aims by the executive
branch's repeated appearance of an indifference to law. A president does have an
obligation to assess the constitutionality of statutes, but when he secretly
decides a measure is unconstitutional and neglects to say so (much less why), he
undermines the very system of public consent for which we are fighting. Having
said that, we also must not be so absorbed by questions of statutory
construction that we ignore the revolutionary political and technological events
that are transforming the world in which our laws must function.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Josh Cochran)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); ESPIONAGE (91%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (88%); GLOBALIZATION
(78%); WIRETAPPING (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); COLD WAR (78%); COMPUTER & INTERNET
LAW (78%); ENTERPRISE GLOBALIZATION (76%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (75%);
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (75%); DATA MINING (75%); AL-QAEDA (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);
HIJACKING (74%); CREDIT CARDS (71%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (70%);
FREQUENT FLYER PLANS (69%); PROBABLE CAUSE (67%) Terrorism; Surveillance of
Citizens by Government; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Freedom and Human Rights; Computers and the Internet; Law and Legislation;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (94%); AL-QAEDA (56%) National Security
Agency

PERSON: Philip (Prof) Bobbitt; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             543 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 6, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Do You Know What They Know?

BYLINE: By Bob Herbert

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 23

LENGTH: 722 words


Has the National Security Agency referred your name to the F.B.I. as a result of
information it picked up from its illegal domestic eavesdropping program?

You don't know, do you? And the Bush administration, which has linked its mania
for secrecy with its fetish for collecting data on Americans, is not saying.

The big problem related to this program, as far as the administration is
concerned, is not its metastasizing threat to constitutional government, the
rule of law, the privacy of innocent Americans, the venerable system of checks
and balances, and the American way of life as we've known it.

No, the big problem for Bush & Co. -- the thing that makes the president and his
apologists apoplectic -- is the mere fact that this domestic spying program has
come to light. Investigations are under way to determine who might have leaked
information about the supersecret program to The New York Times, which disclosed
its existence, and others.

This is not a time for Congress or the media to bow before the intimidation
tactics of a bullying administration. This is a time to heed the words of a
federal judge named Damon Keith, who reminded us back in 2002 that ''democracies
die behind closed doors.''

The attorney general, Alberto Gonzales, is scheduled to testify about the N.S.A.
program today at a public hearing of the Senate Judiciary Committee.

Here are some of the questions that need to be asked:

Who is being spied upon, and why?

How many Americans here in the United States -- or others who were lawfully in
the country -- have had their phone conversations or e-mails intercepted without
a warrant?

Who determines what calls or e-mails are to be monitored in the U.S. without
warrants, and what are their guidelines?

How many of those who were spied upon were found to have been involved in
terror-related activities? How many were referred to the F.B.I. or other
agencies for further investigation?

Of those who were referred, how many were cleared of wrongdoing?

What kind of information is being collected about people who are spied upon
without warrants but are not referred to law enforcement agencies? How is that
data being used, and how is it stored?

Is the government collecting information about the political views of the people
who are being spied upon? With whom is that information being shared?

What has been the nature and the extent of the objections from people inside the
government to the warrantless spying?

Until recently, no one was above the law in the U.S., not even the president.
Richard Nixon was threatened with impeachment and run out of town for thumbing
his nose at the Constitution. Bill Clinton was impeached for lying under oath
about his sex life.

The Bush administration, by exploiting the very real fear of terrorism, and with
the connivance of Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, has run
roughshod over constitutional guarantees that had long been taken for granted.
The prohibition against cruel and inhuman punishment? Habeas corpus? The right
to face one's accuser? When it suits the Bush crowd, such protections are simply
ignored.

The president would have you believe that the warrantless N.S.A. spy program is
a very limited operation, narrowly focused on international communications
involving ''people with known links to Al Qaeda and related terrorist
organizations.''

If that were true, there would be no reason not to get a warrant from the secret
court set up by the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act. The most logical
reason for not getting a warrant is that the president's intelligence acolytes,
who behave as though they graduated from the Laurel and Hardy school of data
mining, have not been able to demonstrate that the people being spied upon are
connected to Al Qaeda or any other terror organization.

The National Security Agency sent so much useless information to the F.B.I. in
the aftermath of the Sept. 11 attacks that agents began to joke that the tips
would result in more ''calls to Pizza Hut.'' The Times reported that thousands
of tips a month came pouring in, virtually all of them leading to dead ends or
innocent Americans.

The American public needs to know what's really going on with this spy program.
''Liberty,'' said John Adams, ''cannot be preserved without a general knowledge
among the people.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); TERRORISM (85%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); WIRETAPPING (78%);
RULE OF LAW (78%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (78%); IMPEACHMENT (76%); WITNESSES (73%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); JUDGES (66%) Terrorism; Wiretapping
and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Surveillance of Citizens by
Government; Freedom and Human Rights; News and News Media  ; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(84%) National Security Agency

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (78%); BILL CLINTON (58%); RICHARD NIXON (57%) Bob
Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush; Alberto R (Atty Gen) Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             545 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 9, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Illegal And Inept

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 747 words


While testifying about the Bush administration's warrantless eavesdropping
program, Attorney General Alberto Gonzales was asked to explain how the program
had been damaged by the disclosure of its existence in the press.

Senator Joseph Biden suggested that Al Qaeda operatives have most likely been
aware for some time that the government is trying to intercept their phone
calls.

Mr. Gonzales agreed. ''You would assume that the enemy is presuming that we are
engaged in some kind of surveillance,'' he said. ''But if they're not reminded
about it all the time in newspapers and in stories, they sometimes forget.''

Senator Biden managed to laugh. Probably to keep from crying. This was the
attorney general of the United States speaking, yet another straight man for an
administration that has raised governing to new heights of witlessness. Watching
the Bush administration in action would be hilarious, if its ineptitude and
brutally misguided policies didn't end so often in needless suffering and
sorrow.

The public should be aware of two important points about the president's
domestic spying program: it's illegal, and it's not catching terrorists.

If the program were legal, there is no chance so many Republicans would be upset
about it. While questioning Mr. Gonzales at Monday's Judiciary Committee
hearing, Senator Lindsey Graham, a conservative Republican from South Carolina,
assailed both of the rationales used by the administration to justify the
program.

Referring to the administration's repeated insistence that the Congressional
resolution authorizing the use of force against Al Qaeda gave the president the
power to bypass restrictions on domestic surveillance imposed by the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act, Senator Graham said:

''I'll be the first to say, when I voted for it, I never envisioned that I was
giving to this president or any other president the ability to go around FISA
carte blanche.''

Senator Graham then addressed the argument that the president has the inherent
power under the Constitution to authorize the warrantless wiretapping. Such a
view, said Senator Graham, would undermine the principle of checks and balances.
''Taken to its logical conclusion,'' he said, ''it concerns me that it could
basically neuter the Congress and weaken the courts.''

Moments later, he added, ''And when the nation's at war, I would argue, Mr.
Attorney General, you need checks and balances more than ever.''

Other Republicans on the Judiciary Committee who expressed skepticism or voiced
serious doubts about the program included Mike DeWine and Sam Brownback, and the
chairman, Arlen Specter. ''You think you're right,'' Senator Specter told Mr.
Gonzales. ''But there are a lot of people who think you're wrong.''

Apart from the legal issues, it's increasingly clear that the president's
program is contributing little if anything to the effort to protect Americans
from Qaeda-type terrorism.

Senator Biden asked Mr. Gonzales whether the program had achieved any results.
Mr. Gonzales said it had helped identify ''would-be terrorists here in the
United States.''

''Have we arrested those people?'' asked Mr. Biden. ''Have we arrested the
people we've identified as terrorists in the United States?''

The attorney general's reply left people shaking their heads and rubbing their
eyes. ''When we can use our law enforcement tools to go after the bad guys,'' he
said, ''we do that.''

Senator Biden tried to push the issue, but Mr. Gonzales would not elaborate. Mr.
Biden finally said: ''Well, I hope we arrested them -- if you identified them. I
mean, it kind of worries me because you all talk about how you identify these
people, and I've not heard anything about anybody being arrested.''

A clue to Mr. Gonzales's reluctance to discuss the achievements of the
president's domestic spying program could be found on the front page of The
Washington Post on Sunday. A long article about the program began as follows:

''Intelligence officers who eavesdropped on thousands of Americans in overseas
calls under authority from President Bush have dismissed nearly all of them as
potential suspects after hearing nothing pertinent to a terrorist threat,
according to accounts from current and former government officials and
private-sector sources with knowledge of the technologies in use.''

To laugh or to cry -- that is the question as we contemplate three more years of
this theater of the absurd known as the Bush administration.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%);
AL-QAEDA (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); WIRETAPPING (89%); ESPIONAGE (89%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); CONSERVATISM (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (72%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (61%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Surveillance of Citizens by Government;
Security and Warning Systems; Freedom and Human Rights; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%) Al Qaeda (Terrorist Group)

PERSON: ALBERTO GONZALES (92%); JOE BIDEN (90%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (89%); ARLEN
SPECTER (58%); SAMUEL BROWNBACK (57%) Bob Herbert; George W (Pres) Bush; Joseph
R Jr (Sen) Biden; Alberto (Atty Gen) Gonzales

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             551 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Rumsfeld, In Algeria, Discusses Arms Sales

BYLINE: By DAVID S. CLOUD

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: RABAT, Morocco, Feb. 12


Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld said Sunday that he discussed possible
arms sales to Algeria with the country's president in what other Pentagon
officials described as a growing American effort to build a military
relationship.

''They have things they desire, and we have things we can be helpful with,'' Mr.
Rumsfeld told reporters about possible arms sales after meeting with the
president, Abdelaziz Bouteflika.

A senior Pentagon official said Algeria was interested in high-technology
equipment like night vision goggles and helicopters useful in tracking down
suspected antigovernment fighters in the country's desertlike southern region.

Mr. Rumsfeld, who later flew to Morocco for talks with King Mohammed VI, is
finishing a three-day visit to North Africa that also included a stop in
Tunisia.

Pentagon officials said they believed that Mr. Rumsfeld was the first secretary
of defense to visit Algeria, which shunned ties with Washington during the cold
war and endured a brutal Islamic insurgency during the 1990's that kept American
officials away.

Relations have warmed since 2001, which American officials attribute to what
they call a realization on both sides that they face similar threats from
Islamic militants.

American officials emphasized that any weapons sales would start slowly, so as
not to worry Algeria's smaller neighbors or raise concerns in Congress about
arming a country with a poor record on human rights.

Algeria may have grander ambitions, however. Pentagon officials say Algeria is
interested in replacing its aging fleet of fighter aircraft. Recent published
reports indicate that Russia is considering selling Algeria new MIG fighters as
well as tanks and other military equipment.

Mr. Rumsfeld is the second senior American official to visit Algeria recently.
The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Robert S. Mueller III, held
talks with Algerian law enforcement officials this month on counterterrorism
cooperation, an official said.

Mr. Rumsfeld said Mr. Bouteflika reviewed his country's decade-long battle with
Islamic militant groups and offered suggestions to the United States for
conducting what Bush administration officials have recently begun referring to
as ''the long war'' against Islamic extremists.

''He described it from the inside as to what took place and how they fought off
the terrorism,'' Mr. Rumsfeld told reporters. ''It's instructive for us to
realize that the struggle we're in is not unlike the struggle that the people of
Algeria went through.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); ARMS TRADE (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); RELIGION (88%); TERRORISM
(87%); FIGHTERS & BOMBERS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY
(78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); COLD WAR (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (75%); NIGHT VISION DEVICES (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); HELICOPTERS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (68%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(68%); INVESTIGATIONS (64%) United States International Relations; Arms Sales
Abroad; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (67%); ABDELAZIZ BOUTEFLIKA (58%) David S Cloud; Donald H
(Sec) Rumsfeld

CITY: RABAT, MOROCCO (76%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); MOROCCO (90%); NORTHERN AFRICA
(79%); AFRICA (79%); TUNISIA (79%)

REGION: Algeria; Algeria

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             557 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

More Abu Ghraib Pictures Broadcast on Australian TV

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: PRISONER
ABUSE; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 628 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


An Australian television network on Wednesday broadcast previously unseen
pictures of Iraqi prisoners at Abu Ghraib being mistreated by American soldiers
in 2003, scenes that the State Department said were ''absolutely disgusting''
but that add little to what is already known.

The videotapes and photographs of naked captives at the prison, west of Baghdad,
were consistent with earlier images showing captives naked, with hoods over
their heads and posed in sexual situations.

One video shows a handcuffed man pounding his head against a metal cell door.
Other pictures show him dangling upside down and naked from a top bunk and
smeared with his own feces, according to the ''Dateline'' program at the
network, the Special Broadcasting Service.

The prisoner was mentally ill and became a ''plaything'' for the guards, the
S.B.S. reported, according to The Associated Press in Sydney. The network
declined to say where it had obtained the pictures.

The State Department legal adviser, John B. Bellinger III, said the latest
pictures ''show once again just the reprehensible conduct that was going on in
Abu Ghraib.''

He noted that after the instances of abuse in late 2003 and their disclosure
early in 2004 there had been public investigations, prosecutions and internal
reviews. ''And it's unfortunate, in fact, that these photographs are coming out
further and fanning the flames,'' he said. Images from the Australian broadcast
were shown in the Middle East.

But critics of the Pentagon's handling of the episode said the latest
disclosures confirmed the need for a truly independent investigation of abuses
not only at Abu Ghraib but in Afghanistan and at the Guantanamo Bay naval base
in Cuba. The critics say only an outside inquiry can adequately look into
possible wrongdoing up the entire chain of command.

Bill Goodman, the legal director for the Center for Constitutional Rights, said
his organization would continue to sue the federal government to release all
pertinent videotapes and photographs. He rejected the State Department's
suggestion that it would have been better for the images not to have been
released, saying that attitude reflected a philosophy in the Bush administration
that ''the less information the people have, the better democracy operates.''

The American Civil Liberties Union had a similar reaction. ''We continue to see
undeniable evidence that abuse and torture have been widespread and systematic,
yet high-level government officials have not been held accountable for creating
the policies that led to these atrocities,'' said Anthony D. Romero, the
A.C.L.U.'s executive director.

The prisoner abuse scandal has been acutely embarrassing for the United States
military, whose members are required by regulation to treat prisoners with
respect.

Two of the best-known defendants were Specialist Charles A. Graner Jr.,
convicted of being a ringleader in the abuse, and Pvt. Lynndie R. England, who
was photographed mistreating naked Iraqis. Specialist Graner was sentenced to 10
years in prison and demoted to private, while Private England was sentenced to
three years in prison. Several other soldiers were imprisoned or dishonorably
discharged.

But Amnesty International says the latest pictures indicate that there may be
more to the scandal than has yet been uncovered. ''The repulsive images released
today give a clearer picture of the scope of the abuses perpetrated at Abu
Ghraib and raise the question of what other abuses occurred there and elsewhere
when cameras weren't present,'' said William F. Schulz, the organization's
executive director.

''Prosecutions of primarily lower-level military personnel create the impression
that those on the front lines are the scapegoats for policy set at the top.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: An image shown on an Australian television news program shows
what the narrator says is a detainee at Abu Ghraib being abused in 2003. (Photo
by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY
(90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
PRISONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TORTURE (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); SEX SCANDALS (77%); SCANDALS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); NAVIES
(69%); EXECUTIVES (62%); TERRORISM (60%); GENOCIDE (60%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Recordings (Video); Terrorism; Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba)

PERSON: David Stout

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (73%); SYDNEY, AUSTRALIA (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Afghanistan; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             559 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

GERMANY WEIGHS IF IT PLAYED ROLE IN SEIZURE BY U.S.

BYLINE: This article was reported by Don Van Natta Jr., Souad Mekhennet, and
Nicholas Wood, and was written by Mr. Van Natta.; Don Van Natta reported from
Munich for this article, Souad Mekhennet from Neu-Ulm and Munich, and Nicholas
Wood from Skopje.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1967 words

DATELINE: MUNICH, Feb. 20


For more than a year, the German government has criticized the United States for
its role in the abduction of a German man who was taken to an American prison in
Kabul, Afghanistan, where he said he was held and tortured for five months after
being mistaken for a terrorism suspect.

German officials said they knew nothing about the man's abduction and have
repeatedly pressed Washington for information about the case, which has set off
outrage here. At a meeting in Berlin last December, Chancellor Angela Merkel
demanded an explanation from Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice over the
incident.

But on Monday in Neu-Ulm near Munich, the police and prosecutors opened an
investigation into whether Germany served as a silent partner of the United
States in the abduction of the man, Khaled el-Masri, a German citizen of Arab
descent who was arrested Dec. 31, 2003, in Macedonia before being flown to the
Kabul prison.

The action came after a two-and-a-half-hour meeting at police headquarters in
which Mr. Masri told the police that he was ''90 percent'' certain that a senior
German police official was the interrogator who had visited him three times
inside the prison in Kabul but had identified himself only as ''Sam.'' The
German prosecutors said Monday that they were also investigating whether the
German Embassy in Skopje, Macedonia, had been notified about Mr. Masri's
kidnapping within days of his capture there, but then had done nothing to try to
help him.

Mr. Masri's case has come to symbolize the C.I.A. practice known as
extraordinary rendition, in which terror suspects are sent to be interrogated in
other countries where torture is commonly used. In broadening its criminal
inquiry into the abduction of Mr. Masri to the activities of its own government,
German prosecutors are trying to determine whether the German government worked
secretly with the United States in the practice.

''I feel deceived and betrayed by my own country,'' Mr. Masri, a 42-year-old
unemployed car salesman from Neu-Ulm, said in an interview.

The German police official identified as ''Sam'' denied that he had visited Mr.
Masri in Afghanistan and said he was ''on holiday'' at the time in Germany, but
that he could not remember exactly where. The man was present on Monday at the
police station, where Mr. Masri picked him out of a 10-person lineup. After
speaking with him, Mr. Masri said that his voice was similar but that his hair
style was different.

Martin Hofmann, a prosecutor in Munich, said Monday that his office would not
''assume that this man is Sam'' but would ''go forward with our investigation.''

A senior German official familiar with the case said that Mr. Masri was ''at
best mistaken'' and that the police official ''cannot be Sam.''

The New York Times is withholding the official's name at the request of
Germany's intelligence services because he often does undercover intelligence
work. He frequently gets ''sensitive'' assignments and helps clean up ''dirty
work'' for the German foreign intelligence service, said one of his longtime
colleagues, who spoke on condition of anonymity.

A senior Macedonian government official who was directly involved in Mr. Masri's
detention told The Times that not long after Mr. Masri's capture, Macedonian
officials notified the German Embassy in Skopje. C.I.A. officers in Macedonia
conducted the interrogation of Mr. Masri, according to Macedonian officials.

August Stern, the Munich-based federal prosecutor who is leading Germany's
criminal investigation of Mr. Masri's kidnapping, said his investigators were
trying to determine whether the German Embassy had been told about Mr. Masri's
capture, and then sent a German agent to the American prison in Kabul to talk
with him. Mr. Stern and other senior police officers and prosecutors said they
would try to interview the officials in the embassy in Skopje in coming weeks.

August Hanning, secretary of state for the Ministry of the Interior, denied in
an interview that any member of Germany's secret services had visited Mr. Masri
while he was held captive. ''He has never been to Afghanistan,'' Mr. Hanning
said of the German police official.

Two senior German officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity because of the
case's sensitive nature, denied that Germany's Embassy had been told about Mr.
Masri's capture. ''The German Embassy in Skopje was not informed by Macedonian
authorities while German citizen el-Masri was in custody in Macedonia,'' a
Foreign Office spokesman said. Another official said Germany did not learn about
Mr. Masri's detention until May 31, 2004, when the American ambassador to
Germany at the time, Daniel Coats, informed German officials about Mr. Masri's
capture and eventual release.

''According to our investigation, I am convinced that German officials did not
have any knowledge before his release,'' the official said.

Later this week, the German government is expected to turn over a report to
Parliament about Mr. Masri's case.

Meanwhile, investigators at the Council of Europe, led by Dick Marty, a Swiss
lawmaker, are looking into whether there was quiet cooperation between the
C.I.A. and its counterparts in European countries, including Germany, Italy and
Sweden, where suspected terrorists were kidnapped and sent to third countries
for interrogation.

In Italy, the authorities in June charged 23 C.I.A. agents with the abduction of
a terrorism suspect from the streets of Milan. Italian officials insist that
they did not know about the procedure, but some elected officials in Italy said
the Americans must have tipped off their counterparts in the Italian
intelligence agency.

European officials have been sharply critical of the C.I.A.'s rendition program.
In particular, German officials have rebuked the United States for playing a
role in the abduction of one of their citizens and then transporting him to
Afghanistan on a chartered C.I.A. plane.

''I have no explanation for the whole case,'' a senior German official said.
''To bring such a man like el-Masri from Europe to Afghanistan and to ask him
some questions and six months later, the explanation is that it's a terrible
error is not very convincing. To me there are still a lot of questions.''

Manfred R. Gnjidic, Mr. Masri's lawyer, said he is convinced that Germany
''stood by like a little school boy, watching what was going on with my client
and doing nothing.''

After more than five months in captivity, the United States released Mr. Masri
without filing charges. His case was first disclosed in The Times in January
2005.

At the meeting last December in Berlin between the German chancellor and Ms.
Rice, the kidnapping of Mr. Masri was discussed privately, but the two leaders
seemed to disagree about the substance of that conversation afterward.

Ms. Merkel said the Bush administration had admitted that it had mistakenly
abducted Mr. Masri. But Ms. Rice declined to discuss with reporters anything
about the case. She said only that she had pledged to Ms. Merkel, ''When and if
mistakes are made, we work very hard and as quickly as possible to rectify
them.''

In Washington, a senior State Department official said Monday that the
department would not comment on Mr. Masri's case, noting that it was a matter of
litigation in both Germany and the United States. In late 2003, Mr. Masri left
his family in Ulm for a trip to Macedonia. Macedonian and German officials said
he was arrested at a border checkpoint on Dec. 31, 2003, because his name was on
an Interpol terror watch list. But they said the name referred to another Khaled
el-Masri.

Mr. Masri was then held in a hotel in Macedonia for several weeks, where he was
questioned by the C.I.A., according to senior Macedonian and American officials.
A senior Macedonian official said the German Embassy was notified about Mr.
Masri within days of his capture. ''Unofficially, they knew,'' the official said
of the Germans.

A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment.

Two senior Macedonian officials said the Americans had asked to have Mr. Masri
detained in Macedonia for 23 days. ''We consider the Americans as our
partners,'' a senior Macedonian official said. ''We cannot refuse them.''

Mr. Masri said he had pleaded with his captors to let him go. ''Call the German
Embassy,'' Mr. Masri said he had repeatedly told them. ''I'm a German citizen.
Please tell them I am here!''

''They don't want to talk to you,'' he said one of his captors had replied.

In a recent interview, Mr. Masri said: ''I thought it was strange that they kept
telling me the Germans didn't care about me. Now I know why they said that --
because it was true.''

At the hotel, Mr. Masri said he had been asked whether he was a member of Al
Qaeda. But he was struck by the many questions he was asked about his time in
Germany. He said the questions had led him to suspect that the Germans were
cooperating with the Macedonians.

A German official disputed that assertion, saying Germany often shared
information with their American counterparts about suspected terrorists. But the
official acknowledged that the German police had not considered Mr. Masri to be
an ''important'' suspect.

Publicly, Macedonia has denied that Mr. Masri was held illegally. ''There is
nothing the ministry has done illegally,'' Hari Kostiv, the minister of interior
at the time and later the prime minister, said in an interview. ''The man is
alive and back home with his family. Somebody made a mistake. That somebody is
not Macedonia.''

By late January 2004, Mr. Masri was sent to Afghanistan, where he said he was
held and beaten over the next five months.

For Mr. Masri, one of the biggest mysteries was the identity of the interrogator
who identified himself as Sam, and who spoke fluent German. He visited three
times during Mr. Masri's final month at the Kabul jail.

During the first meeting, Mr. Masri said he had asked the man if he was from
Germany, but the man declined to answer. Mr. Masri said he had asked him, ''Do
the Germans know I'm here?''

''He said he did not want to answer,'' Mr. Masri said. ''I asked him if my wife
knew I was there. Sam said she doesn't know. He then said, I shouldn't ask
questions, I should only answer them.''

During their second meeting, the man was no longer belligerent, Mr. Masri said,
bringing him cookies, chocolates and a copy of the German newsmagazine Focus.
The man also asked if Mr. Masri wanted ''anything from Germany.''

''I said, 'Nothing, thank you,' '' Mr. Masri said.

In their last meeting, a week before Mr. Masri's release, the man told him that
he would be returning home soon. The last time Mr. Masri saw Sam, the
interrogator was speaking with a man who he believed was an American. Soon
afterward, Mr. Masri was released.

On Dec. 12, 2005, Mr. Gnjidic, the lawyer for Mr. Masri, received an e-mail
message from a German journalist named Frank Kruger, who suggested that Sam
might be a German police official. Earlier this month, Mr. Gnjidic said he had
obtained a videotape of the police official that convinced Mr. Masri that he was
Sam. On Monday, after meeting the man at police headquarters, Mr. Masri said he
was 90 percent certain that the police official was Sam.

''The man was very nervous, and he could not look at me into my eyes,'' Mr.
Masri said. ''The hair is different, but the voice sounded very similar.''

''For me, it is very important that we know who this man was,'' he said.

Mr. Gnjidic said he found it hard to believe that other than the prosecutors in
Munich, no one in the German government has sought Mr. Masri's testimony about
his ordeal. ''The scandal for me is that the Germans did nothing when they heard
a German had been captured,'' he said. ''They should have protested very hard
and tried to stop this.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Khaled el-Masri says he is ''90 percent'' certain he was
interrogated by a German police official in an American prison in Kabul. (Photo
by Ruedinger Baessler/European Pressphoto Agency)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
TORTURE (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (77%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (75%); INTERVIEWS (75%); ARRESTS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%) Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Mistaken Identity;
Terrorism; United States International Relations; Torture; Foreign Service;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%) Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (73%); ANGELA MERKEL (58%) Don Jr Van Natta; Souad
Mekhennet; Nicholas Wood; Khaled El- Masri

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (94%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); SKOPJE, MACEDONIA, THE
FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); AFGHANISTAN (95%); MACEDONIA, THE
FORMER YUGOSLAV REPUBLIC OF (93%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

REGION: Germany; Afghanistan; Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic)

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             562 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

No Justice, No Peace

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 730 words


If you talk to Maher Arar long enough, even on the telephone, you'll get the
disturbing sense that you are speaking with someone whose life has been
shattered like a pane of glass.

''Sometimes I have the feeling that I want to go and live on another planet,''
he told me. ''A completely different planet than planet Earth. You know?''

Mr. Arar, thanks to the United States government, went through the almost
incomprehensible agony of being tortured. Now he is trying to live with the
aftermath of torture, which is its own form of agony.

On Sept. 26, 2002, Mr. Arar, a Canadian citizen born in Syria, was taken into
custody by American authorities at Kennedy Airport in New York. He was locked in
chains and shackles and accused of being ''a member of a known terrorist
organization.''

There was no evidence to support the accusation, and no evidence has ever come
to light. Nevertheless, as part of the hideous U.S. policy known as
extraordinary rendition, Mr. Arar was shipped off to Syria, where he was kept in
an underground rat-infested, grave-like cell, and tortured. (When I visited him
in Ottawa last year, he told me how he had screamed and wept and begged both God
and his captors for mercy.)

After 10 months, he was released. No charges against him were ever filed.

I called Mr. Arar last week after a federal judge in Brooklyn threw out a
lawsuit in which Mr. Arar had sought damages from the U.S. government for his
ordeal.

''I don't feel like I am the same person,'' he said. ''I feel that my brain or
my inner soul does not want to think about what's going on. My soul is trying to
distract itself from reality.''

The reality, he said, is that his life has been all but completely destroyed. He
is fearful. He has become psychologically and emotionally distant from his wife
and two young children. He has nightmares. He can't find a job. He spins dizzily
from one bout with depression to another. And some former friends who are Muslim
will no longer associate with him because ''they're afraid to be the next
target.''

''I mean, you can tell, no one wants to hear about me,'' he said. ''After 9/11,
everyone branded with the terrorism label -- they're doomed.''

Mr. Arar, now 35, made a comfortable living as a software engineer before he
fell into the demonic embrace of the rendition program. Now no one will hire
him. ''They put it in a nice way,'' he said. ''They've said to people: 'Listen,
we believe he's innocent. But, you know, we don't want to hire him.' ''

Mr. Arar's own psychological difficulties have compounded the external
challenges he faces. ''I was invited to go and speak in Vancouver, which is west
of here,'' he said. ''But I can't take the plane anymore. Psychologically I am
so scared to fly. So I couldn't go.''

He said he frequently lacks the confidence or motivation to perform even minor
tasks, and often feels overwhelmed by the thought of something as ordinary as a
scheduled meeting with the principal at his 9-year-old daughter's school.

He said his 4-year-old son, Houd, panics whenever he thinks his father is about
to go out. ''He always wants to come with me,'' said Mr. Arar. ''He insists, and
he cries if I can't take him. He's afraid that if I go, I won't ever come
back.''

So the nightmare that began with rendition continues with no end in sight. Mr.
Arar is grateful that his wife was able to land a job last year with a political
party. ''It's not much money,'' he said, ''but had she not found a job we would
be in a very, very miserable situation. We're just barely surviving.''

Unexpected emotional support has come from ordinary Canadians; strangers
frequently come up to Mr. Arar on the street and shake his hand. ''They might
say, ''We're behind you,' or, 'We support you,' '' he said. ''It means a lot to
me.''

The rendition program is one more example of the way the United States, using
the threat of terror as an excuse, has locked its ideals away in a drawer
somewhere. We don't even give them lip service anymore. A person like Mr. Arar
is not seen as having any rights. He's not even seen as human. He was carted
away in accordance with official U.S. policy, and treated like an animal.

''They are doing this to people and it is wrong, wrong, wrong,'' said Mr. Arar.
''This is an evil practice, and I want them to acknowledge it. I want them to
acknowledge that what they did to me was wrong.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(89%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); SUITS & CLAIMS (69%); LITIGATION (69%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (65%); DAMAGES (64%); JUDGES (64%); CHILDREN (50%) Terrorism; Torture;
United States International Relations; Freedom and Human Rights; Suits and
Litigation; Terrorism

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Maher Arar

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (76%); OTTAWA, ON, CANADA (56%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); EARTH (73%); ONTARIO, CANADA (56%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); SYRIA (90%); CANADA (56%)

REGION: Syria; Canada

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             564 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Tortured Logic

BYLINE: By Anthony Lagouranis.

Anthony Lagouranis served in the Army from May 2001 to July 2005.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 762 words

DATELINE: Chicago


I HAVE never met Sgt. Santos Cardona or Sgt. Michael Smith, but we share similar
experiences. In late 2003 and early 2004, both men used their dogs to intimidate
Iraqi prisoners during interrogations at Abu Ghraib prison. They maintain that
they were following legal orders. Now they both face impending court-martial.

From January 2004 to January 2005, I served in various places in Iraq (including
Abu Ghraib) as an Army interrogator. Following orders that I believed were
legal, I used military working dogs during interrogations. I terrified my
interrogation subjects, but I never got intelligence (mostly because 90 percent
of them were probably innocent, but that's another story). Perhaps, I have
thought for a long time, I also deserve to be prosecuted. But if that is the
case, culpability goes much farther up the chain of command than the Army and
the Bush administration have so far been willing to admit.

When the chief warrant officer at our interrogation site in Mosul first told me
to use dogs during interrogations, it seemed well within what was allowed by our
written rules and consistent with what was being done at Abu Ghraib and other
detention centers. The dogs were muzzled and held by a handler. The prisoners
didn't know that, though, because they were blindfolded; if they gave me an
answer I didn't like, I could cue the handler so the dog would bark and lunge
toward them. Sometimes they were so terrified they'd wet their jumpsuits. About
halfway through my tour, I stopped using dogs and other ''enhancements'' like
hypothermia that qualify as torture even under the most nonchalant readings of
international law. I couldn't handle being so routinely brutal.

In training, we learned that all P.O.W.'s are protected against actual and
implied threats. You can never put a ''knife on the table'' to get someone to
talk. That was clear. But our Iraqi prisoners weren't clearly classified as
P.O.W.'s, so I never knew what laws applied. Instead, a confusing set of verbal
and written orders had supplanted the Geneva Conventions.

When an Army investigator asked Col. Thomas Pappas, the top military
intelligence officer at Abu Ghraib, how intimidation with dogs could be allowed
under this treaty, he gave the chilling reply, ''I did not personally look at
that with regard to the Geneva Convention.'' Colonel Pappas later testified that
he was taking his cue on the use of dogs from Maj. Gen. Geoffrey Miller, who
took over detainee operations in Iraq after running them in Guantanamo Bay,
Cuba.

General Miller has denied recommending the use of guard dogs to intimidate
prisoners during interrogations in Iraq. He also recently said he would not
testify in the courts-martial of Sergeants Cardona and Smith, invoking his right
to avoid self-incrimination. As someone who voluntarily spoke at length about my
actions in Iraq to investigators, without a lawyer present, I can't have a
favorable opinion of General Miller. By doing the military equivalent of
''taking the Fifth,'' he's decided to protect himself, apparently happy to let
two dog handlers take the fall -- a stunning betrayal of his subordinates and
Army values.

Sergeants Cardona and Smith have been accused of sick and sadistic behavior.
They face the prospect of serious jail time. But they almost certainly acted
believing they were following legal orders. In the military, orders are orders
unless there is clear, uncluttered law transmitted from far above our
commanders' rank and station. Instead of a clear message prohibiting torture,
our top commanders gave us a deliberate muddying of the waters.

Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, recently shepherded a ban on torture
through Congress. Then, while reluctantly signing the legislation, President
Bush muddled this very clear ban on torture by stating that he would construe it
''in a manner consistent with the constitutional authority of the president.''

Those who serve in the prisons of Iraq deserve to know clearly the difference
between legal and illegal orders. Soldiers on the ground need a commander in
chief who does not seek strained legalisms that ''permit'' the use of torture.
The McCain amendment, prohibiting ''cruel, inhuman, or degrading'' treatment in
all instances, is an accurate reflection of the true values of the military and
American society. We should adhere to it strictly and in all cases. I know, from
personal experience, that any leeway given will be used to maximum effect
against detainees. No slope is more slippery, I learned in Iraq, than the one
that leads to torture.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Alex Nabaum)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DOGS (91%); ARMIES (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); LAW OF WAR (89%); POWS & MIAS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
TORTURE (89%); PRISONS (77%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ARMED
FORCES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Torture; Freedom and Human Rights
; Dogs

PERSON: Anthony Lagouranis; Santos (Sgt) Cardona; Michael (Sgt) Smith; Geoffrey
(Maj Gen) Miller

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (84%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             566 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Car Explosion In Gaza City Kills a Leader Of Jihad Group

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 530 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, March 1


A leader in the armed wing of the Palestinian faction Islamic Jihad was killed
Wednesday when an explosion tore a car apart on a busy street in Gaza City.

The cause of the blast was not clear. Islamic Jihad, which carried out all six
suicide bombings in Israel last year, blamed Israel for the death of the man,
Khaled Dahdouh, who had survived many attempts to kill him. Khaled al-Batsh,
another Islamic Jihad leader, said the blast had been caused by an Israeli
airstrike, or by a bomb detonated by remote control, Agence France-Presse
reported.

The Israeli military, which regularly acknowledges killing Palestinian
militants, said it had nothing to do with the blast.

Violence also erupted in the West Bank, where Palestinian gunmen staged two
shootings, killing one Israeli man, Eldad Abir, 48, at a gas station, and
seriously wounding a second man, the Israeli military said. Al Aksa Martyrs
Brigades claimed responsibility for both attacks.

Islamic Jihad rejected an informal truce that other armed Palestinian factions
agreed to a year ago. In addition to its suicide bombings, the group has fired
rockets from the Gaza Strip into southern Israel. Islamic Jihad members have
frequently been the targets of Israeli attacks in the past year.

Israel has been carrying out ground raids in the West Bank and occasional
airstrikes in Gaza, saying it is responding to planned or actual Palestinian
attacks. The vast majority of the deaths in recent weeks have been on the
Palestinian side.

In February, 33 Palestinians were killed by the Israeli security forces, and one
Israeli civilian was stabbed to death by a Palestinian, the Palestinian Human
Rights Monitoring Group said in its monthly report on fatalities.

Israel's foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, began a European tour on Wednesday by
calling on European countries not to finance a Palestinian Authority government
led by the militant group Hamas. ''Part of the idea of the free world fighting
terrorism is not to welcome terrorists, not to give money to terror,'' Ms. Livni
said in Vienna.

Israel has y stopped transferring the tax money it collects on behalf of the
Palestinians. The European Union agreed Monday to provide more than $140 million
in emergency assistance to the Palestinians, who have a caretaker government.
The European Union did not say what it would do when Hamas comes to power, which
is expected this month.

The leader of Israel's left-leaning Labor Party, Amir Peretz, plans to meet
Thursday in the West Bank with the Palestinian Authority president, Mahmoud
Abbas. Meetings between Israeli politicians and Mr. Abbas have been rare since
he was elected a year ago, and it is even more unusual for such talks to occur
in Palestinian areas. Mr. Peretz, who was born in Morocco, recently went to
Egypt for talks with President Hosni Mubarak, and to Morocco for a visit with
King Mohammed VI.

Israel has national elections planned for March 28, and the Labor Party is
running a distant second to the centrist Kadima Party, led by the acting prime
minister, Ehud Olmert.

The Labor Party has long advocated peace talks with the Palestinians, though the
party says it would not negotiate with Hamas.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%); BOMBINGS (91%); WAR &
CONFLICT (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); HAMAS (89%); DEATHS (89%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS
(74%); POLITICS (70%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (69%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (67%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (67%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (65%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-ISLAMI AL-JIHAD (96%); HEZBOLLAH (94%); AL-AQSA MARTYRS
BRIGADES (56%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%)

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (58%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%); HOSNI MUBARAK (50%)

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); EUROPE (94%);
MOROCCO (92%); EGYPT (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(53%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             567 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Americas: Mexico: Inquiry Into Leak Of 'Dirty War' Report

BYLINE: By ANTONIO BETANCOURT (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 138 words


Attorney General Daniel Cabeza de Vaca announced that his office had begun an
investigation into the leak last week of a secret report prepared by a special
prosecutor's office that accused the armed forces of kidnapping, torturing and
murdering hundreds of suspected subversives during the so-called dirty war of
the late 1960's to the early 1980's. The government had withheld the report
since December, saying that it placed too much blame for the abuses on the
military. Its authors, worried their report would be censored, leaked it to
several prominent writers, and it was posted on the Internet by the National
Security Archives, a nonpartisan research group based in Washington. The special
prosecutor, Ignacio Carrillo Prieto said an official version of the report would
be released on April 15.   ANTONIO BETANCOURT (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TORTURE (90%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (90%); MURDER (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (87%);
CENSORSHIP (86%); NATIONAL SECURITY (86%) Torture  ; Kidnapping; Computers and
the Internet; Censorship; Freedom and Human Rights; Computers and the Internet

ORGANIZATION: National Security Archive

PERSON: Antonio Betancourt; Daniel Cabeza (Atty Gen) de Vaca

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Mexico

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             572 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

They Came for the Chicken Farmer

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 629 words


This has been our nightmare since the Bush administration began stashing
prisoners it did not want to account for in Guantanamo Bay: An ordinary man with
a name something like a Taliban bigwig's is swept up in the dragnet and
imprisoned without any hope of proving his innocence.

A case of mistaken identity's turning an innocent person into a
prisoner-for-life was supposed to be impossible. President Bush told Americans
to trust in his judgment after he arrogated the right to arrest anyone, anywhere
in the world, and toss people into indefinite detention. Defense Secretary
Donald Rumsfeld infamously proclaimed that the men at Guantanamo Bay were ''the
worst of the worst.''

But it has long been evident that this was nonsense, and a lawsuit by The
Associated Press has now demonstrated the truth in shameful detail. The suit
compelled the release of records from hearings for some of the 760 or so men who
have been imprisoned at Guantanamo Bay. (About 490 are still there.) Far too
many show no signs of being a threat to American national security. Some, it
appears, did nothing at all. And they have no way to get a fair hearing because
Gitmo was created outside the law.

Take the case of Abdur Sayed Rahman, as recounted in Monday's Times. The
transcripts quote Mr. Rahman as saying he was arrested in his Pakistani village
in January 2002, flown to Afghanistan, accused of being the Taliban's deputy
foreign minister and then thrown into a cell in Guantanamo Bay. ''I am only a
chicken farmer in Pakistan,'' he said, adding that the Taliban official was
named Abdur Zahid Rahman.

Other cases included prisoners who owned a particular kind of cheap watch
supposedly favored by Al Qaeda. An Afghan was accused of being the former
Taliban governor of a province and subjected to a pretzel logic that would make
Joseph Heller cringe. He said he was a different person entirely and asked the
tribunal to contact the current governor and verify his story. The presiding
officer refused, saying it was up to the prisoner to produce the evidence. The
incarcerated Afghan then pointed out that he was being held virtually
incommunicado in a United States prison in a remote corner of Cuba and not
allowed to make calls. The presiding officer assured the prisoner that he would
have plenty of time to write a letter -- during the year of continued detention
before his case might be reviewed again.

Some of the prisoners proudly proclaimed their allegiance to the Taliban or Al
Qaeda. But far too many seemed to be innocents or lowly foot soldiers simply
caught up in the whirlwind after 9/11.

Because Mr. Bush does not recognize that American law or international treaties
apply to his decisions as commander in chief, these prisoners were initially not
given hearings. The transcripts are from proceedings that were begun under a
court order. They started years after the prisoners were originally captured --
a clear violation of the Geneva Conventions. And they were conducted under rules
that mock any notion of democratic justice.

Prisoners do not see the evidence against them and barely have access to legal
counsel. Now, thanks to a horrible law sponsored by Senators Lindsey Graham, a
Republican, and Carl Levin, a Democrat, they have virtually no right of appeal.
The law even permits the use of evidence obtained by torture.

If the stories of the chicken farmer and the men with the wrong watches are new,
the broad outlines of this disaster have long been visible. It is shocking in
itself, and in the fact that average citizens have not risen up to demand that
these abuses come to an end. The founding fathers knew that when you dispensed
with the rule of law, the inevitable outcome was injustice. Now America is
becoming the thing they sought to end.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%);
TERRORISM (85%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); PRISONS (78%);
REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); AL-QAEDA (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); LITIGATION (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (70%); NAVIES (70%); GOVERNORS (67%); ARMED FORCES (62%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%) Editorials; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Prisoners of War;
False Arrests, Convictions and Imprisonments; Terrorism; Freedom and Human
Rights; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Taliban

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) George W (Pres) Bush; Abdur Zahid Rahman; Abdur
Sayed Rahman

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (93%); PAKISTAN (93%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Pakistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             580 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Congo Warlord Sent To International Court As
First Case

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 115 words


The International Criminal Court said it had received its first prisoner, a
Congolese militia leader accused of using child soldiers. The prisoner, Thomas
Lubanga, left, the leader of the Union of Congolese Patriots, an ethnic militia
now registered as a political party, was arrested in Congo last year. He is
accused of widespread human rights abuses in Congo's lawless eastern Ituri
district, where a foreign and local militias have looted, raped and murdered
civilians during and since Congo's 1998-2003 war. He is also suspected of
ordering the killing of nine Bangladeshi peacekeepers last year. The
International Criminal Court opened in 2002 as a permanent court for judging war
crimes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); LITIGATION (90%); CHILD SOLDIERS
(88%); PEACEKEEPING (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (86%); ARRESTS (86%); SEX OFFENSES
(85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%); MURDER (58%) Terms not available from
NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (93%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (94%); EUROPE (91%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); BANGLADESH (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             582 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The President and the Courts

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 782 words


Since the Republican majority has decided to allow President Bush to usurp
Congress's role in matters of national security, the battle to save the
constitutional balance of powers moves to the judiciary. A critical test of
judicial independence will come this month, when the Supreme Court hears
arguments in a case that has become a focus of Mr. Bush's imperial vision of the
presidency.

Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a Yemeni national accused of having been a bodyguard and
driver for Osama bin Laden in Afghanistan, has been detained since 2002 in
Guantanamo Bay. He filed suit to challenge the legitimacy of the military
commission that upheld his designation as an ''unlawful enemy combatant'' -- a
term Mr. Bush invented after 9/11 to deny the protections of the Geneva
Conventions, international statutes or United States law to certain prisoners.

Mr. Hamdan argued, rightly, that the commissions are not legitimate because
prisoners are routinely barred from seeing evidence, much less confronting their
accusers or having access to real legal representation. But his case has now
become a much larger battle over the principle of habeas corpus, which is
embedded in the Constitution and says that a prisoner cannot be denied the right
to challenge his detention. Mr. Bush's decision after 9/11 that he had the power
to put prisoners beyond the reach of the law at his choosing was the first
attempt to suspend habeas corpus on American territory since the Civil War.

The Supreme Court two years ago emphatically rejected the president's claim that
its jurisdiction did not extend to Guantanamo. Seeking to reverse that ruling,
the White House in December helped push through a special amendment as part of
the deal that also saw Mr. Bush sign a watered-down ban on torture of military
detainees. The amendment, sponsored by Senator Lindsey Graham, a Republican, and
Senator Carl Levin, a Democrat, stripped Guantanamo detainees of the normal
rights of judicial review. It also designated a single appellate court to
conduct a limited review of decisions by the military commissions, and left
''enemy combatants'' held without a trial in a seemingly inescapable legal black
hole.

As soon as Mr. Bush signed this law, he declared that the administration was
going to apply it to all pending cases, about 160 or so, and the solicitor
general told the Supreme Court it no longer had a right to hear Hamdan v.
Rumsfeld. This is court-stripping -- the attempt by another branch of government
to prevent the court from deciding a particular issue. The White House tried to
justify this outrageous tampering with the judiciary by ignoring the new law's
actual language and legislative history to argue that the new legislation took
away the power of the courts to hear not just future cases but also cases
already filed and accepted for review. The Supreme Court responded by adding the
jurisdictional objection to the list of issues it will consider when the case is
heard on March 28.

At a minimum, we hope the court will rule that Congress and the president may
not deny the justices the power to review pending cases. But it should also
reject the defective military commissions, as well as the idea of denying access
to the courts for future valid claims brought by Guantanamo detainees, including
claims of torture.

If Congress wants to take the extreme step of suspending the Supreme Court's
jurisdiction over habeas corpus, especially pending appeals, it must say so in
unmistakable terms, which it has not done. Both the text and the legislative
history of the Graham-Levin amendment demonstrate an intention to avoid touching
pending cases. Moreover, the Constitution itself requires an ''invasion'' or a
''rebellion'' as a prerequisite for suspension of habeas corpus. It's hardly
likely that the founding fathers intended to give Congress the right to
eliminate judicial review during an ongoing international struggle against
terrorism that may well go on for generations.

The retired Justice Sandra Day O'Connor observed in a recent speech that the
framers created three separate and equal branches of government because they
knew that preserving liberty requires that no single branch or person can amass
unchecked power. According to NPR's Nina Totenberg, who heard the speech,
Justice O'Connor cited Republican court-stripping efforts as an example of
dangerous overreaching. ''It takes a lot of degeneration before a country falls
into dictatorship,'' Justice O'Connor said, ''but we should avoid these ends by
avoiding these beginnings.''

The president seems to forget that and Congress clearly will not remind him. The
nation cannot afford for the Supreme Court to forget as well.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); HABEAS CORPUS
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
SUPREME COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); MILITARY COURTS (89%); LEGISLATION (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); APPEALS (89%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); JURISDICTION (77%);
TERRORISM (75%); LAW OF WAR (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); LAWYERS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); NAVIES (73%); APPEALS COURTS (72%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (58%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%) Editorials; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Suits
and Litigation; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (70%); LINDSEY GRAHAM (58%); CARL
LEVIN (58%) George W (Pres) Bush; Salim Ahmed Hamdan; Osama Bin Laden

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); YEMEN (92%); CUBA (90%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             590 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Outrage in Afghanistan

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 294 words


What's the point of the United States' propping up the government of Afghanistan
if it's not even going to pretend to respect basic human rights? President Bush
himself said it was ''deeply troubling'' that an Afghan man is facing the death
penalty for converting from Islam to Christianity.

In fact, the case is more than deeply troubling; it's barbaric, and we were glad
that Mr. Bush promised yesterday to press for religious freedom in Afghanistan.
The Afghan man, Abdul Rahman, was arrested two weeks ago. His parents reported
him to the police for converting to Christianity 16 years earlier while working
for a Christian aid organization in Peshawar, Pakistan. He was hauled before a
judge, where he said he had no regrets. ''If he doesn't revert back to Islam,
he's going to receive the death penalty, according to the law,'' an Afghan
Supreme Court judge told Agence France-Presse.

And maybe Afghanistan should also return to stoning women to death for adultery?
The United States, Britain and every other country helping the Afghan government
should take a hard look at its legal institutions. Muslim leaders would also do
well to condemn this case strongly; those who continue to hold the teachings of
Islam hostage to intolerance do grievous harm to their religion.

There appears to be a move afoot to declare Mr. Rahman mentally incompetent as a
way to avoid the mess. That would be a cheap trick because the law would remain
on the books. Afghanistan is not the only American ally that enforces cruel
religious laws. But this is a country that was liberated from the Taliban by
American troops and whose tenuous peace is enforced by those troops. If
Afghanistan wants to return to the Taliban days, it can do so without the help
of the United States.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (94%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TALIBAN (89%); ARRESTS (70%); SUPREME COURTS (69%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (69%); JUDGES (69%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%) Editorials;
Freedom of Religion; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; Islam; Christians and Christianity; Capital Punishment

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (56%)

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); PAKISTAN (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             599 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

JUSTICES DECLINE TERRORISM CASE OF A U.S. CITIZEN

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1240 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 3


Jose Padilla, the American citizen held for more than three years in military
custody as an enemy combatant, fell one vote short on Monday of persuading the
Supreme Court to take his case.

Four votes are necessary for the court to take a case, and Mr. Padilla's appeal
received only three. The result was to leave standing a decision by the federal
appeals court in Richmond, Va., that endorsed the government's power to seize a
citizen on United States soil and keep him in open-ended detention.

Nonetheless, the outcome was not the unalloyed victory for the Bush
administration that it might have appeared to be.

Three justices who voted not to hear the case -- Justices Anthony M. Kennedy and
John Paul Stevens, along with Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. -- filed an
unusual opinion explaining their position. They noted that Mr. Padilla, who is
now out of military custody and awaiting trial in federal district court in
Miami on terrorism-related charges, was entitled to a criminal defendant's full
range of protections, including the right to a speedy trial.

Most significant, the three justices warned the administration that the federal
courts, including the Supreme Court, stood ready to intervene ''were the
government to seek to change the status or conditions of Padilla's custody.''

The comment was clearly a reference to the sequence of events last fall, when
the administration, days before it was due to file a brief in response to Mr.
Padilla's Supreme Court appeal, announced that it had obtained a grand jury
indictment and planned to shift him to civilian custody.

The administration then filed a brief arguing that the appeal had to be
dismissed as moot, since Mr. Padilla was getting the relief he requested when he
filed his original petition asking to be released from custody or charged with a
crime.

The Miami indictment charges him with providing material support to terrorists
as part of a cell that is said to have sent money and recruits overseas. He is
being held without bail; a trial is scheduled for Sept. 9.

In simply turning down Mr. Padilla's appeal, Padilla v. Hanft, No. 05-533, the
court did not make a formal determination that the case was moot. But Mr.
Padilla's transfer from military custody to the civilian justice system rendered
his legal claims, ''at least for now, hypothetical,'' Justice Kennedy said in
the explanatory opinion, which the two other justices signed.

''Even if the court were to rule in Padilla's favor, his present custody status
would be unaffected,'' Justice Kennedy said.

In shifting Mr. Padilla to civilian custody, the government said that it
reserved the right to redesignate him as an enemy combatant and send him back to
military custody. His lawyers argued that for that reason, the Supreme Court
should hear his case.

Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg agreed, filing an opinion on Monday dissenting from
the court's refusal to hear the case.

''Nothing the government has yet done purports to retract the assertion of
executive power Padilla protests,'' Justice Ginsburg said, adding that ''nothing
prevents the executive from returning to the road it earlier constructed and
defended.'' She said she was ''satisfied that this case is not moot.''

Justices David H. Souter and Stephen G. Breyer did not sign Justice Ginsburg's
opinion, noting only that they, too, had voted to hear the case.

Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Samuel A. Alito Jr., who voted
against hearing the appeal, neither signed Justice Kennedy's opinion nor offered
an explanation of their own. It is possible that they objected to the language
in the Kennedy opinion about the court's readiness to intervene ''promptly to
ensure that the office and purposes of the writ of habeas corpus are not
compromised'' if the administration were to change Mr. Padilla's status once
again.

The silence of these three justices was only one of several mysteries
surrounding the court's disposition of the case, among the most prominent of the
cases generated by the administration's handling of those it has labeled enemy
combatants.

One mystery is what took the court so long. Mr. Padilla's appeal had been
pending for months, and had been taken up by the justices at their weekly
closed-door conference eight times since mid-January. That length of time was
hardly needed to produce the four pages of opinions, three for Justice Kennedy
and one for Justice Ginsburg, that the court issued on Monday.

Another mystery is the role played by Justice Stevens, who signed Justice
Kennedy's opinion rather than provide a crucial fourth vote to his natural
allies -- Justices Ginsburg, Souter and Breyer. Two years ago, Justice Stevens
wrote for Justices Ginsburg, Souter and Breyer in dissent from an earlier ruling
in Mr. Padilla's legal saga.

That was a 5-to-4 decision holding that the federal appeals court in New York,
which had ordered Mr. Padilla released, lacked the authority to decide the case.
The five justices in the majority then required Mr. Padilla to file a new habeas
corpus petition seeking release in South Carolina, where he was held in the Navy
brig in Charleston.

Justice Stevens, dissenting, criticized the majority as failing to address the
merits of Mr. Padilla's case, which he said ''raises questions of profound
importance to the nation.''

In her dissenting opinion on Monday, Justice Ginsburg quoted those words,
identifying them as those of Justice Stevens. As a careful writer, not given to
wasting words herself, Justice Ginsburg appeared to be sending a signal of her
dismay at Justice Stevens's failure to join her in dissent this time.

The two mysteries -- the lengthy consideration and the role of Justice Stevens
-- may not be unrelated. It is possible that the Kennedy opinion was the result
of a long negotiation, and that the price Justice Stevens exacted for not giving
the dissenters the crucial fourth vote needed to hear the case was insertion of
the language that can be read as warning the administration not to presume on
the court's patience.

The test may come if Mr. Padilla is acquitted by a jury in the Miami federal
case or receives and serves a short sentence. The government would then have to
decide whether to set him free or find a way to keep him confined.

The federal court charges against him bear little if any relationship to the
accusations the administration made after he was arrested after arriving at
O'Hare International Airport in Chicago on a flight from Pakistan. He was then
described as an operative for Al Qaeda on a mission to detonate a dirty bomb in
the United States.

In another development on Monday, the court agreed to resolve a dispute among
the lower courts with implications for thousands of deportation and criminal
sentencing cases. The question is whether a drug offense that is only a
misdemeanor under federal law, but that an individual state's criminal code
treats as a felony, is deemed an ''aggravated felony'' for purposes of
immigration law or for adding time to a federal sentence.

The issue is particularly important in immigration law because deportable aliens
with ''aggravated felonies'' on their records are ineligible for administrative
discretion, making their deportation essentially automatic, no matter the
individual circumstances. To resolve the issue, the court accepted two cases,
Lopez v. Gonzales, No. 05-547, and Toledo-Flores v. United States, No. 05-7664.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); APPEALS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(78%); PETITIONS (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); APPEALS COURTS (77%); RIGHT
TO SPEEDY TRIAL (77%); LAWYERS (74%); BAIL (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (70%); GRAND JURY (67%) Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts; Freedom and
Human Rights; Terrorism; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: ANTHONY KENNEDY (79%); JOHN ROBERTS (79%); JOHN PAUL STEVENS (72%) Linda
Greenhouse; George W (Pres) Bush; Jose Padilla; Anthony M (Assoc Justice)
Kennedy; John Paul (Assoc Justice) Stevens; John G Jr (Chief Justice) Roberts;
Ruth Bader (Assoc Justice) Ginsburg; David H (Assoc Justice) Souter; Stephen G
(Assoc Justice) Breyer

CITY: RICHMOND, VA, USA (91%)

STATE: VIRGINIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             603 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 12, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Turkey: Charges Against 4 Journalists Dropped; Fifth To
Be Tried

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 211 words


A court in Istanbul dropped charges against four Turkish journalists accused of
insulting the country's courts but decided to press ahead with the trial of a
fifth, a report said. The five, who had faced from 6 months to 10 years in
prison, have been on trial since February for criticizing in print a court's
decision last year to shut down a conference in Istanbul about the mass killings
of Armenians by Turks during the Ottoman Empire. The court case is being
monitored by the European Union as a test of Turkish human rights. The court
dropped charges against Ismet Berkan and Haluk Sahin of the liberal newspaper
Radikal and Hasan Cemal and Erol Katircioglu of the center-right newspaper
Milliyet on the ground that prosecutors had not filed the charges within the
required two-month period after the publication of the articles, the state-run
Anatolia news agency reported. But the court decided to proceed with the trial
of Murat Belge, a columnist for Radikal, the agency said. It was not clear why
the case against him was not dropped. A case against the country's best-known
novelist, Orhan Pamuk, who publicly questioned Turkey's official denial of the
Armenian genocide, was dropped in January after Turkey came under harsh
criticism from the European Union.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); JOURNALISM (90%); WRITERS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION (75%); LIBERALISM (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%);
LIBERAL MEDIA (73%) Freedom of the Press

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%)

PERSON: Ismet Berkan; Haluk Sahin; Hasan Cemal; Murat Belge; Erol Katircioglu

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (94%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (98%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); ARMENIA
(90%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             606 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Democracy at the Top of the World

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 256 words


The remote mountain kingdom of Nepal has become convulsed by violent
confrontations between police and protesters. The crisis does not involve
strategic resources or Islamic terrorists. But there are good reasons why the
outside world should pay attention.

First, there is a potential for friction between the two giants bordering on
Nepal, India and China, if they feel the little country shifting one way or the
other. Then there is the fact that the world does not need another failed state,
especially one with a powerful Maoist militia and a terrain that would ideally
suit warlords and terrorists. Finally, the Nepalese are fighting for democracy,
and it would be good for developed democracies to show a willingness to help
even if there is no immediate or tangible gain.

In 1996, radical leftists began a brutal insurgency, in which more than 12,000
people were killed. In 2001, the heir to the throne went berserk and killed
himself and most of his family. The crown passed to his uncle, Gyanendra, who
used the Maoist insurgency as a pretext to assume absolute powers. Last month
opposition parties called for a series of strikes in support of demands for a
restoration of democracy, and they have swelled into a wave of public protests.

The Maoist insurgency is clearly a serious blight. But King Gyanendra has
brought this on himself. The United States and Europe should urge him to step
back into a constitutional role, and promise to help a democratic Nepal emerge
from the crushing poverty that sustains the insurgents.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (78%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (74%); LIBERALISM (74%); RIOTS (73%); RELIGION (73%); POLITICS (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (50%) Editorials; Demonstrations and
Riots; Freedom and Human Rights; United States International Relations; Foreign
Aid

PERSON: Gyanendra (King)

COUNTRY: NEPAL (96%); CHINA (92%); INDIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE
(90%)

REGION: Nepal; Europe

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             611 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Debated Or Not, A Genocide In Armenia

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section E; Column 6; The Arts/Cultural Desk; TELEVISION REVIEW; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1009 words


It is impossible to debate a subject like genocide without giving offense. PBS
is supposed to give offense responsibly.

And that was the idea behind a panel discussion that PBS planned to show after
tonight's broadcast of ''The Armenian Genocide,'' a documentary about the
extermination of more than one million Armenians by the Turkish Ottoman Empire
during World War I.

The powerful hourlong film will be shown on most of the 348 PBS affiliate
stations. But nearly a third of those stations decided to cancel the follow-up
discussion after an intense lobbying campaign by Armenian groups and some
members of Congress.

The protesters complained that the panel of four experts, moderated by Scott
Simon, host of ''Weekend Edition Saturday'' on NPR, included two scholars who
defend the Turkish government's claim that a genocide never took place. The
outrage over their inclusion was an indication of how passionately Armenians
feel about the issue; they have battled for decades to draw attention to the
genocide.

But the fact that so many stations caved is a measure of something else: PBS's
growing vulnerability to pressure and, perhaps accordingly, the erosion of
viewers' trust in public television.

The camera lends legitimacy, but as Senator Joseph R. McCarthy's performance on
Edward R. Murrow's ''See It Now'' famously showed, it also can undermine
credibility. Panel discussions in particular give people with outlandish views a
hearing -- and also an opportunity to expose the flaws in their arguments.

That is certainly the case with the discussion program ''Armenian Genocide:
Exploring the Issues.'' It turns out that there is only one articulate voice
arguing that Armenians died not in a genocide but in a civil war between
Christians and Muslims -- that of Justin A. McCarthy, a history professor at the
University of Louisville. His Turkish counterpart, Omer Turan, an associate
professor at the Middle East Technical University in Ankara, tries ardently to
back him up, but his English is not good enough to make a dent. And the two
other experts, Peter Balakian, a humanities professor at Colgate University, and
Taner Akcam, a visiting professor of history at the University of Minnesota and
a well-known defender of human rights in Turkey, lucidly pick Mr. McCarthy's
points apart.

Mr. Balakian, who is one of the experts cited in the documentary, gets the last
word. ''If we are going to pretend that a stateless Christian minority
population, unarmed, is somehow in a capacity to kill people in an aggressive
way that is tantamount to war, or civil war,'' Mr. Balakian says, ''we're living
in the realm of the absurd.''

Tone and appearance on television can be as persuasive as talk. Mr. McCarthy
mostly sounds condescending and defensive, while Mr. Balakian is smooth and
keeps his cool.

''The Armenian Genocide '' which was made by Andrew Goldberg in association with
Oregon Public Broadcasting, does not ignore the Turkish government's denial, or
its repression of dissidents in Turkey who try to expound another point of view.
One of the film's merits is that it tries to explain both the circumstances that
led to the atrocities of 1915 and the reasons why Turkish officials are still so
determined to keep that period unexplored. ''There is a feeling that Turkey
would be putting itself permanently in the company of Adolf Hitler,'' Samantha
Power, the author of ''A Problem From Hell: America and the Age of Genocide,''
says. ''That same stain would envelop Turkey as it seeks, of course, to be a
major player on the international stage.''

Several of the experts in the film, including Turkish scholars, argue that
because Turkey is seeking admission to the European Union, its leaders will
eventually have to bend to international will and acknowledge responsibility.
But official Turkish denial remains fierce, and intellectuals and even
well-known writers like Orhan Pamuk can still be brought to trial for mentioning
the treatment of Armenians and Kurds.

The documentary, which is partly narrated by Julianna Margulies, Ed Harris and
others, includes rare clips of Turkish scholars acknowledging the anti-Armenian
campaign as genocide as well as Turkish villagers recounting their ancestors'
stories about participating in the killings. ''They caught Armenians and put
them in a barn and burned them,'' a man in a town in eastern Turkey says to an
interviewer. There are also shots of ordinary Turks who insist their ancestors
were incapable of that level of barbarity.

Mostly, however, the film painstakingly makes the case that a genocide did take
place, relying on archival photographs, victims' memoirs and the horrified
first-hand accounts of diplomats, missionaries and reporters. The forced
deportations and killings did not take place unnoticed -- public figures like
Theodore Roosevelt and H. L. Mencken spoke out about the horrors. In 1915, The
New York Times published 145 stories about the systematic slaughter of
Armenians.

Even after World War II, the fate of Turkey's Armenian population was high on
the list of crimes against humanity. The film includes a clip from a 1949 CBS
interview with Raphael Lemkin, a law professor who in 1943 coined the term
genocide. ''I became interested in genocide because it happened so many times,''
he tells the CBS commentator Quincy Howe. ''First to the Armenians, then after
the Armenians, Hitler took action.''

The documentary honors the victims of the Armenian genocide and also pays
tribute to dissidents in Turkey who are brave enough to speak out despite
government censorship. And that makes it all the odder that so many public
television stations here censored the follow-up program as soon as a few lobby
groups complained.

The Armenian Genocide

PBS, tonight at 10 Eastern and Pacific times; 9 p.m., Central time.

Written, directed and produced by Andrew Goldberg. Produced by Two Cats
Productions in association with Oregon Public Broadcasting. Narrated by Julianna
Margulies, Ed Harris, Natalie Portman, Laura Linney and Orlando Bloom.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A scene from ''The Armenian Genocide'' on PBS
 a follow-up panel will not be shown on many PBS stations. (Photo by Two Cats
Productions)(pg. E7)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PUBLIC BROADCASTING (90%); NETWORK TELEVISION (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (88%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (86%); LOCAL TELEVISION
STATIONS (77%); HISTORY (77%); WORLD WAR I (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (73%); LOBBYING (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (67%);
RELIGION (67%) Terms not available from NYTimes

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%)

STATE: MINNESOTA, USA (76%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (99%); TURKEY (95%); UNITED STATES (76%); MIDDLE EAST (71%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             619 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Peacekeepers Targets of New Sinai Attacks

BYLINE: By MICHAEL SLACKMAN; Mona el-Naggar contributed reporting from Cairo for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1016 words

DATELINE: EL ARISH, Egypt, April 26


Two suicide bombers attacked members of a multinational peacekeeping force in
the northern Egyptian Sinai on Wednesday, two days after a triple bomb attack
killed nearly two dozen in a resort south of here.

The suicide blasts were small, officials said, killing only the attackers while
damaging two security vehicles. But their timing -- so soon after Monday's
attacks -- and the location in one of the Egypt's highest security zones raised
concerns that the country might again be faced with the kind of sustained
terrorist threat it struggled to suppress a decade ago.

The bombings on Wednesday -- against members of a multinational peacekeeping
force established in 1982 after a peace treaty between Egypt and Israel -- came
as investigators rounded up suspects and sorted through evidence in the triple
bomb attack on the southern Sinai resort town of Dahab.

The latest attacks added to a general sense of anxiety, both inside and outside
the government, over challenges facing the Arab world's most populated country.
The government has been buffeted on multiple fronts, from sectarian strife in
Alexandria, where a Muslim resident recently attacked three Coptic Christian
churches, sparking days of riots, to a protest by thousands of judges demanding
independence from the executive branch, to the emergence of the fundamentalist
Muslim Brotherhood as the only organized political opposition.

The string of bombings in the Sinai -- at a time when the government has
increasingly moved to stifle political opposition -- has also prompted many
people to charge that the authorities are so focused on political control they
have undermined their ability to fight terrorism.

''The problem is you cannot separate what's happening now from the general
atmosphere in Egypt,'' said Dr. Emad Gad, an analyst at the government-financed
Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies in Cairo. ''There is a state of
apprehension. Part of the problem rests in the fact that the Egyptian security
agencies are concerned about confronting civil society interactions.''

While the government insists it has made every effort to combat domestic
terrorism, it has appeared stumped over to how to safeguard its tourist industry
in the Sinai, one of the pillars of the nation's economy.

Magdy Rady, the chief government spokesman, said Wednesday night that the
government recognized that it needed to address security in the Sinai in a
comprehensive way -- from improving roads to building schools -- and said the
government had developed a master plan to address the many concerns of the
region. But he disputed the notion that the spate of attacks suggested a
government failure, saying they occurred as tourism and the economy had begun to
improve.

''The prime minister said something very true, that it seems like there are some
people who do not like for Egypt to wake up,'' Mr. Rady said. ''We were
approaching a record in tourism. We are heading to a 6 or 7 percent growth rate,
part of it because of investment, part because of tourism, and all this
terrorism will affect this.''

The aftermath of the Dahab attack demonstrated the nearly impossible task the
government faced in trying to deter terrorism. While security at hotels has been
tightened around the country, those responsible for Dahab went after the softest
of targets -- the middle of a crowded pedestrian walkway. Men, women and
children were killed and maimed.

There have been multiple bombings in the Sinai in the last two years, and
investigators say that what is worrisome is that they all appear connected --
including Dahab and the suicide blasts.

Investigators said the attacks seemed to be the work of locals, mostly people
from the Northern Sinai region who know the area and can avoid the intense
security and checkpoints that are routine here, and have decided that they are
willing to kill to undermine the government. An Interior Ministry statement said
it had information that the attackers in Dahab and Northern Sinai were Sinai
Bedouins.

''It is obvious that there is a link, especially since there are still suspects
at large from the first attacks,'' said a top security official who asked not to
be identified because he was not authorized to speak publicly.

The first attack on Wednesday occurred about 11 a.m. when a suicide bomber
exploded a device near a van carrying two Egyptian officials and two
peacekeepers with the multinational force, not far from their base in Al Gorah,
about 15 miles west of the Gaza Strip.

The second bomb blew up five minutes later beside an Egyptian police vehicle
responding to the first attack, officials with the multinational force said,
adding that the bombers were the only ones injured in either attack.

But the bombings, while far less bloody than those in Dahab, sent a chill
through Cairo.

For the first time since Hosni Mubarak became president, Egyptians are pressing
his government in ways they have never dared to before, and the protests
continue despite beatings and arrests by the security forces. As the suicide
bombers were attacking the peacekeeping forces, for example, some of Egypt's
most prominent judges were in the eighth day of a Cairo sit-in to demand
independence from the executive branch.

''There are cracks everywhere, and what we have seen in the recent weeks are
symptoms of deeper cracks in the regime,'' said Saad Eddin Ibrahim, who was once
jailed for his own democracy work.

''The people are no longer as afraid of the regime as they used to be,'' he
said. ''Part of it is because of their ineptitude of handling big problems in
the country whether social, political, or economic.''

Mr. Rady, the government spokesman disagrees, saying that it is because of
Egypt's successes that it has been the target of attacks.

''Even though there are some trespasses, we are heading the right way in many
things, and every time we are about to accomplish something, there is a hit that
brings us back a bit,'' he said. ''We are adamant to head for our target despite
all these problems. But there is someone trying to pull us back.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Egyptians lighted candles in Dahab yesterday for those killed
in a wave of suicide bombings on Monday. (Photo by Anja Niedringhaus/Associated
Press)
 The first suicide bombing yesterday was aimed at a van carrying two Egyptian
officials and two peacekeepers near their base at Al Gorah. (Photo by Ashraf
Sweilem/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBINGS (94%); TERRORISM (91%); PEACEKEEPING (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (79%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (79%); SUICIDE (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); RIOTS (77%); RELIGION (71%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (71%); FUNDAMENTALISM (71%); POLITICS (70%); POLITICAL
SCIENCE (67%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%); TOURISM (62%); PEACE
PROCESS (55%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (54%); SCHOOL BUILDINGS (50%) Bombs and
Explosives; Terrorism; Freedom and Human Rights; Freedom of Speech and
Expression

PERSON: Michael Slackman

CITY: ALEXANDRIA, EGYPT (78%); CAIRO, EGYPT (78%)

COUNTRY: EGYPT (99%); ISRAEL (79%)

REGION: Egypt; El Arish (Egypt); Dahab (Egypt); Sinai Peninsula; Egypt

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             621 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Due Process

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 30

LENGTH: 570 words


The jury in the trial of Zacarias Moussaoui has determined that he should spend
his life in jail rather than be executed for his role in the Sept. 11 terror
attacks. This seems like the best possible outcome. For all his bombast, Mr.
Moussaoui had no direct role in the 9/11 attacks. And it is good to know that he
will not achieve a fanatic's martyrdom.

The most important thing about the Moussaoui trial, however, was that it
happened. The proceedings -- including the jury deliberations -- were long and
difficult, but they were also fair and in accordance with the rules of American
justice.

That is not the story for hundreds of other people, many far less complicit than
Mr. Moussaoui, who are languishing in the prison at Guantanamo because the
United States rounded them up haphazardly during the Afghan war and plunked them
down in Cuba without any clear plan on what to do with them over the long run.

So far only 10 of the 490 people still stashed away in Guantanamo have ever been
charged with anything. The rest were hauled up before military proceedings that
were a joke, if the available transcripts are any indication, to determine
whether they should continue to be held without any rights or process under the
phony label of ''unlawful enemy combatant'' that the Bush administration
concocted after 9/11 for just this purpose. This is not even a half-hearted stab
at a day in court, and it leaves hundreds of people under indefinite, illegal
detention.

Among them are about 150 prisoners whom the government says it would like to
send home because they pose no threat to the United States, but feels it can't.
Some, like the Uighurs -- Chinese Muslims -- would face possible prison or
torture if sent back to countries without basic regard for human rights. The
Bush administration has put itself in a bizarre situation when it is forced to
worry about the humane treatment of people it whisked off to Guantanamo without
any serious attempt to determine who they were, much less what crime they may
have committed. They were then held without charges, many under abusive
conditions that sometimes amounted to torture, for more than three years.

The Moussaoui trial was a messy process, marked by embarrassing lapses on the
part of the prosecution, court fights about what information the defense could
have access to and the weird demeanor of the defendant himself, which threatened
at times to make the whole exercise seem ridiculous. It summarized, in the end,
almost all the things about playing by the rules that the hard men who surround
the president dislike.

But it worked. The whole world was able to watch this country's judicial system
struggling gamely and fairly toward a proper conclusion, upholding the principle
that even semideranged outsiders who claim to rejoice in the deaths of more than
2,000 innocent civilians deserve their day in court.

Meanwhile, the bitter fruits of the fast, easy, tough route are hidden away on a
military base. It seems apparent now that many of them are simply luckless men
who were in the most utterly wrong place in the world at the worst possible
time. Those who may be something more sinister cannot be tried because their
rights have been so compromised during their imprisonment. They are damaged
goods, their very presence staining the honor of the country that imprisoned
them, willy-nilly, because it seemed the easiest thing to do at the time.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORISM (90%); DUE
PROCESS (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); PRISONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HIJACKING (77%); NAVIES (68%);
RELIGION (50%) Terrorism; Editorials; Decisions and Verdicts; Sentences
(Criminal); Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; World Trade Center (NYC);
Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba)

PERSON: Zacarias Moussaoui

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             622 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

An Incomplete Peace: Sudan's Never-Ending War With Itself

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1103 words

DATELINE: KHARTOUM, Sudan, May 3


When northern and southern Sudanese leaders met in a soccer stadium in January
2005 to sign an agreement to end the civil war that had raged for more than two
decades, Bush administration officials hoped they were killing two birds with
one stone. By solving Sudan's worst conflict, the war in the south,
administration officials reasoned that the carnage also taking place in the
west, which Mr. Bush would eventually call genocide, would come to an end as
well.

Under the peace accord, John Garang, the charismatic leader of the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement, would become Sudan's vice president, joining his
old nemesis President Omar Hassan al-Bashir in Khartoum. In order to win peace
in the south, Darfur was left out of the negotiations, but peace in Darfur would
come as a natural byproduct of this process -- or so the reasoning went.

A year and a half later, top American diplomats once again find themselves at
the center of urgent talks to end a brutal conflict in Sudan, this time in
Darfur. If anything, the conflict there has escalated since the agreement with
the south -- more than 250,000 people have been chased from their homes in the
past three months, and a second, related conflict is brewing in neighboring
Chad.

The administration's current down-to-the-wire effort to clinch a peace deal for
Darfur comes at the end of a long string of confusing and sometimes seemingly
contradictory stances from the United States on Sudan. In the end, that may have
put peace even farther out of reach.

''Certainly one of the precipitating factors in the in the escalation from
political opposition to armed insurrection in Darfur is the fact that Darfurian
actors were not given any role in the peace process between the government and
southern-based rebels,'' said John Prendergast of the International Crisis
Group, which tries to prevent armed conflict. ''They realized the only way their
issues could be addressed was if they shot their way into the negotiating room.
So this is a case of negotiators actually making matters worse by their
interventions.''

For much of its post-colonial history, Sudan has been at war with itself, and
much of that conflict has been fought between latitudes. Indeed, the world has
long viewed Sudan's problems as beginning and ending roughly at the 12th
parallel, between northern, Muslim Arabs and southern, Christian and animist
Africans.

While the peace agreement between the north and south was being negotiated,
diplomats argued that because that conflict had raged for so long, and had cost
so many lives, it was proper to find a solution to it first, and then deal with
other problems.

In terms of the number of people killed, the Darfur conflict is comparable in
size to the brutal intertribal struggle that broke out in the south between the
Dinka and Nuer tribes in the early 1990's, just one of the deadly interludes of
the overall civil war. Hundreds of thousands of people died, mostly from disease
and hunger, in this side struggle between the tribes for control over the Sudan
People's Liberation Movement.

Political factors within the United States doubtless played a role in its
approach. Evangelical Christian groups have long focused on the civil war in
Sudan, providing much needed humanitarian aid and participating in ''buy-back''
programs to return civilians taken as slaves during the war to their villages.

But in the conflict in Darfur, as with a rebellion brewing in the east, the
warring groups are all Muslims. Taken together, they help demonstrate that while
deep, historical problems exist between Muslims and non-Muslims, Arabs and
Africans, nomads and farmers, Sudan's primary conflict is not between the north
and south. Instead it is between Khartoum, where all the nation's power lies,
and the periphery, where millions of people live on the margins, yearning for a
sliver of the power and wealth the center enjoys.

The fight between the north and the south was merely a symptom of this, and
soothing the symptoms in one region will not cure what ails Sudan, said Adam M.
Mousa Madibo, vice chairman of the opposition Umma Party, Sudan's largest
political party. ''The agreement between the north and south is an agreement
between two non-democratic military parties,'' Mr. Madibo said. ''It does not
reflect the ideas of the popular consensus of the Sudanese people. It doesn't
change any basic facts about political life in Sudan, so it cannot bring real
peace.''

The problem with the Comprehensive Peace Agreement, as the deal between the
north and the south is known, Mr. Madibo said, is that it is not comprehensive
at all. In its quest to maximize the powers of each side as an enticement to
peace, it excludes everyone in Sudan other than Mr. Bashir's ruling National
Congress Party, which controls 52 percent of the executive and legislative
power, and the Sudan People's Liberation Movement, which controls the remaining
48 percent.

Major political players, like the Umma Party, the north's most broadly popular
party, were excluded from the agreement. Darfur, it was decided, would be dealt
with separately.

''Frankly, the whole history of the Darfur conflict is a holding back of many
actors, some with the best of intentions, who felt there was such a danger of
jeopardizing the north-south agreement,'' said Louise Arbour, the United Nations
high commissioner for human rights, after touring refugee camps in Darfur this
week. ''But now dealing with Darfur has become painfully unavoidable.''

Rather than becoming a democratic, open society with a booming economy based on
Sudan's oil reserves and other natural resources, as envisioned in the peace
agreement, Sudan found itself this week at the top of Foreign Affairs magazine's
failed states index.

Making matters worse, Mr. Garang was killed in a helicopter crash last August,
and the rebel commander who replaced him, Salva Kiir, has not played the central
role the United States had hoped Mr. Garang would play. The south, which under
the peace deal may decide in a referendum to split from the north after six
years, seems increasingly likely to do so. Real peace in Sudan, after the
conflicts that have wracked this nation since its independence from Britain in
1954, remains out of reach.

''What plagues Sudan is fundamentally a regime at the center which is highly
discriminatory,'' Mr. Prendergast said. ''Until you deal with that, we are going
to see a continuation of this cycle of sort of half baked agreements with the
most heavily armed elements of different regions in Sudan, which will never
bring peace to the country.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 6, 2006



CORRECTION: A news analysis article yesterday about the difficulties of ending
the civil conflicts in Sudan misstated the year of the country's independence
from Britain. It was 1956, not 1954. The article also misidentified the magazine
that publishes the annual Failed States Index, a list of unstable countries, in
which Sudan is ranked No. 1. It is Foreign Policy, not Foreign Affairs.

A news analysis article on Thursday about the history of efforts to bring peace
to Sudan misstated the timing of the death of John Garang, a rebel leader who
was to become a vice president under an agreement with southern rebels last
year. Though his death was not confirmed until Aug. 1, it occurred in a
helicopter crash at the end of July.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vice President Ali Osman Taha, left, shook hands with John
Garang, a rebel leader, upon reaching a peace agreement in 2005 over a civil
war. Fighting in Darfur, already brewing, was not addressed at those talks.
(Photo by Sayyid Azim/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(88%); HISTORY (78%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (63%) United States
International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (88%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             632 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Jordan Islamists Stir Tensions By Displaying Election Skills

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 978 words

DATELINE: AMMAN, Jordan


The candidates came equipped with speeches and responses to criticism.
Organizers presented local outreach efforts and lunch for reporters. A visitor
could have been forgiven for imagining that a real election for the leadership
of the engineers syndicate was under way. In fact, most of the seats were
uncontested.

For the predominantly Islamist candidates who vied for the leadership of
Jordan's most powerful professional association, the message was simple: ''We
know how to get elected.''

''Anywhere there are free and fair elections, the Islamists inevitably win,''
said Maysara Mallas, a campaign organizer and leader of the association's
Freedom Committee. ''They have proven themselves, and the other movements have
all failed.''

The election, Mr. Mallas said, was an example of what could happen in government
if Islamists are permitted to contest a truly fair election.

Emboldened by the Muslim Brotherhood's electoral gains in Egypt last year and
more significantly by the rise to power of Hamas in the Palestinian elections in
January, Jordan's Islamists have raised their sights, preparing to take part in
possible council elections this year and parliamentary elections next year.

With an unlikely swagger, the Islamic Action Front, the Muslim Brotherhood's
political party, which controls 17 of the 110 seats in Parliament, is betting
that it can now ride a popular wave to win a significant majority and maybe even
form a government someday.

''We are a political party, and it is natural for us to seek to come to power
one day,'' said Rohile Ghraibeh, the front's No. 2 officer. ''If we were to win,
is that worthy of any fear? We would consider it a blessing from God.''

There is little chance of an Islamist government under the current political
system in Jordan -- King Abdullah has the power to bypass Parliament in forming
a government and can dissolve Parliament by decree.

But the Islamists' bluster and the government's reaction have increased tensions
here.

In the most significant case, security officials announced in late April that
they had arrested several men with ties to Hamas who had been tracked smuggling
weapons into Jordan from Syria.

Many in Jordan saw the timing of the announcement, right before a planned visit
by Hamas leaders and as the Islamists were becoming more aggressive, not only as
an assault on Hamas, but also as a swipe at the Islamic Action Front, which is
openly sympathetic to the group.

The Islamic Action Front's new leadership quickly dismissed the allegations and
the sparse details released with the announcements as a politically convenient
ploy.

[On Wednesday, a government spokesman, Nasser Judeh, said the men admitted under
interrogation that Hamas had been trying to recruit Jordanians for training in
Syria and Iran to stage possible attacks in Jordan.]

''The announcement underscored the crisis between the government and the
Islamists,'' said Muhammad Abu Rumman, who is in charge of research at the
Jordanian daily Al Ghad and an expert on Jordan's Islamists. Arab governments
are seeking to send two messages, Mr. Abu Rumman says: one is aimed at Western
nations, hinting that true political reform would bring the Islamists to power,
and the other is aimed at the Jordanian public, portraying the Islamists as
untrustworthy and full of empty promises.

Mr. Abu Rumman and others say they have seen a decided governmental cooling with
the opposition since November, when suicide bombers attacked three hotels,
killing at least 59 people in the worst act of terrorism in Jordan. New
antiterrorism legislation was soon passed, raising concerns by Islamists that
they would be caught in a tighter net.

After the Hamas victory in Palestinian elections in January, Mr. Abu Rumman
said, that shift became even more pronounced. There are reports that the
Mukhabarat have become more heavy-handed with journalists who criticize the
government, he said. And when the Islamists protested the increase in fuel
prices last month, they were quickly silenced and several members of the group
reportedly were arrested.

Government officials say they have nothing to fear from the Islamists, who have
been part of Jordan's political fabric, though a tightly controlled one, since
the 1950's.

If there is tension, it has been brought on by the Islamists, Nasser Judeh, a
government spokesman, said. The prime minister met for three hours with Islamist
members of Parliament after the announcement of the Hamas arrests last month,
and lines of communication have been kept wide open, he said.

Jordan's election law works against the Islamists' chances of gaining political
control. After Islamists won a majority in Parliament in 1989, a new law put
into effect in 1993 and again with modifications in 2001, provided for a
one-person one-vote system in choosing Parliament, in effect weakening an
ideologically based group in favor of traditional tribal ties.

Last year an initiative called the National Agenda, which made recommendations
for changes in Jordan sought to overhaul the elections law by creating a hybrid
of the existing law and a proportional voting system, but debate over changing
the law continues.

Still, critics of the Islamists have begun calling for an even tougher stance by
the government.

''The Islamists are growing stronger, and their institutions are, too,'' said
Samir Habashneh, a member of Jordan's appointed Senate and a former interior
minister who has been an outspoken opponent of Islamist political power.

Mr. Ghraibeh and other Islamists say they simply want a fairer chance at the
ballot box. ''I am not optimistic that we can win a majority now, because the
laws have still not been changed,'' said Mr. Ghraibeh, of the Islamic Action
Front. ''But we are not trying to take everything away. We just want to take
part in a fair process.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
RELIGION (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
POLITICS (89%); HAMAS (89%); POLITICAL ORGANIZING (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (71%); SMUGGLING
(60%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%) Islam; Elections; Legislatures
and Parliaments; Freedom and Human Rights; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (55%)

PERSON: Hassan M Fattah; Abdullah (King of Jordan)

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (79%)

COUNTRY: JORDAN (96%); SYRIA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); EGYPT
(79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Jordan; Jordan

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             633 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1487 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-9

Diverse Sri Lankan City Mired in Ethnic Violence
After four years of livable peace since the 2002 cease-fire between the
government and the separatist Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, the city of
Trincomalee has once again sunk into the muck of fear, uncertainty and distrust
that marked the worst years of the ethnic conflict in Sri Lanka that has spanned
the last two decades.   A1

China Reacts to Scientist Fraud


China's government announced that a computer scientist, who became a national
hero when he said he had created one of China's first homegrown digital signal
processing computer chips, had faked research and stolen chip designs from a
foreign company, then passed them off as his own.   A1

32 Dead in Iraq Attacks
Two suicide car bombers tore into a checkpoint for Baghdad's airport, killing at
least 14 people and wounding 16. It was the first bomb attack in nearly a year
aimed at the airport, and the worst in a spree of violent assaults that left at
least 32 people dead on Iraq's deadliest day in weeks.   A6

Pyramid Fever in Bosnia
An amateur archaeologist is convinced that he has discovered a huge ancient
pyramid in Bosnia, a country awash in war recriminations, political divisions
and sunken pride. But while pyramid fever is spreading through his country,
archaeologists and historians insist it is simply a peculiarly symmetrical
geological formation.   A8

British Union to Vote on Israel
Britain's biggest union for college and university teachers plans to ask its
67,000 members to consider boycotting Israeli lecturers who do not publicly
dissociate themselves from what it called Israel's ''apartheid policies''
concerning Palestinians.   A3

Prime Minister Tony Blair says he is contemplating changes in Britain's human
rights laws, limiting the power of courts to challenge the government, after a
paroled rapist killed a woman and a judge refused to send several hijackers back
to their country.   A9

Israel Kills 6 Palestinians
In one of the bloodiest days in the West Bank in recent weeks, Israeli troops
killed at least six Palestinians, including an Islamic Jihad leader accused of
orchestrating a suicide bombing last month.   A3

Nepal Moves to Limit Monarchy
Nepal's recently reinstated Parliament, eager to sideline the monarchy, or at
least show its citizenry that it is moving to do so, is to introduce a bill that
would abolish the palace Privy Council, compel King Gyanendra to pay taxes and
scrap the term ''his majesty's government'' from a host of state institutions.
A8

Somali Militias Observe Truce
Rival militias observed a truce in response to demands from clan elders alarmed
that eight days of fighting, in which 148 people had been killed, seemed ready
to engulf Mogadishu, the capital.   A9

NATIONAL   A12-19

U.S. Plan to Deploy Guard At Border Worries Mexico
President Bush's plan to send National Guard troops to guard the southern border
of the United States has raised the concern of his longtime ally President
Vicente Fox of Mexico, who called Mr. Bush to express his worries. White House
officials said Mr. Bush assured Mr. Fox that a permanent National Guard presence
on the border was not being considered.   A1

Politics Stalls Flood Insurance
An effort to rescue the federal flood insurance program that grew in the wake of
Hurricane Katrina is faltering. Though hurricane experts foresee a generation of
fiercer and more frequent storms, Congress seems unlikely to make more than
modest changes in the program.   A1

Old Allies Criticize Republicans
Some of President Bush's most influential Christian conservative allies in the
last election are becoming openly critical of the White House and Republicans in
Congress, warning that they will not help turn out the vote this fall unless
Congress does more to oppose same-sex marriage, obscenity and abortion.   A1

Millionaire Airline Employees
The remaining active employees who helped start Southwest Airlines 35 years ago
are each millionaires. Ask them why they stick around and they mention
frugality, pride in earning their keep and a simple enjoyment of work.   A1

Top Aide Defends N.S.A. Spying
As senior lawmakers vowed to question the former head of the National Security
Agency this week about its surveillance programs, Stephen J. Hadley, left , a
presidential adviser, said the programs were lawful and had not invaded the
privacy rights of millions of Americans.   A15

Medicare Deadline Nears
Enrollment in Medicare's new benefit for prescription drugs will conclude today,
with beneficiaries, insurers and many lawmakers saying Congress should eliminate
the financial penalty for people who sign up late.   A12

EDUCATION

A Federal Push on Math
The Bush administration has named a former president of the University of Texas
to lead a national panel to weigh in on the math wars playing out across the
country: a politically fraught battle that pits a more free-form approach to
teaching math against the traditional method which emphasizes rules and
formulas.   A17

Schools Update Data Systems
Nearly all 50 states are building high tech student data systems to collect,
categorize and crunch the endless gigabytes of attendance logs, test scores and
other information collected in public schools.   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-5

Republican Congressman Faces Tough Political Fight
Representative John E. Sweeney, who just a few years ago was a rising star in
the New York Republican Party, is facing his first significant electoral
challenge since taking office in 1998. His troubles are both unexpected and
intriguing, independent analysts say, because he represents a solidly Republican
upstate district.   B1

The Avenues Less Traveled
The 300 volunteers with Big Apple Greeter show off New York City's diverse
byways to visitors interested in more than the familiar paths, and at no cost.
B3

Clinton Clarifies Remark
Backing away from her assertion that the current generation is lazy, Senator
Hillary Rodham Clinton said that she simply wanted to ''set the bar high'' when
she told an audience last week that young people today ''think work is a
four-letter word.''   B3

New York Signs on Sale
An eclectic collection of drawings, models and neon signs, all vivid reminders
of the brightly lighted advertisements that have long hovered over Broadway, are
being auctioned off this week in Philadelphia.   B1

SPORTSMONDAY   D1-8

Webb Wins Michelob Open
Karrie Webb shot a one-under-par 70 at the Michelob Ultra Open in Williamsburg,
Va., to win the tournament by seven shots over Lorena Ochoa (72) and Hee Won Han
(70).   D4

Yankees Struggle at Home
The Yankees lost at home to the Oakland Athletics, 6-1. The team's depleted
lineup, which is missing the injured outfielders Hideki Matsui and Gary
Sheffield, never had more than one base runner in any inning.   D1

ARTS   E1-8

Getty to Meet With Greeks
Michael Brand, the new director of the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles will
meet with Greek officials in Athens to address allegations that some objects in
the Getty's collection were illegally removed from their historical settings.
E1

OBITUARIES   B8

Alexander Zinoviev
A philosopher turned popular author who won wide repute for his satires of
Soviet society, only to become a surprising apologist for Communism after its
demise, he was 83.   B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Cable TV Push in Japan
The Japanese are among the most avid television watchers on earth, yet just one
in five homes in Japan subscribes to a cable or satellite service. Jupiter
Telecommunications, the nation's biggest cable provider, is tryng to change that
by signing up record numbers of customers for its television, broadband lines
and digital phones.   C1

Journalism Schools Thriving
Despite recent pessimism over the future of journalism, demand for seats in the
nation's journalism schools and programs remains robust.   C1

Ad Changes on the Horizon
Media companies are turning to market researchers to find out how to reach
consumers who use more than one medium -- including the Internet, television and
cellphone -- at one time.   C1

The unexpectedly fast and furious embrace of the new media by the big broadcast
television networks is offering advertisers the opportunity to spend the same
amount of money they usually do on marketing not only popular programs but on
their Web sites and the repeats the networks now offer free online.   C1

Downloading Debate
In the current debate over laws governing music downloads in France, some
condemn Aziz Ridouan as an advocate of criminal piracy, while others say he
represents the new generation of online consumers. In either case, just about
everyone involved listens to what Mr. Ridouan, an 18-year-old high school
student, has to say.   C7

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A20-21

Editorials: About that free trade ; less than meets the eye; new guidelines for
AIDS testing; science in the garden.

Columns: Bob Herbert, Paul Krugman.

Bridge   E6
Crossword   E2
Metro Diary   B2
Weather   B7
TV Listings   E8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LIBERATION
TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL
SCIENCE (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); BOMBINGS (88%); SEX
OFFENSES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (77%); COMPUTER SCIENCE (76%); GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS (76%); COMPUTER
CHIPS (75%); HISTORY (74%); LEGISLATION (74%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); HIJACKING (73%); ARCHAEOLOGY (71%); DIGITAL
SIGNAL PROCESSING (70%); ELECTRONICS DESIGN (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (68%);
BOYCOTTS (65%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (65%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (64%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%); JUDGES (62%); PAROLE (62%); RELIGION
(50%); ARMED FORCES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%)

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (57%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%); MUQDISHO, SOMALIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (94%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); IRAQ (92%); NEPAL (92%); SOMALIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             645 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Strategic Victimhood in Sudan

BYLINE: By Alan J. Kuperman.

Alan J. Kuperman, an assistant professor of public affairs at the University of
Texas, is an editor of ''Gambling on Humanitarian Intervention: Moral Hazard,
Rebellion and Civil War.''

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 19

LENGTH: 991 words

DATELINE: AUSTIN, Tex.


THOUSANDS of Americans who wear green wristbands and demand military
intervention to stop Sudan's Arab government from perpetrating genocide against
black tribes in Darfur must be perplexed by recent developments.

Without such intervention, Sudan's government last month agreed to a peace
accord pledging to disarm Arab janjaweed militias and resettle displaced
civilians. By contrast, Darfur's black rebels, who are touted by the wristband
crowd as freedom fighters, rejected the deal because it did not give them full
regional control. Put simply, the rebels were willing to let genocide continue
against their own people rather than compromise their demand for power.

International mediators were shamefaced. They had presented the plan as take it
or leave it, to compel Khartoum's acceptance. But now the ostensible
representatives of the victims were balking. Embarrassed American officials were
forced to ask Sudan for further concessions beyond the ultimatum that it had
already accepted.

Fortunately, Khartoum again acquiesced. But two of Darfur's three main rebel
groups still rejected peace. Frustrated American negotiators accentuated the
positive -- the strongest rebel group did sign -- and expressed hope that the
dissenters would soon join.

But that hope was crushed last week when the rebels viciously turned on each
other. As this newspaper reported, ''The rebels have unleashed a tide of
violence against the very civilians they once joined forces to protect.''

Seemingly bizarre, this rejection of peace by factions claiming to seek it is
actually revelatory. It helps explain why violence originally broke out in
Darfur, how the Save Darfur movement unintentionally poured fuel on the fire,
and what can be done to stanch genocidal violence in Sudan and elsewhere.

Darfur was never the simplistic morality tale purveyed by the news media and
humanitarian organizations. The region's blacks, painted as long-suffering
victims, actually were the oppressors less than two decades ago -- denying Arab
nomads access to grazing areas essential to their survival. Violence was
initiated not by Arab militias but by the black rebels who in 2003 attacked
police and military installations. The most extreme Islamists are not in the
government but in a faction of the rebels sponsored by former Deputy Prime
Minister Hassan al-Turabi, after he was expelled from the regime. Cease-fires
often have been violated first by the rebels, not the government, which has
pledged repeatedly to admit international peacekeepers if the rebels halt their
attacks.

This reality has been obscured by Sudan's criminally irresponsible reaction to
the rebellion: arming militias to carry out a scorched-earth counterinsurgency.
These Arab forces, who already resented the black tribes over past land disputes
and recent attacks, were only too happy to rape and pillage any village
suspected of supporting the rebels.

In light of janjaweed atrocities, it is natural to romanticize the other side as
freedom fighters. But Darfur's rebels do not deserve that title. They took up
arms not to stop genocide -- which erupted only after they rebelled -- but to
gain tribal domination.

The strongest faction, representing the minority Zaghawa tribe, signed the
sweetened peace deal in hopes of legitimizing its claim to control Darfur. But
that claim is vehemently opposed by rebels representing the larger Fur tribe.
Such internecine disputes only recently hit the headlines, but the rebels have
long wasted resources fighting each other rather than protecting their people.

Advocates of intervention play down rebel responsibility because it is easier to
build support for stopping genocide than for becoming entangled in yet another
messy civil war. But their persistent calls for intervention have actually
worsened the violence.

The rebels, much weaker than the government, would logically have sued for peace
long ago. Because of the Save Darfur movement, however, the rebels believe that
the longer they provoke genocidal retaliation, the more the West will pressure
Sudan to hand them control of the region. Sadly, this message was reinforced
when the rebels' initial rejection of peace last month was rewarded by American
officials' extracting further concessions from Khartoum.

The key to rescuing Darfur is to reverse these perverse incentives. Spoiler
rebels should be told that the game is over, and that further resistance will no
longer be rewarded but punished by the loss of posts reserved for them in the
peace agreement.

Ultimately, if the rebels refuse, military force will be required to defeat
them. But this is no job for United Nations peacekeepers. Iraq, Afghanistan and
Somalia show that even the United States military cannot stamp out Islamic
rebels on their home turf; second-rate international troops would stand even
less chance.

Rather, we should let Sudan's army handle any recalcitrant rebels, on condition
that it eschew war crimes. This option will be distasteful to many, but Sudan
has signed a peace treaty, so it deserves the right to defend its sovereignty
against rebels who refuse to, so long as it observes the treaty and the laws of
war.

Indeed, to avoid further catastrophes like Darfur, the United States should
announce a policy of never intervening to help provocative rebels,
diplomatically or militarily, so long as opposing armies avoid excessive
retaliation. This would encourage restraint on both sides. Instead we should
redirect intervention resources to support ''people power'' movements that
pursue change peacefully, as they have done successfully over the past two
decades in the Philippines, Indonesia, Serbia and elsewhere.

America, born in revolution, has a soft spot for rebels who claim to be freedom
fighters, including those in Darfur. But to reduce genocidal violence, we must
withhold support for the cynical provocations of militants who bear little
resemblance to our founders.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); PEACE
PROCESS (77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); LAND USE PLANNING
(73%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: Alan J Kuperman

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (90%); AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             647 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 12, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Deaths at Gitmo

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 558 words


The news that three inmates at Guantanamo Bay hanged themselves should not have
surprised anyone who has paid the slightest attention to the twisted history of
the camp that President Bush built for selected prisoners from Afghanistan and
antiterrorist operations. It was the inevitable result of creating a netherworld
of despair beyond the laws of civilized nations, where men were to be held
without any hope of decent treatment, impartial justice or, in so many cases,
even eventual release.

It is a place where secret tribunals sat in judgment of men whose identities
they barely knew and who were not permitted to see the evidence against them.
Inmates were abused, humiliated, tormented and sometimes tortured. Some surely
are very dangerous men, committed to a life of terrorism and deserving of harsh
justice. But only 10 of the roughly 465 men at the camp have been charged with
crimes. The others, according to senior officers who served there, were foot
soldiers of the Taliban or men who just happened to live in a country invaded by
the United States after the 9/11 attacks.

Inmates at Guantanamo Bay have tried seeking help from the American courts, and
one case has reached the Supreme Court. But most of these appeals were thwarted
by claims of national security. Any new appeals will fall under a shocking new
law that deprives the inmates of the centuries-old right to challenge their
imprisonment. Government lawyers have even tried to use that law retroactively,
to dismiss all pending appeals.

Guantanamo Bay and other American detention centers have sparked outrage around
the world -- deeply harming America's image as the defender of humanity against
just these sorts of abuses. Last month a United Nations panel called for the
prisons to be shut down. But the administration's response to all of this has
been defiance.

When dozens of inmates went on hunger strikes last year, the authorities
strapped them into metal ''restraint chairs'' and ordered doctors to force-feed
them. Military officials said they did this only to inmates on the brink of
death, but The Times has reported that the restraint chair was used on all
hunger strikers, regardless of their condition.

Medical groups were overwhelmingly appalled by this practice, but the Pentagon
issued new rules this month reaffirming that military doctors can be ordered to
force-feed prisoners. The only role for psychiatrists at Gitmo seems to be to
help prepare prisoners for interrogation.

So it was not surprising in the least when inmates attempted suicide.
Twenty-three tried to kill themselves over eight days in August 2003, but the
military covered it up for 18 months. Now, three inmates have succeeded. Camp
officials say one was a mid- or high-level Qaeda operative. One was captured in
Afghanistan (doing what, we don't know), and the other was from something the
camp commander, Rear Adm. Harry Harris Jr., called a splinter group.

Admiral Harris's response was as appalling as the suicides. ''I believe this was
not an act of desperation, but an act of asymmetrical warfare waged against
us,'' he said. The inmates, he said, ''have no regard for life, neither ours nor
their own.''

These comments reveal a profound disassociation from humanity. They say more
about why Guantanamo Bay should be closed than any United Nations report ever
could.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); SUICIDE (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); TORTURE (78%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (77%); MILITARY
BASES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); TALIBAN (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); LAWYERS (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); SUPREME COURTS (71%);
APPEALS (71%); NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (69%); NAVIES (68%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (62%) Terrorism; Editorials; Suicides and Suicide
Attempts; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Freedom and Human Rights

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             656 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Was Killed After Firing Shots, Peacekeepers Say

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 423 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, Jan. 7


A woman killed by peacekeeping troops in Bosnia on Thursday was shot after she
and her 11-year-son fired on soldiers seeking the arrest of her husband, a
Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect, a military official in the Bosnian capital,
Sarajevo, said Friday.

The woman, Rada Abazovic, was declared dead shortly after she was taken to a
hospital in Rogatica in southeastern Bosnia on Thursday, several hours after the
gun battle outside the Abazovic family home in nearby Bjelogorci, in which her
son, Dragoljub, was wounded.

Her husband, Dragomir Abazovic, who stands accused by a Bosnian court of
committing war crimes during the 1992-95 Bosnian conflict, had tried to flee but
was cornered by troops and shot himself in the head, the official said. Hospital
officials said he was in serious condition.

The shooting of Mrs. Abazovic and her son was widely criticized by Serbian
politicians in Bosnia and Serbia, including the Serbian member of Bosnia's
tripartite presidency, Dragan Cavic, who accused the European Union-led
peacekeeping force of using indiscriminate force resulting in the death and
injury of innocent victims.

The nationality of the troops involved has not been disclosed. Italian
carabinieri, military police officers who are part of the United Nations
peacekeeping force, were photographed later at the scene of the shooting.

But on Friday, a spokesman for the European Union-led mission, which took over
from NATO troops at the end of 2004, said Mrs. Abazovic had opened fire on the
commander of the unit seeking her husband's arrest as he tried to escape.

''She fired short bursts from an automatic weapon, a Kalashnikov AK-47,'' said
the spokesman, Lt. Cmdr. Jem Thomas, in a telephone interview, giving an account
based on a debriefing of the unit's commander, whom he did not name. ''Soon
after, she was joined by a boy.''

''When she was about to run out, she gave the weapon to her son, who continued
shooting while she looked for more ammunition.''

He said troops were then ordered to shoot both Mrs. Abazovic and her son. ''She
was immobilized,'' he said, ''with one shot.'' The boy, he said, was also ''shot
and immobilized.''

Mrs. Abazovic was estimated to have used four magazines of ammunition, Commander
Thomas said.

A Bosnian Serb police spokesman would not comment on that account, or say
whether the autopsy on Mrs. Abazovic had provided evidence that she had fired a
gun. ''I am unable to talk about it,'' said the spokesman, Radovan Pejic. ''All
the evidence has been given to the prosecutor.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Italian peacekeepers after gunfire near Rogatica, Bosnia, killed
the wife of a Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect. (Photo by Amel Emric/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (93%); ARMED FORCES (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (89%);
FIREARMS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); AUTOPSIES (73%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%);
HOSPITALS (71%); POLICE FORCES (57%) WAR CRIMES, GENOCIDE AND CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); UNITED NATIONS (55%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (54%)

PERSON: NICHOLAS WOOD; DRAGOMIR ABAZOVIC; RADA ABAZOVIC; DRAGOLJUB ABAZOVIC

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (79%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); EUROPE (94%);
SERBIA (94%); SLOVENIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%); ITALY (79%)

REGION: SERBIA; EUROPEAN UNION; EUROPE; ITALY; SERBIA

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             657 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 8, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

When Democracy Died in Wilmington, N.C.

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial Observer; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 932 words


The United States abolished the practice of owning and selling human beings when
the 13th Amendment was ratified in 1865. But the commercial component of slavery
was in some ways the easiest to dispense with. The systems of black
powerlessness and white supremacy that supported the enterprise proved to be far
more pernicious. They persisted for another 100 years in the Deep South,
enforced by lynching, disenfranchisement and state-sanctioned racial terror.

By the rise of the civil rights movement, many black Southerners had been so
thoroughly conditioned to be subservient that they dared not look white people
in the eye, much less seek the right to vote. This posture was understandable in
the Deep South, where racial violence had been a kind of blood sport. But it
seemed out of place in states like North Carolina, which was not as closely
associated with hard-core brutality as were states like Mississippi and Alabama.

This rosy version of Carolina history turns out to have its bloody side. A draft
of a voluminous report commissioned by the North Carolina legislature has
recently outlined a grotesquely violent and stridently racist version of state
history that rivals anything ever seen in the most troubled parts of the Deep
South. The report, by the Wilmington Race Riot Commission, has thrown a klieg
light onto a coup and riot that were staged in Wilmington, N.C., in 1898 -- and
that still have an evident impact on the political landscape of the state.

The uprising was engineered by white supremacists who unseated a government that
had been elected by an alliance that included black citizens and white
progressives. Scores of black citizens were killed during the uprising -- no one
yet knows how many -- and prominent blacks and whites were banished from the
city under threat of death. White supremacists eventually hijacked the state
government, stripped black citizens of the right to vote and brought black
political participation to a close.

The events outlined in the report provide a ready explanation for why black
people in North Carolina remained politically docile for so long and why the
civil rights movement was so slow to reach them. The speed with which the coup
and the accompanying riot were papered over and swept from public awareness
reminds us what a powerful force cultural amnesia can be in shaping how we see
history.

The Wilmington coup was unique in its scope and planning. But in general terms,
it provided the template for how white communities in many parts of the country
would respond when faced with the sudden rise of a black professional class that
owned property and competed openly with white businesses. In the early 20th
century, fear of black independence and self-determination would lead to white
vigilante actions in communities like Tulsa, Okla., followed by expulsions of
influential black people.

Like their counterparts elsewhere, white supremacists in Wilmington found
themselves faced with an economically vibrant community, where a strong black
professional class was publicly asserting itself in very visible ways. In
addition to owning impressive businesses, black citizens had joined forces with
like-minded whites to bring a progressive government to power both in the city
and at the state level.

White racists were particularly outraged at the large black political presence
in Wilmington, where black people could be found at just about all levels of
government. Among the more visible black figures at the time was John Campbell
Dancy, collector of customs at the Port of Wilmington, who was appointed by the
Republican president, William McKinley. That Dancy was very well paid -- and
that he replaced a white Democrat -- was an endless source of irritation among
whites in the city. Dancy was ridiculed by some in the white press, who referred
to him as ''Sambo of the Customs House.''

The proponents of the insurrection found ready allies in the press -- most
notably The News and Observer -- which inflamed the public through editorials
and political cartoons that depicted white manhood being trod upon by mere
Negroes, who were, it was said, better suited to be slaves. The plotters and
their minions in the press were further angered by a famously incendiary
editorial written by the black journalist Alexander Manly of The Daily Record of
Wilmington. Manly, descended from a white former governor and a black slave,
knew a great deal about sexual hypocrisy in North Carolina society. He brought
that knowledge to bear in an editorial attacking a speaker who had urged the
lynching of black men to prevent them from seeking sex with white women.

Manly escaped Wilmington before he could be caught and lynched. But his
newspaper's office was burned, heralding a long period of voicelessness for the
black community in both the city and the state. As the full scope of what the
plotters had in mind became clear, black people by the hundreds left the city,
taking their ideas and commercial energies elsewhere. The city has yet to
recover from the exodus.

The riot commission is circulating a draft version of its report (which has also
been posted on the Web at www.ah.dcr.state.nc.us), and hopes to find descendants
of blacks and whites who fled Wilmington for places like Washington and New
York. The draft report has already begun to pull back the covers on a brutal but
little-known episode in Southern history. If the commission's progress so far is
any measure of things to come, the final report will make an even more
impressive contribution to public understanding of this period.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RIOTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); COUPS (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (76%); POLITICS (72%) History  ;
Discrimination; Demonstrations and Riots; Politics and Government; Blacks

PERSON: Brent Staples

CITY: WILMINGTON, NC, USA (96%); TULSA, OK, USA (79%)

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (96%); SOUTHEAST USA (94%); OKLAHOMA, USA (79%);
ALABAMA, USA (79%); MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: North Carolina; Southern States (US); Wilmington (Nc); North Carolina

LOAD-DATE: January 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             662 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Mideastisms

BYLINE: By William Safire.

Send comments and suggestions to: safireonlanguage@nytimes.com.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 2; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 01-15-06: ON
LANGUAGE; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1010 words


''We frequently call them insurgents,'' Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld told a
news conference late last year. ''I'm a little reluctant to, for some reason.
They're against a legitimate government.''

Gen. Peter Pace, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, at Rumsfeld's side, told
the reporters that U.S., Iraqi and coalition forces were ''taking cities from
the -- I have to use the word 'insurgent' because I can't think of a better word
right now.. . .'' Rumsfeld quickly put in, ''Enemies of the legitimate Iraqi
government -- how's that?''

Insurgent, from the Latin insurgere, ''to rise up,'' means ''a rebel, one who
revolts against an established government.'' The insurgent in rebellion does not
have the status of a belligerent, rooted in Latin for ''waging war,'' and thus
does not have the protections in law of a member of a state at war. Why, then,
was Rumsfeld eager to get away from the term insurgent? One reason, I think, is
that the word has gained more of a political connotation than a legal one in the
U.S.; it is often applied to a group seeking to oust the leadership of a
political party or a union, and insurgents in that context can refer to
admirable ''underdogs'' in a struggle against the established order or
entrenched leadership. Another reason: it unifies disparate elements into an
''insurgency.''

The day after that news conference, President Bush delivered a speech to the
Naval Academy defining the enemy in Iraq as ''a combination of rejectionists,
Saddamists and terrorists.'' Gone was insurgents; in addition, a previous
category of ''Saddam loyalists'' was shortened to Saddamists because loyalty,
even to a tyrant, can be seen as an attribute. In the Bush lexicon,
rejectionists are mainly resentful Sunnis who can be brought into the Iraqi
democratic fold; Saddamists are the tyrant's favorites ''who still harbor dreams
of returning to power''; and terrorists, a term from the French Revolution, are
Al Qaeda ''foreigners who are coming to fight freedom's progress in Iraq.''

By refusing to accept the lumping of the three disparate groups into an
insurgency, the Bush administration hopes to publicly separate the most violent
factions from the more reachable current rejectionists.

In wartime, words are weapons; we have seen how Israelis and Palestinians are
highly sensitive to connotations in their conflict. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon
preferred to refer to land in dispute west of the Jordan River by biblical
names: Judea and Samaria, evoking Hebrew origins; Israeli diplomats long tried
''administered territories.'' Palestinians call it the West Bank and have won
that terminological battle.

On another word-war front, the construction within the West Bank to protect
Israelis from rocket attacks and penetration by suicide bombers is called ''the
wall'' by Palestinians intending to evoke memories of the cold war's hated
Berlin Wall. Israelis counter by calling it ''the fence,'' a less onerous and
more familiar description of a line of separation, recalling to Americans the
Robert Frost poetic line ''Good fences make good neighbors.'' (In fact, it is
both fence and wall, depending on the place.) After perusal of thesauri, the
Bush administration adopted the undeniably accurate word barrier, which has been
accepted as neutral by much of the news media and stirs no objection by Israel.


TO IR- IS HUMAN

The Palestinian Human Rights Monitoring Group, Steven Erlanger of The Times
reported, noted that more than half the violent deaths in areas controlled by
the Palestinian Authority were from gunshot wounds caused by other Palestinians;
the group deplored the authority's ''irresponsiveness to the civil unrest in
Gaza and the West Bank.''

We will now veer from Mideastisms to deal with an English prefix. That was the
first time I had seen irresponsiveness. Although the noun can be found in some
dictionaries and a few hundred times in a search-engine roundup, it is rarely
used. Even the adjective from which it is back-formed -- irresponsive -- is not
part of our working vocabularies, as most of us prefer near synonyms like
''sullen, close, tight-lipped'' or choose phrases like ''lack of response'' or
''failure to react.'' You can find unresponsive, but thereby hangs a tale:

That got me wondering about ir- words, from irresponsible to irreverent, and
irrespective to irrational. There's no doubt about the meaning of the prefix
ir-; it means ''not.'' Why, then, don't we use the standard prefixes that turn
around a word's meaning, like in- or un-?

The reason is that language is created to fit the mouth. It is easier to
pronounce irresolute than inresolute or unresolute, which is why those clunkier
forms never got off the ground. Somewhere in the mist of early mouthings,
English speakers found the n uncomfortable before words beginning with r. So --
why not scrap the ''inr,'' with its two separate sounds, and go with a simple
''ir-''? In most cases we dropped the n of in-, leaving only the i, pronounced
''ih.'' Then, because spelling is the handmaiden of pronunciation, when it came
to writing down the way the word sounded, we decided to double the r.

Who is this mysterious ''we'' telling us what sounds to elide and how to spell
them? It is the native speaker -- our malleable paramour, Norma Loquendi -- who
makes changes in language to make it easier to communicate, irregardless of the
strictures of formalistic word mavens.

And what of irregardless -- as so many readers ask, is that a word? The opening
ir- means ''not'' or ''without'' and the closing -less also means ''without,''
which turns the locution into arrant nonsense. First cited in Harold Wentworth's
dialect dictionary in 1912, irregardless was probably intended to be a joke, and
the deliberate mistake is today used with humorous intent, although some don't
get the joke and make the mistake. Because it is mainly a jocular word, the
answer is yes, irregardless is a word, and that is why lexicographers put it in
dictionaries with a rolling of the eyes and a warning not to take it seriously.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing: Lettering by Scott Teplin

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TERRORISM (89%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(89%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%);
LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (75%); AL-QAEDA (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(71%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (71%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (67%); MILITARY SCHOOLS & ACADEMIES (50%) English Language

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (58%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) William Safire

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); ISRAEL (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); JORDAN (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             664 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Imperial Presidency at Work

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 480 words


You would think that Senators Carl Levin and John McCain would have learned by
now that you cannot deal in good faith with a White House that does not act in
good faith. Yet both men struck bargains intended to restore the rule of law to
American prison camps. And President Bush tossed them aside at the first
opportunity.

Mr. Bush made a grand show of inviting Mr. McCain into the Oval Office last
month to announce his support for a bill to require humane treatment of
detainees at Guantanamo Bay and other prisons run by the American military and
intelligence agencies. He seemed to have managed to get Vice President Dick
Cheney to stop trying to kill the proposed Congressional ban on torture of
prisoners.

The White House also endorsed a bargain between Mr. Levin and Senator Lindsey
Graham of South Carolina, which tempered somewhat a noxious proposal by Mr.
Graham to deny a court hearing to anyone the president declares to be an
''unlawful enemy combatant.'' The bargain with Mr. Levin removed language that
stripped away cases already before the courts, which would have been an
egregious usurpation of power by one branch of government, and it made clear
that those cases should remain in the courts.

Mr. Bush, however, seems to see no limit to his imperial presidency. First, he
issued a constitutionally ludicrous ''signing statement'' on the McCain bill.
The message: Whatever Congress intended the law to say, he intended to ignore it
on the pretext the commander in chief is above the law. That twisted reasoning
is what led to the legalized torture policies, not to mention the domestic
spying program.

Then Mr. Bush went after the judiciary, scrapping the Levin-Graham bargain. The
solicitor general informed the Supreme Court last week that it no longer had
jurisdiction over detainee cases. It said the court should drop an existing case
in which a Yemeni national is challenging the military tribunals invented by Mr.
Bush's morally challenged lawyers after 9/11. The administration is seeking to
eliminate all other lawsuits filed by some of the approximately 500 men at
Gitmo, the vast majority of whom have not been shown to pose any threat.

Both of the offensive theories at work here -- that a president's intent in
signing a bill trumps the intent of Congress in writing it, and that a president
can claim power without restriction or supervision by the courts or Congress --
are pet theories of Judge Samuel Alito, the man Mr. Bush chose to tilt the
Supreme Court to the right.

The administration's behavior shows how high and immediate the stakes are in the
Alito nomination, and how urgent it is for Congress to curtail Mr. Bush's
expansion of power. Nothing in the national consensus to combat terrorism after
9/11 envisioned the unilateral rewriting of more than 200 years of tradition and
law by one president embarked on an ideological crusade.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRISONS (90%); BAD FAITH (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES
2008 (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (89%); TORTURE (89%); LEGISLATION (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%);
LAWYERS (77%); POWS & MIAS (77%); RULE OF LAW (77%); LITIGATION (77%); MILITARY
BASES (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); ESPIONAGE (75%); MILITARY COURTS (75%);
JURISDICTION (75%); COUNTERTERRORISM (75%); TERRORISM (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); SUPREME
COURTS (73%); NAVIES (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); GENOCIDE (61%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (60%) United States Armament and Defense; Editorials; Prisoners of
War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: CARL LEVIN (91%); JOHN MCCAIN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); LINDSEY GRAHAM
(78%); DICK CHENEY (58%); SAMUEL ALITO (56%) Carl (Sen) Levin; John S (Sen)
Mccain; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); CUBA (90%); YEMEN (79%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Afghanistan; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iran

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             665 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 15, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fed Up, Judge In Hussein Trial Offers to Quit

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 535 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Jan. 14


The chief judge in the trial of Saddam Hussein has submitted a letter of
resignation, saying he is frustrated with the tribunal's failure to defend him
against widespread criticism in recent weeks, according to a colleague on the
tribunal. But the resignation is not final, and the tribunal has not accepted
it.

The colleague said at least one tribunal official had traveled to where the
judge, Rizgar Muhammad Amin, lives in Kurdistan to try to persuade him to stay
on. Other judges reached Saturday said they were not aware of Judge Amin's
decision, and the tribunal's spokesman could not be reached for comment.

A resignation by Judge Amin would bring more disarray to an already turbulent
trial process and embarrass the United States, which oversaw the tribunal's
creation. Two defense lawyers have been killed since the trial began Oct. 19,
and last month testimony often bordered on chaos, with Mr. Hussein and his
fellow defendants unleashing long diatribes against the court and the American
role in Iraq.

Some Iraqi political leaders have angrily criticized Judge Amin for not reining
in the defendants, saying the former dictator's televised displays of defiance
can only embolden his followers in the insurgency.

An American official who advises the tribunal has made comments suggesting that
he, too, is impatient with the judge's courtroom management. The trial adjourned
on Dec. 22, and is scheduled to resume Jan. 24 with more testimony relating to
the massacre of 148 men and boys in the Shiite town of Dujail in 1982.

Judge Amin is one of 15 judges on the tribunal, which plans additional cases
against the former dictator that will involve different judges and much larger
numbers of victims.

But Judge Amin has become the public face of the trial, and the airing of his
frustrations could add to the impression of a chaotic trial process and even
political interference.

''This would be a signal that political criticism and pressure on the court has
had an effect,'' said Miranda Sissons, a senior associate at the International
Center for Transitional Justice, who is observing the trial.

Scattered violence resumed across Iraq on Saturday as the relative calm of the
Id al-Adha holiday came to an end. In Baghdad, Sheik Hadi al-Waeli, the imam of
the Mahdi mosque, was fattaly shot in the Hurriya neighborhood, an Interior
Ministry official said.

Later, a roadside bomb wounded two recruits on a police patrol, the officials
said. In the northern city of Kirkuk, gunmen opened fire on a police officer as
he stood outside his home, officials said. American officials said a marine died
of his wounds after being struck by small-arms fire on Friday in Ramadi.

The international team that is investigating violations and misconduct in the
December elections will release a preliminary report on Sunday, said Safwat
Rashid Sidqi, a member of the electoral commission. The final election results,
which had been expected within days, will be released later this month, he said.

He added that the final results would include ''no dramatic changes'' from the
preliminary results released last month, which made clear that Iraq's religious
parties had won a dominant share of seats.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%);
LAWYERS (75%); SHOOTINGS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); EID AL-ADHA (69%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (68%); TERRORISM (68%); POLITICS (67%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(65%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (63%); DISMISSALS (63%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (62%);
MISCONDUCT (61%); INVESTIGATIONS (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (61%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (60%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (60%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (60%)
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
Terrorism; Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Politics and Government

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Robert F Worth; Rizgar Muhammad (Judge) Amin;
Saddam Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAQ (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             671 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 21, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Maryland Judge Voids Ban on Same-Sex Marriage; State Quickly Appeals

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 618 words


A Maryland judge yesterday struck down a state law banning same-sex marriage,
saying the measure violated a state constitutional amendment prohibiting sex
discrimination.

The judge, M. Brooke Murdock of Baltimore City Circuit Court, stayed her ruling
to allow Maryland officials time to appeal, and they immediately did so.

The equal rights amendment to the State Constitution was ratified by Maryland
voters in 1972. Judge Murdock ruled that a state law enacted the following year
that says ''only a marriage between a man and a woman is valid'' could not be
reconciled with the amendment.

Same-sex marriage is available in the United States only in Massachusetts,
though courts in California, New Jersey, New York and Washington State are also
considering the issue.

Courts have generally been unreceptive to the argument that the prohibition on
gay marriage is a form of sex discrimination.

But Ken Choe, a lawyer with the American Civil Liberties Union's Lesbian and Gay
Rights Project, which represented the plaintiffs in the Maryland case, said men
and women were indeed treated differently under the law Judge Murdock struck
down.

''A man can marry a woman, but a woman can't marry a woman,'' Mr. Choe said.

Judge Murdock relied on a 1967 decision by the United States Supreme Court,
Loving v. Virginia, which struck down bans on interracial marriages. The State
of Virginia had argued that its ban was not discriminatory, because it affected
blacks and whites equally. Maryland made much the same argument with regard to
the marriage law's effect on men and women.

William B. Rubenstein, a law professor at the University of California, Los
Angeles, and author of ''Sexual Orientation and the Law,'' said Judge Murdock's
analysis of the Loving decision could be viewed in two ways.

''On a formal level it makes sense,'' Professor Rubenstein said. ''But it hasn't
had as much of an intuitive appeal.''

Mr. Choe said the equal rights amendment provided a sound basis for Judge
Murdock's ruling even if the people who had voted for it did not know they were
endorsing same-sex marriage.

''The voters of Maryland in the early 70's enacted a broad prohibition on sex
discrimination,'' Mr. Choe said. ''The test is not whether a voter thought of
every conceivable fact pattern that could have come up.''

Gov. Robert L. Ehrlich Jr., a first-term Republican, issued a statement saying
the state would ''begin a vigorous appeals process.''

''I firmly believe the institution of marriage is for one man and one woman
only,'' Mr. Ehrlich said.

Judge Murdock wrote that ''the court is not unaware of the dramatic impact of
its ruling.'' But she rejected all the arguments offered in favor of the law,
among them that children are best served by one male parent and one female
parent.

''Prevention of same-sex marriage,'' she wrote, ''is not rationally related to
the state's interests in promoting stable families and protecting the best
interests of children.''

''Tradition and social values alone cannot support adequately a discriminatory
statutory classification,'' she added. ''When tradition is the guise under which
prejudice or animosity hides, it is not a legitimate state interest.''

The plaintiffs -- nine gay or lesbian couples and one individual -- sued court
clerks in five Maryland counties who had denied marriage licenses to same-sex
couples. Their inability to marry, they said, had caused them legal, financial
and emotional harm.

One plaintiff, John Lestitian, the chief code compliance officer in Hagerstown,
Md., said Judge Murdock's decision ''is a step in a very long process.''

''As a 40-year-old man,'' Mr. Lestitian said, ''I should be able to decide who
my family is.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MARRIAGE (95%); GAYS & LESBIANS (95%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE & UNIONS
(93%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (90%); MARRIAGE LAW (90%); APPEALS (90%); SAME SEX MARRIAGE LAWS
(90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); LGBT RIGHTS (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); SUPREME
COURTS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); JUDGES (78%); RACE & RACISM (78%); WRITERS
(63%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (63%) Marriage; Law and Legislation;
Homosexuality; Constitutional Amendments; Discrimination

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED
STATES (55%)

PERSON: Adam Liptak; M Brooke (Judge) Murdock

CITY: BALTIMORE, MD, USA (90%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (94%); VIRGINIA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW
YORK, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS,
USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Maryland

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             678 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawsuit Filed in Support of Muslim Scholar Barred From U.S.

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 926 words


Citing the case of a prominent Muslim scholar who has been barred from the
United States, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit
yesterday seeking to strike down a clause of the USA Patriot Act that bars
foreigners who endorse terrorism from entering to this country.

The suit was filed in Federal District Court in Manhattan on behalf of the
scholar, Tariq Ramadan, and three national organizations of academics or writers
who have invited him to speak to their members. The groups, including the
American Academy of Religion, the leading American organization of scholars of
religion, say Mr. Ramadan has never expressed support for terrorism. They also
argue that the Patriot Act clause has been applied to stifle academic debate in
the United States.

Mr. Ramadan, a Swiss citizen, has been denied a United States visa since July
2004, when he was on the verge of moving with his family to Indiana to take up a
tenured professor's position at the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International
Peace Studies at the University of Notre Dame.

In a telephone interview from Oxford University in England, where he is
currently a visiting professor, Mr. Ramadan said he had never had an explanation
why his visa was revoked, after he had been approved to teach at Notre Dame and
had been a frequent traveler to the United States for many years.

''It's clear there is nothing in my record supporting terrorism,'' Mr. Ramadan
said.

Speaking to reporters in August 2004, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland
Security, Russ Knocke, cited the Patriot Act clause as the reason that Mr.
Ramadan's visa was canceled. The clause, adopted when the act was passed in 2001
and amended last May, bars foreigners who ''endorse or espouse terrorist
activity or persuade others'' to support terrorism.

The author of some 20 books on Islamic theology and the place of Muslims in the
Western world, Mr. Ramadan, 43, is an outspoken critic of the Bush
administration's policies in the Middle East. He has also rejected Muslim
terrorism, calling it ''anti-Islam.'' Last August, he was invited by Prime
Minister Tony Blair to participate in a task force to counter extremism after
the London bombings in July.

The A.C.L.U., joined by the New York Civil Liberties Union, brought the suit
against Michael Chertoff, the homeland security secretary, and Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice, asserting that the Patriot Act clause is
unconstitutional and that the ban on Mr. Ramadan violates the First Amendment
rights of American thinkers who want to meet with him. The American Association
of University Professors and the PEN American Center are also plaintiffs.

After Notre Dame applied a second time for a visa for Mr. Ramadan and he waited
for five months with no response, Mr. Ramadan resigned in December 2004 from his
position there. R. Scott Appleby, the director of the Kroc center, said the
government never gave an explanation to the university. Notre Dame saw Mr.
Ramadan as a theologian who could help build ties between Middle Eastern Muslims
and the West, Mr. Appleby said.

Mr. Ramadan filed a new visa application on Sept. 16, after receiving about 40
invitations for speaking engagements in the United States over the past year.
Interviewed in December in Bern, Switzerland, by agents of the Homeland Security
and State Departments, Mr. Ramadan said he was mainly questioned about his views
of the war in Iraq.

''I told them what I have said many times publicly, that I think the war was a
mistake and illegal,'' he said. ''Even the United Nations has said that. I think
the resistance is legitimate but the means they are using are not.''

A State Department spokeswoman, Janelle Hironimus, confirmed Mr. Ramadan's 2005
visa application but said the department did not comment on pending visa or
legal matters.

Mr. Knocke of the Department of Homeland Security also declined comment on the
suit or Mr. Ramadan's status. But he noted that the criteria for revoking visas
included ''public safety and national security risks,'' among others.

''We have a strong commitment and clear responsibility to restore integrity to
our immigration system, which includes preventing people who might present risks
from entering the country,'' Mr. Knocke said.

The controversy about Mr. Ramadan's ideas arises in part because he is the
grandson of Hasan al-Banna, a founder in 1928 of the Muslim Brotherhood, an
Egyptian group that has turned to violent attacks in recent decades. Some
critics say that he speaks with two voices, espousing moderate views in Europe
but embracing more militant ideas when he addresses Muslims in the Arabic world.

Barbara DeConcini, the executive director of the American Academy of Religion,
described Mr. Ramadan as ''one of the most respected scholars of Islam working
today.''

He was invited to give a keynote address at the group's annual meeting in
November, Ms. DeConcini said, but without a visa he was limited to giving a
lecture to a small audience by videoconference, which she called a poor
substitute for his participation in the group's discussions. He has been invited
to address the next annual meeting, she said.

While the government has the authority to exclude terrorists, Ms. DeConcini
said, the Patriot Act clause ''is being used much more broadly to censor and
manipulate academic and political debate.''

Mr. Ramadan said the ban had damaged him professionally, and the disruption had
been jarring to his wife and children. He said he has not been offered another
tenured university position.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tariq Ramadan, a visiting professor at Oxford University and a
citizen of Switzerland, has been denied a United States visa since July 2004.
(Photo by Graham Morrison for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (91%); RELIGION
(91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); US PATRIOT ACT
(90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); WRITERS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); ACADEMIC TENURE (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); PUBLIC
POLICY (78%); TEACHER UNIONS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); INTERVIEWS (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%);
RESEARCH INSTITUTES (67%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (66%); APPROVALS (65%);
FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (62%); PRIME MINISTERS (50%) Terrorism; Suits and
Litigation; Travel Restrictions; Law and Legislation; Terrorism; Bombs and
Explosives; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Islam

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (91%); UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME
(82%); AMERICAN ACADEMY OF RELIGION (57%) American Civil Liberties Union;
University of Notre Dame; Oxford University

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (63%); MICHAEL CHERTOFF (58%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) Julia
Preston; Tariq Ramadan; George W (Pres) Bush; Tony (Prime Min) Blair

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (55%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); INDIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); ENGLAND (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); SWITZERLAND (71%)

REGION: United States; Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             681 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 28, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 85 words


A report in the National Briefing column on Wednesday about changes to Army
regulations governing the use of the death penalty under the military justice
code misstated the intent of the changes, based on statements issued by military
officials who described the regulations. After publication of the report, other
military spokesmen said that the new rules were meant to apply to death penalty
cases involving American military personnel tried in courts martial, not to
detainees held at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (92%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (91%); MILITARY
OFFENSES (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); CAPITAL CRIMES (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); NAVIES (85%);
MILITARY COURTS (85%); WAR CRIMES (84%); TERRORISM (59%) Terrorism; Correction
Stories; United States Armament and Defense; Capital Punishment; Courts-Martial;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CUBA (90%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: April 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             682 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 28, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

An Exotic Tool For Espionage: Moral Compass

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1178 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 27


Is there such a thing as an ethical spy?

A group of current and former intelligence officers and academic experts think
there is, and they are meeting this weekend to dissect what some others in the
field consider a flat-out contradiction in terms.

The organizers say recent controversies over interrogation techniques bordering
on torture and the alleged skewing of prewar intelligence on Iraq make their
mission urgent. At the conference on Friday and Saturday in a Springfield, Va.,
hotel, the 200 attendees hope to begin hammering out a code of ethics for spies
and to form an international association to study the subject.

Conference materials describe intelligence ethics as ''an emerging field'' and
call the gathering, not sponsored by any government agency, the first of its
kind. The topics include ''Spiritual Crises Among Intelligence Operatives,''
''Lessons From Abu Ghraib,'' ''Assassination: The Dream and the Nightmare'' and
''The Perfidy of Espionage.''

Organizers said conferees would ponder such timely issues as how many civilian
deaths can be justified in a C.I.A. Predator missile strike to kill a known
terrorist, or what legal assurances a National Security Agency eavesdropper
should demand before singling out the phone calls of an American who was linked
to Al Qaeda.

''As an intelligence officer, you are confronted with ethical dilemmas every
day,'' said Melissa Boyle Mahle, who retired from the Central Intelligence
Agency in 2002 after 14 years as a case officer, much of it under cover in the
Middle East.

Ms. Mahle, now a foreign policy consultant, was scheduled to speak Saturday on
the practice of rendition, in which terrorism suspects are seized abroad and
delivered either to trial in the United States or to imprisonment in other
countries.

But in a required security review, the C.I.A. refused to clear about one-fourth
of her proposed 23-page text, Ms. Mahle said Friday. She said the deletions
''gutted'' the paper and made it impossible to deliver. She decided to attend
the conference anyway, because she believes its goal is ''so important.''

While she had received C.I.A. training on agency rules and the law, Ms. Mahle
recalled that she got ''none whatsoever'' in ethics. But she found that her work
demanded constant moral balancing.

Ms. Mahle said she came up with her own ad-hoc ethical checklist, including
imagining what her mother would say about a proposed action or how she herself
would feel if it were described on the front page of an American newspaper. But
she believes any officer would benefit from more rigorous training in moral
decision-making.

''You're the point of the spear, and no one's going to be there to make
decisions for you,'' she said.

Not all agree. ''It doesn't make much sense to me,'' said Duane R. Clarridge,
who retired in 1988 after 33 years as a C.I.A. operations officer and who will
not attend the conference. ''Depending on where you're coming from, the whole
business of espionage is unethical.''

To Mr. Clarridge, ''intelligence ethics'' is ''an oxymoron,'' he said. ''It's
not an issue. It never was and never will be, not if you want a real spy
service.'' Spies operate under false names, lie about their jobs, and bribe or
blackmail foreigners to betray their countries, he said.

''If you don't want to do that,'' he added, ''just have a State Department.''

Mr. Clarridge's view may be colored by his history; he was indicted on perjury
charges in 1991, accused of lying to Congress about the Iran-contra affair. He
was pardoned in 1992 by President George H. W. Bush.

But skepticism about the ethics project inside the agencies is widespread,
conference participants said, some of whom spoke on the condition of anonymity
because they were not authorized by their agencies to be quoted. ''A lot of
current intelligence practitioners are afraid to come,'' said one who is
attending. ''They think it could be held against them.''

Judith A. Emmel, a spokeswoman for the director of national intelligence, said
American intelligence officers received training on ''legal issues appropriate
to their responsibilities,'' and on ethical regulations governing matters like
conflicts of interest.

Paul Gimigliano, a C.I.A. spokesman, said the agency had ''a robust ethics
training program'' that focused on ''integrity, honesty and accountability'' and
included the use of case studies. As for the agency's deletions from proposed
speeches, by Ms. Mahle or any other former employee, he said such editing was
based on the secrecy agreement employees sign and was ''only to ensure that they
contain no classified material,'' not to censor anyone's opinions.

One conference organizer, Jan Goldman, a 25-year intelligence veteran who
teaches at the Joint Military Intelligence College, edited a just-published
collection of articles on the subject called ''Ethics of Spying'' (Scarecrow
Press).

The book includes 22 imaginary cases, from a female operative who must decide
whether to have sex with a ''repulsive'' terrorism suspect in order to stay in
contact, to a counternarcotics officer who must decide whether to relocate a
drug lord-informant to protect him from arrest.

Less dramatic but more common ethical choices come routinely to intelligence
analysts, who must decide each day what gets reported to policy makers. Melvin
A. Goodman, a C.I.A. analyst from 1966 to 1990, is speaking at the conference on
his experience with the politicization of intelligence during the cold war,
which he believes has been echoed in the Iraq war.

''My feeling is that every problem with the intelligence in the run-up to the
war was an ethical question,'' from the handling of the dubious defector
code-named Curveball to the cherry-picking of evidence on Iraq's nuclear
program, Mr. Goodman said.

''There's a lot of pandering at the C.I.A.,'' with the White House being given
intelligence reports that suit known policy preferences, he said.

Mr. Goodman is a critic of the Bush administration's policies, but conference
organizers say they have tried to avoid bias. The top intelligence officer of
the National Guard, Brig. Gen. Annette L. Sobel, is a scheduled panelist. And
one organizer, Fritz Allhoff, who teaches philosophy at Western Michigan
University, has written an essay arguing that torture in interrogation is
ethical in some circumstances.

Ms. Mahle, the former C.I.A. officer, says merely taking a tough line is not
enough. If intelligence tactics are not supported by a public consensus of
Americans, they can backfire, she said.

For example, the past capture of terrorists abroad who were then convicted in
American courts stirred little controversy. But more recent rendition cases,
like the delivery of a suspect to Egypt, where he complained of torture and
provided information that turned out to be false, shifted the public focus from
the would-be terrorist to the actions of the C.I.A.

''If there's not a consensus, then the public focus will be not on the bad guy
you got off the street, but on what the C.I.A. was doing,'' Ms. Mahle said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE (94%); ETHICS (93%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (93%); TERRORISM
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TORTURE (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
ASSASSINATION (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); JAIL SENTENCING (67%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (66%); AL-QAEDA (66%); GENOCIDE (63%) Terrorism;
Espionage; Ethics; Intelligence Services; Prisoners of War; Torture; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (73%); PRISONERS OF
WAR (59%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (55%)

PERSON: Scott Shane

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (91%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Springfield (Va); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             683 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 28, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shock Waves From the Hamas Earthquake

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 118 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Bush Defends His Goal of Spreading Democracy to the Mideast'' (news
article, Jan. 27):

One has to know what a democracy is and how it functions, and then model it at
home, before being convincing in attempts to spread democratic systems.

Furthermore, democracy cannot be imposed on another culture. It must truly be
the desire of a particular culture to move in that direction for it to be truly
democratic.

The Bush administration has no real concept of how democracy functions, judging
by its disregard for the democratic process and human rights. Therefore, its
calls to ''reform'' the Middle East are illegitimate and ludicrous.

Karen Alexander-Brown
Hillsboro, Ore., Jan. 27, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HAMAS (89%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (84%)

PERSON: Karen Alexander-Brown; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: OREGON, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%); MIDDLE EAST (90%); ISRAEL (57%)

REGION: Israel

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             686 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein Trial Erupts, and Expulsions Ensue

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE
COURTROOM; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 1264 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 29


The trial of Saddam Hussein erupted into chaos on Sunday, with the new chief
judge ordering all four lead defendants removed from the courtroom -- one of
them kicking and screaming as he went -- and tried in absentia, as the entire
defense team walked out in protest.

The judge, Raouf Abdel-Rahman, made clear as soon as the trial reconvened after
its monthlong recess that he would not tolerate the lengthy political diatribes
by Mr. Hussein and one of his fellow defendants, Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, that
have dominated the sessions since they began, on Oct. 19.

Soon afterward Mr. Ibrahim, who twice called the court ''a daughter of
adultery'' and refused to obey Judge Abdel-Rahman's commands, was dragged
howling from the courtroom by four bailiffs. One of the lawyers, Saleh Armouti,
instantly began yelling at the judge, and Mr. Armouti, too, was dragged out. Mr.
Hussein then had a furious exchange with the judge, but walked out before the
bailiffs could be ordered to remove him.

''Don't call yourself an Iraqi,'' Mr. Hussein yelled, after Judge Abdel-Rahman
told him he would be ejected. ''I've led you for 35 years and now you say,
'Remove him!' Shame on you, shame on you!''

The courtroom showdown raised the extraordinary prospect of a major war crimes
trial being conducted without the lead defendants or their lawyers. Judge
Abdel-Rahman warned the departing lawyers several times that they would not be
allowed back once they left, and he promptly replaced them with a team of six
court-appointed lawyers, who sat silently as the trial proceeded for three more
hours.

The walkout suggested a deliberate defense strategy to give the tribunal the
appearance of a show trial. On Sunday evening, Khalil Dulaimi, Mr. Hussein's
lead lawyer, issued a call for the trial to be moved out of Iraq, saying the
judge's decision to eject the lead defendants and their lawyers made a fair
trial impossible.

''What happened today is a shameful moment in the history of the Iraqi
judiciary,'' said Mr. Dulaimi, who added that the defense team would agree to
return only if a list of conditions were met, all of them very unlikely,
including a public apology to Mr. Armouti, the Jordanian lawyer who was removed
from the courtroom.

The original defense team could be allowed to return to the case if they filed a
formal legal request, said Raid Juhi, the chief investigative judge on the
tribunal, who spoke to reporters after the court session. The four defendants
could also be allowed back into the courtroom if they committed themselves to
behaving properly, Judge Juhi added.

But Mr. Dulaimi's conditions made a return by the lawyers look unlikely. It also
seemed unlikely that Judge Abdel-Rahman would change his mind after repeatedly
warning the lawyers that he would not let them back in.

A trial without Saddam Hussein could be an embarrassment for the United States
government, which has worked hard to help create a tribunal that would be
perceived by Iraqis as independent and fair. The current trial, relating to the
massacre of 148 Shiite men and boys in the village of Dujail in 1982, is the
first of several that are planned, but it is expected to last through late May.

''War crimes trials are always messy, but they must meet international
standards, and holding this trial in absentia would be extremely troubling to a
lot of people,'' said Miranda Sissons, a senior associate at the International
Center for Transitional Justice, a New York-based advocacy group, who is
observing the trial.

Another troubling sign, Ms. Sissons noted, was the apparent passivity of the new
court-appointed lawyers. They said nothing during three hours of testimony on
Sunday afternoon, even as prosecutors and the judge peppered the witnesses with
questions about the accusations that torture and executions had been ordered by
Mr. Hussein and his lieutenants.

The original defense team threatened to boycott the trial in November, but
relented after the former presiding judge, Rizgar Muhammad Amin, agreed to give
the defendants more time to speak in the courtroom. In the weeks that followed,
Mr. Hussein and Mr. Ibrahim often took charge, unleashing frequent broadsides
against the tribunal and complaining that they had been ill treated.

Judge Amin resigned from the tribunal earlier this month, saying he was fed up
with a torrent of criticism about his handling of the trial by high-level Iraqi
officials. President Jalal Talabani and other Iraqi leaders tried unsuccessfully
to persuade Judge Amin to reconsider, apparently hoping to avoid the impression
that the judge had been forced out through political pressure.

Judge Abdel-Rahman set a new tone as soon as the court came to order on Sunday
morning.

''I can see that it is my duty to underline what Imam Ali said, that if your
power has led you to oppress people, remember the judgment will be on you,'' he
said, in a reference to the founding saint of Shiite Islam. Many of Mr.
Hussein's victims were Shiites, though the judge is a Kurd.

But it was not until Mr. Ibrahim began talking that the judge made clear he
would not accept any of the rants that have been so common in earlier sessions.

''Political speeches have no place in this courtroom,'' Judge Abdel-Rahman said.
''You must abide by the rules. Any irrelevant remarks will be struck from the
record, and anyone who breaks the rules will be removed from the courtroom and
tried as if he were present.''

Fifteen minutes later, after Mr. Ibrahim and Mr. Armouti had been dragged out,
chaos overwhelmed the court. All the defendants and lawyers stood up, shouting
furiously. Judge Abdel-Rahman banged his gavel and called for order, to no
avail. The bailiffs moved around the room looking baffled; some spoke
imploringly to Mr. Hussein, who talked back at them, his face an angry mask.

At one point the judge seemed to be defending himself. ''I am honored to be an
Iraqi,'' he said. ''Why all this provocation?''

After the defense lawyers walked out, the chaos subsided, and Mr. Hussein took
center stage, lecturing Judge Abdel-Rahman on law and politics. Then he noticed
that six new court-appointed lawyers had appeared at the defense table.

''We reject you, and if you stay here you are evil people,'' Mr. Hussein said,
staring angrily at the new lawyers.

That infuriated the judge, who soon ordered Mr. Hussein removed. Taken aback,
the former dictator declared proudly, ''I am asking to leave of my own will.''

At that point Taha Yassin Ramadan, a former vice president and one of Mr.
Hussein's most ruthless associates, stood up and shouted, ''Me, too, your
honor.'' Awad al-Bandar, who led the revolutionary court when it ordered the
execution of the men from Dujail, also stood up, and Judge Abdel-Rahman soon
ordered them removed as well.

Moments later, silence descended. The four remaining defendants are much
lower-profile men from the Dujail area who are accused of playing roles in the
massacre.

Judge Abdel-Rahman could easily have called a recess to allow Mr. Hussein and
the others to hire new lawyers. Instead, he called the first witness of the day
and the trial proceeded as if nothing had happened.

For the next three hours, witnesses described tortures and executions they
witnessed in the wake of an assassination attempt on Mr. Hussein in Dujail. In
stories that echoed those told by earlier witnesses, they described women and
children tortured, men executed and a 2-year-old child placed in solitary
confinement. Mr. Hussein and his three top associates were not there to hear the
testimony.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Iraqis at a barbershop in Baghdad watched Saddam Hussein's
trial, which dissolved into chaos yesterday. (Photo by Falleh Kheiber/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (78%); GENOCIDE (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (64%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) Robert F Worth; Saddam Hussein; Barzan Ibrahim
Al-Tikriti; Raouf (Judge) Abdel-Rahman

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             691 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 4, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Muhammad Cartoon Furor

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 92 words



To the Editor:

The issue is not whether European papers have the right to publish offensive
cartoons of the Prophet Muhammad. The issue is abuse of freedom and the lack of
responsibility.

The function of newspapers is to inform, not inflame. At a time when the
relationship between Islamic and Western countries is strained, one would expect
more from reputable newspapers.

How would Americans feel if The New York Times decided to print jokes about the
Jewish Holocaust or African slavery, just to test our reaction?

Hala Innab
Amman, Jordan, Feb. 3, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); JEWS & JUDAISM (85%); VISUAL ARTISTS (85%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); HOLOCAUST (51%) Islam; News and News Media; Cartoons and
Cartoonists

PERSON: Hala Innab; Muhammad (Prophet) (C570-632)

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (50%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%); EUROPE (79%); JORDAN (78%)

REGION: Europe

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             698 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Contest for Cartoons Mocking the Holocaust Announced in Tehran

BYLINE: By NAZILA FATHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE ISLAMIC FLARE-UP: IRAN; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 374 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, Feb. 7


Iran's largest newspaper on Tuesday announced an international competition for
Holocaust cartoons to retaliate against the publication of cartoons of the
Prophet Muhammad in Danish newspapers last year.

The daily newspaper Hamshahri, which is run by the capital's municipal
government, said the competition was co-sponsored by the House of Caricatures, a
Tehran exhibit hall for cartoons. It said further information would be announced
next week.

The paper said it wanted to see whether freedom of expression extended to
mocking the Holocaust. It invited foreign cartoonists to enter the contest.

''The serious question for Muslims is whether the West extends freedom of
expression to the crimes committed by the United States and Israel, or an event
such as the Holocaust,'' the daily said. ''Or is its freedom only for insulting
religious sanctities?''

In a twist on the way some Americans renamed French fries ''freedom fries,'' the
Commerce Ministry called for changing the name of Danish pastry to that of a
flower named after Muhammad, according to the Iranian Student News Agency. The
idea was proposed in a letter to the ministry, the press agency said.

The cartoon contest announcement came a day after hundreds of demonstrators
hurled stones and gasoline bombs at the Danish Embassy here.

Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, praised the protests in a speech
on Tuesday, comparing the cartoons to questioning the Holocaust. ''In this
freedom, casting doubt or negating the genocide of the Jews is banned but
insulting the beliefs of 1.5 billion Muslims is allowed,'' he said of Western
press freedom, according to the official Islamic Republic News Agency.

''The reaction of the Muslim world was in time, and they were right to react
this way,'' Ayatollah Khamenei was quoted as saying. ''This anger is not
targeted at Christians but at those who planned this conspiracy.''

The ayatollah was referring to the reaction of European leaders last year after
Iran's conservative president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, called the Holocaust a myth
and called for the destruction of Israel.

The Foreign Ministry has announced that it plans to hold a seminar to examine
the veracity of the Holocaust but has set no date for it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); HOLOCAUST (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); FREEDOM
OF EXPRESSION (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); VISUAL ARTISTS (78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); CONSPIRACY (74%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (71%);
COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (67%); CITIES (57%); CITY GOVERNMENT (57%) Islam; Cartoons
and Cartoonists; Freedom of the Press; Freedom of Speech and Expression; News
and News Media; Islam; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities

ORGANIZATION: Hamshahri (Newspaper)

PERSON: MAHMOUD AHMADINEJAD (59%); ALI KHAMENEI (59%) Nazila Fathi; Muhammad
(Prophet) (C570-632)

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (99%); DENMARK (93%); IRAN (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); ISRAEL (92%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Iran; Denmark; Iran

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             702 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Inquiry Into Wiretapping Article Widens

BYLINE: By DAVID JOHNSTON

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 1567 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 11


Federal agents have interviewed officials at several of the country's law
enforcement and national security agencies in a rapidly expanding criminal
investigation into the circumstances surrounding a New York Times article
published in December that disclosed the existence of a highly classified
domestic eavesdropping program, according to government officials.

The investigation, which appears to cover the case from 2004, when the newspaper
began reporting the story, is being closely coordinated with criminal
prosecutors at the Justice Department, the officials said. People who have been
interviewed and others in the government who have been briefed on the interviews
said the investigation seemed to lay the groundwork for a grand jury inquiry
that could lead to criminal charges.

The inquiry is progressing as a debate about the eavesdropping rages in Congress
and elsewhere. President Bush has condemned the leak as a ''shameful act.''
Others, like Porter J. Goss, the C.I.A. director, have expressed the hope that
reporters will be summoned before a grand jury and asked to reveal the
identities of those who provided them classified information.

Mr. Goss, speaking at a Senate intelligence committee hearing on Feb. 2, said:
''It is my aim and it is my hope that we will witness a grand jury investigation
with reporters present being asked to reveal who is leaking this information. I
believe the safety of this nation and the people of this country deserve nothing
less.''

The case is viewed as potentially far reaching because it places on a collision
course constitutional principles that each side regards as paramount. For the
government, the investigation represents an effort to punish those responsible
for a serious security breach and enforce legal sanctions against leaks of
classified information at a time of heightened terrorist threats. For news
organizations, the inquiry threatens the confidentiality of sources and the
ability to report on controversial national security issues free of government
interference.

Bill Keller, executive editor of The Times, said no one at the paper had been
contacted in connection with the investigation, and he defended the paper's
reporting.

''Before running the story we gave long and sober consideration to the
administration's contention that disclosing the program would damage the
country's counterterrorism efforts,'' Mr. Keller said. ''We were not convinced
then, and have not been convinced since, that our reporting compromised national
security.

''What our reporting has done is set off an intense national debate about the
proper balance between security and liberty -- a debate that many government
officials of both parties, and in all three branches of government, seem to
regard as in the national interest.''

Civil liberties groups and Democratic lawmakers as well as some Republicans have
called for an inquiry into the eavesdropping program as an improper and possibly
illegal intrusion on the privacy rights of innocent Americans. These critics
have noted that the program appears to have circumvented the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Act, which requires court approval for eavesdropping
on American citizens.

Former Vice President Al Gore has called for a special prosecutor to investigate
the government's use of the program, and at least one Democrat, Representative
John Conyers Jr. of Michigan, has said the eavesdropping effort may amount to an
impeachable offense.

At the same time, conservatives have attacked the disclosure of classified
information as an illegal act, demanding a vigorous investigative effort to find
and prosecute whoever disclosed classified information. An upcoming article in
Commentary magazine suggests that the newspaper may be prosecuted for violations
of the Espionage Act and says, ''What The New York Times has done is nothing
less than to compromise the centerpiece of our defensive efforts in the war on
terrorism.''

The Justice Department took the unusual step of announcing the opening of the
investigation on Dec. 30, and since then, government officials said,
investigators and prosecutors have worked quickly to assemble an investigative
team and obtain a preliminary grasp of whether the leaking of the information
violated the law. Among the statutes being reviewed by the investigators are
espionage laws that prohibit the disclosure, dissemination or publication of
national security information.

A Federal Bureau of Investigation team under the direction of the bureau's
counterintelligence division at agency headquarters has questioned employees at
the F.B.I., the National Security Agency, the Justice Department, the Central
Intelligence Agency and the office of the Director of National Intelligence, the
officials said. Prosecutors have also taken steps to activate a grand jury.

The interviews have focused initially on identifying government officials who
have had contact with Times reporters, particularly those in the newspaper's
Washington bureau. The interviews appeared to be initially intended to determine
who in the government spoke with Times reporters about intelligence and
counterterrorism matters.

In addition, investigators are trying to determine who in the government was
authorized to know about the eavesdropping program. Several officials described
the investigation as aggressive and fast-moving. The officials who described the
interviews did so on condition of anonymity, citing the confidentiality of an
ongoing criminal inquiry.

The administration's chief legal defender of the program is Attorney General
Alberto R. Gonzales, who is also the senior official responsible for the leak
investigation. At a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on Feb. 6, Mr. Gonzales
said: ''I'm not going to get into specific laws that are being looked at. But,
obviously, our prosecutors are going to look to see all the laws that have been
violated. And if the evidence is there, they're going to prosecute those
violations.''

Mr. Bush and other senior officials have said that the electronic surveillance
operation was authorized by what they call the president's wartime powers and a
Congressional resolution authorizing the use of force against Al Qaeda passed in
the days after the September 2001 terror attacks.

The government's increasing unwillingness to honor confidentiality pledges
between journalists and their sources in national security cases has been
evident in another case, involving the disclosure in 2003 of the identity of an
undercover C.I.A. officer, Valerie Wilson. The special counsel in the case,
Patrick J. Fitzgerald, demanded that several journalists disclose their
conversations with their sources.

Judith Miller, at the time a reporter for The Times, went to jail for 85 days
before agreeing to comply with a subpoena to testify about her conversations
with I. Lewis Libby Jr., who was chief of staff to Vice President Dick Cheney.
Mr. Libby has been indicted on charges of making false statements and
obstruction of justice and has pleaded not guilty.

''An outgrowth of the Fitzgerald investigation is that the gloves are off in
leak cases,'' said George J. Terwilliger III, former deputy attorney general in
the administration of the first President Bush. ''New rules apply.''

How aggressively prosecutors pursue the new case involving the N.S.A. may depend
on their assessment of the damage caused by the disclosure, Mr. Terwilliger
said. ''If the program is as sensitive and critical as it has been described,
and leaking its existence could put the lives of innocent American people in
jeopardy,'' he said, ''that surely would have an effect on the exercise of
prosecutorial discretion.''

Recently, federal authorities have used espionage statutes to move beyond
prosecutions of government officials who disclose classified information to
indict private citizens who receive it. In the case of a former Pentagon
analyst, Lawrence A. Franklin, who pleaded guilty to disclosing defense secrets,
federal authorities have charged Steven J. Rosen and Keith Weissman, formerly
representatives of the American Israel Public Affairs Committee, a pro-Israel
lobbying group.

The two men have been indicted on charges of turning over information obtained
from Mr. Franklin to a foreign government, which has been identified as Israel,
and to journalists. At Mr. Franklin's sentencing hearing in Alexandria, Va.,
Judge T. S. Ellis III of Federal District Court said he believed that private
citizens and government employees must obey laws against illegally disseminating
classified information.

''Persons who have unauthorized possession, who come into unauthorized
possession of classified information, must abide by the law,'' Judge Ellis said.
''That applies to academics, lawyers, journalists, professors, whatever.''

Some media lawyers believe that The Times has powerful legal arguments in
defense of its reporting and in protecting its sources.

Theodore J. Boutrous Jr., who has represented publications like The Wall Street
Journal and Time magazine, said: ''There is a very strong argument that a
federal common-law reporters' privilege exists and that privilege would protect
confidential sources in this case. There is an extremely strong public interest
in this information, and the public has the right to understand this
controversial and possibly unconstitutional public policy.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 10, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about the American Israel Public Affairs
Committee and the indictments of two former officials of the group, who are
accused of passing on classified information, omitted the credit for the source
of a quotation from United States District Judge T.S. Ellis III, who is
presiding over their case (an article on Feb. 12 also omitted the credit). He
said: ''Persons who have unauthorized possession, who come into unauthorized
possession of classified information, must abide by the law. That applies to
academics, lawyers, journalists, professors, whatever.'' The quotation came from
the Jewish Telegraphic Agency.

An article on Sunday about the American Israel Public Affairs Committee and the
indictments of two former officials of the group, who are accused of passing on
classified information, omitted the credit for the source of a quotation from
United States District Judge T.S. Ellis III, who is presiding over their case
(an article on Feb. 12 also omitted the credit). He said: ''Persons who have
unauthorized possession, who come into unauthorized possession of classified
information, must abide by the law. That applies to academics, lawyers,
journalists, professors, whatever.'' The quotation came from the Jewish
Telegraphic Agency.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Director of National Intelligence John Negroponte, left, spoke
this month at a Senate hearing on threats to the United States. With him were
C.I.A. Director Porter J. Goss and F.B.I. Director Robert S. Mueller III. (Photo
by Jason Reed/Reuters)
 Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales at a hearing on spying. (Photo by Stephen
Crowley/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (92%); GRAND JURY
(91%); WIRETAPPING (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
TERRORISM (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); INFORMATION SECURITY & PRIVACY (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); INTERVIEWS
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (76%); NEWS REPORTING (76%); POLITICAL DEBATES (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (68%); PRIVACY
RIGHTS (67%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Privacy; Security and Warning Systems; Freedom of the Press; News and News
Media; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (59%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
(59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%) New York Times; National Security Agency

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (79%); JOHN NEGROPONTE (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%);
ALBERTO GONZALES (55%) David Johnston; Bill Keller

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             703 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Disposable Cameras for Disposable People

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 820 words


Meet some of the disposable people of Darfur, the heirs of the disposable
Armenians, Jews, Cambodians, Rwandans and Bosnians of past genocides. Look
carefully, for several hundred thousand people like these have already been
slaughtered in Darfur in western Sudan -- and the lives of two million more are
in our hands.

On my fifth and last trip to Darfur, in November, I smuggled in 20 disposable
cameras to hand out to these disposable people. While taking photos without a
permit is illegal in Sudan, two aid groups agreed to distribute the cameras,
teach the genocide survivors how to use them, and then send me the pictures (for
their own protection, I'm not naming those aid groups).

Many of the resulting photos were unusable, for those shooting the pictures had
mostly never held a camera before. Many of them were living until recently in
thatch-roof mud huts, and their first direct encounter with the modern world
came when Sudanese military aircraft strafed their villages.

The photos were taken in makeshift camps near the town of Zalingei where
survivors have lived since fleeing their villages. Taking a photo more publicly
might have led to an arrest or a beating. These scenes reflect the banality of
waiting -- for food, for protection, for death. In short, such photos are a bit
like those from the Warsaw Ghetto in the early 1940's.

The photo in the upper left shows Assim, 5, Asiel, 3, and Salma, almost 2; Assim
says he misses the village trees he used to climb, for in the camps the trees
have all been cut for firewood. The photo in the upper right shows a man named
Adam in his tailor ''shop.''

The photo in the lower left shows Aisha and Fatima, preparing their ''stove.''
And in the lower right is Halima, a 27-year-old widow whose husband and brother
were murdered when the government-supported janjaweed militia attacked her
village. An aid group helps her and other women make biscuits and cheese to sell
in local markets -- so they won't have to venture out of the camps and risk rape
by the janjaweed.

Granted, people like these die all the time in Africa of malaria or AIDS. And
it's true that it's probably as wrenching for a parent to lose a child to
malaria as to a machete. But when a government deliberately slaughters people
because of their tribe or skin color, then that is a special affront to the
bonds of humanity and creates a particular obligation to respond. Nothing rips
more at the common fabric of humanity than genocide -- and the only way to
assert our own humanity is to stand up to it.

President Bush is doing more about Darfur than most other leaders, but that's
not saying much. The French are being particularly unhelpful, while other
Europeans (including, alas, Tony Blair) seem to wonder whether it's really worth
the expense to save people from genocide. Muslim countries are silent about the
slaughter of Darfur's Muslims, while China disgraces itself by protecting Sudan
in the United Nations and underwriting the genocide with trade. Still, even Mr.
Bush is taking only baby steps.

Here are some grown-up steps Mr. Bush could take: He could enforce a no-fly zone
to stop air attacks on civilians in Darfur, lobby Arab leaders to become
involved, call President Hu Jintao and ask China to stop protecting Sudan,
invite Darfur refugees to a photo op at the White House, attend a coming donor
conference for Darfur, visit Darfur or the refugee camps next door in Chad, push
France and other allies for a NATO bridging force to provide protection until
United Nations troops arrive, offer to support the United Nations force with
American military airlift and logistical support (though not ground troops,
which would help Sudan's hard-liners by allowing them to claim that the United
States was starting a new invasion of the Arab world), make a major speech about
Darfur, and arrange for Colin Powell to be appointed a United Nations special
envoy to seek peace among Darfur's tribal sheiks.

With Mr. Bush saying little about Darfur, presidential leadership on Darfur is
coming from  Slovenia. The Slovenian president, Janez Drnovsek, has emerged as
one of the few leaders who are actually organizing an international effort to
stop the genocide.

''You ask, Why Slovenia?'' he told me. ''I can ask, Why not Slovenia?''

Mr. Drnovsek came to the United States recently to talk about Darfur with Kofi
Annan, Bill Clinton and Chinese officials. But he says that President Bush
declined to see him; if Mr. Bush were more serious about Darfur, he would be
hailing Slovenia's leadership -- indeed, emulating it.

On Tuesday, Mr. Bush spoke movingly at the funeral of Coretta Scott King. I hope
he'll look at these photos and ruminate on an observation of the Rev. Martin
Luther King Jr.: ''Man's inhumanity to man is not only perpetrated by the
vitriolic actions of those who are bad, it is also perpetrated by the vitiating
inaction of those who are good.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Survivors of the Darfur genocide in Sudan took these photos
with disposable cameras that had been smuggled into the camps in which they have
taken refuge, near Zalingei, Sudan. The government bans photography except with
a permit.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MALARIA (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); SMUGGLING (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (71%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (66%); MURDER (54%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (53%) Photography
; Smuggling; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (71%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush; Janez
(Pres) Drnovsek

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); RWANDA (92%); SLOVENIA (79%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Slovenia; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             704 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Trust Gap

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 892 words


We can't think of a president who has gone to the American people more often
than George W. Bush has to ask them to forget about things like democracy,
judicial process and the balance of powers -- and just trust him. We also can't
think of a president who has deserved that trust less.

This has been a central flaw of Mr. Bush's presidency for a long time. But last
week produced a flood of evidence that vividly drove home the point.

DOMESTIC SPYING -- After 9/11, Mr. Bush authorized the National Security Agency
to eavesdrop on the conversations and e-mail of Americans and others in the
United States without obtaining a warrant or allowing Congress or the courts to
review the operation. Lawmakers from both parties have raised considerable doubt
about the legality of this program, but Attorney General Alberto Gonzales made
it clear last Monday at a Senate hearing that Mr. Bush hasn't the slightest
intention of changing it.

According to Mr. Gonzales, the administration can be relied upon to police
itself and hold the line between national security and civil liberties on its
own. Set aside the rather huge problem that our democracy doesn't work that way.
It's not clear that this administration knows where the line is, much less that
it is capable of defending it. Mr. Gonzales's own dedication to the truth is in
considerable doubt. In sworn testimony at his confirmation hearing last year, he
dismissed as ''hypothetical'' a question about whether he believed the president
had the authority to conduct warrantless surveillance. In fact, Mr. Gonzales
knew Mr. Bush was doing just that, and had signed off on it as White House
counsel.

THE PRISON CAMPS -- It has been nearly two years since the Abu Ghraib scandal
illuminated the violence, illegal detentions and other abuses at United States
military prison camps. There have been Congressional hearings, court rulings
imposing normal judicial procedures on the camps, and a law requiring prisoners
to be treated humanely. Yet nothing has changed. Mr. Bush also made it clear
that he intends to follow the new law on the treatment of prisoners when his
internal moral compass tells him it is the right thing to do.

On Thursday, Tim Golden of The Times reported that United States military
authorities had taken to tying up and force-feeding the prisoners who had gone
on hunger strikes by the dozens at Guantanamo Bay to protest being held without
any semblance of justice. The article said administration officials were
concerned that if a prisoner died, it could renew international criticism of
Gitmo. They should be concerned. This is not some minor embarrassment. It is a
lingering outrage that has undermined American credibility around the world.

According to numerous news reports, the majority of the Gitmo detainees are
neither members of Al Qaeda nor fighters captured on the battlefield in
Afghanistan. The National Journal reported last week that many were handed over
to the American forces for bounties by Pakistani and Afghan warlords. Others
were just swept up. The military has charged only 10 prisoners with terrorism.
Hearings for the rest were not held for three years and then were mostly sham
proceedings.

And yet the administration continues to claim that it can be trusted to run
these prisons fairly, to decide in secret and on the president's whim who is to
be jailed without charges, and to insist that Gitmo is filled with dangerous
terrorists.

THE WAR IN IRAQ -- One of Mr. Bush's biggest ''trust me'' moments was when he
told Americans that the United States had to invade Iraq because it possessed
dangerous weapons and posed an immediate threat to America. The White House has
blocked a Congressional investigation into whether it exaggerated the
intelligence on Iraq, and continues to insist that the decision to invade was
based on the consensus of American intelligence agencies.

But the next edition of the journal Foreign Affairs includes an article by the
man in charge of intelligence on Iraq until last year, Paul Pillar, who said the
administration cherry-picked intelligence to support a decision to invade that
had already been made. He said Mr. Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney made it
clear what results they wanted and heeded only the analysts who produced them.
Incredibly, Mr. Pillar said, the president never asked for an assessment on the
consequences of invading Iraq until a year after the invasion. He said the
intelligence community did that analysis on its own and forecast a deeply
divided society ripe for civil war.

When the administration did finally ask for an intelligence assessment, Mr.
Pillar led the effort, which concluded in August 2004 that Iraq was on the brink
of disaster. Officials then leaked his authorship to the columnist Robert Novak
and to The Washington Times. The idea was that Mr. Pillar was not to be trusted
because he dissented from the party line. Somehow, this sounds like a story we
have heard before.

Like many other administrations before it, this one sometimes dissembles
clumsily to avoid embarrassment. (We now know, for example, that the White House
did not tell the truth about when it learned the levees in New Orleans had
failed.) Spin-as-usual is one thing. Striking at the civil liberties, due
process and balance of powers that are the heart of American democracy is
another.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%); TERRORISM
(89%); CORRECTIONS (88%); POWS & MIAS (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); WIRETAPPING (75%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); WITNESSES (75%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (74%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (74%); LEGISLATION (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(74%); LITIGATION (74%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (74%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(71%); TESTIMONY (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%);
SCANDALS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (62%); ARMED
FORCES (61%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (60%); AL-QAEDA (60%) Terrorism;
Editorials; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (57%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%); ALBERTO GONZALES (79%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); CUBA (51%)

REGION: Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             705 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Diary of a Teenage Hit

BYLINE: By STEPHEN WELLS

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: MILLBURN


MICHAEL GENNARO knew the phones would ring. He just didn't realize how much.

When Mr. Gennaro, who is president and chief executive of Paper Mill Playhouse,
decided to include ''The Diary of Anne Frank'' in this season's schedule, he
included four student matinee performances during its current six-week run. That
seemed to be more than enough since in the past the most student matinees for a
Paper Mill production had been two, for ''The King and I'' in 2002.

But no sooner had the announcement been sent to middle schools and high schools
throughout northern and central New Jersey than requests for group tickets began
pouring in, some from schools as far away as Newton and Manville.

In early October, the theater added a fifth weekday performance at 11:30 a.m. A
few weeks later, a sixth performance was added. And in early December, a
seventh.

Mr. Gennaro said there was enough demand for an eighth, but no place to squeeze
it onto the schedule of the 1,200-seat theater. Instead, 28 schools are
attending the theater's regular 2 p.m. matinees, making a total of 125 school
groups and nearly 9,000 students that either have seen or are scheduled to see
this production before it closes on Feb. 26.

Even though the theater doesn't earn as much money on the student matinees --
the cost of a ticket is $20 compared with as much as $62 for a regular
performance -- Mr. Gennaro maintained that it was Paper Mill's ''obligation to
do this'' as part of its responsibility to the community. He also said that
regular sales for the drama had been nowhere near as brisk as those for the
student performances.

Part of the reason for this large degree of interest from schools is because New
Jersey is one of seven states that mandates that Holocaust and genocide studies
be taught at some point in their elementary or secondary schools' curriculum.

Many, if not most, of New Jersey public schools fulfill the academic requirement
by offering courses at the middle school level, like the ''Lessons From the
Holocaust'' class that Mary Vazquez teaches as an eighth-grade elective at
Millburn Middle School. She said the course was always overbooked, and that
two-thirds of the students in it are Jewish.

''They have a great interest in learning about their heritage,'' she said.

But young teenagers will be young teenagers, and at the first of the student
matinees for ''Anne Frank'' on Jan. 25, that was obvious the moment the lights
went down, when mock screams came from the audience.

''It's pitch black! Let's make out!'' one West Essex Junior High School student
said to a female student next to him.

Likewise, as the play progressed and the character of Anne described her
feelings about her awakening sexuality, laughter and rumbling cascaded through
the theater.

But despite that -- and most revealing about the play's impact on the students
-- at its end when the Nazi soldiers storm into the Franks' annex without
warning, the young audience members let out an audible gasp, and a few even
shouted, ''Oh, my God!''

That one scene also answered the question of why make a field trip to the
theater.

''We learn about it, we study it, but it was shocking to see it brought to
life,'' said Carrie Bilenker of Cranford, a student at Solomon Schechter Day
School of Essex and Union in West Orange.

Carla Pastore, a fifth-grade teacher at Mountain Park School in Berkeley
Heights, said her students felt that the bombings and the noises from downstairs
and the vividness of Anne's nightmares were sensations you could not get from a
book.

That was what Mr. Gennaro was hoping for when, sitting in his Paper Mill office
during one of the recent matinees, he said, ''Something this visceral has to
have some kind of impact on them.''

Actually, the very nature of theater seems in total harmony with the desired
approach to the teaching of the Holocaust. Dr. Paul B. Winkler, the executive
director of the New Jersey Commission on Holocaust Education in Trenton, said in
a telephone interview that Holocaust and genocide study must be ''much more
affective learning than cognitive learning.'' In other words, more about caring,
understanding and feeling than about facts and figures.

By semester's end when Ms. Vazquez's class saw ''Anne Frank,'' they had been so
exposed to affective learning on this subject that, compared with many of the
other student groups, they were not quite as shocked by the play, according to
their teacher.

''After they hear survivors speak,'' she said, ''nothing can compare to that.''

Ms. Vazquez has formed a close bond with two Holocaust survivors -- Fred Heyman
of Morristown and a woman from Montclair named Gina, who preferred not to give
her last name -- and they have become regular guests in her Millburn classroom,
as well as on her semiannual field trips to the United States Holocaust Memorial
Museum in Washington. On the bus drive down each semester, Gina gives her
extraordinary testimony to the students.

Both of them also joined the class for the Paper Mill outing, and Mr. Heyman
later said that he was ''amazed how the young generation, when they are
introduced to the Holocaust, totally respond to it.''

This has been borne out by many of the teachers who have already taken their
classes to one of the ''Anne Frank'' matinees. Ms. Pastore indicated that in her
Berkeley Heights class, the students insisted on having a 45-minute discussion
about it the next day.

Her students' biggest shock, despite having read the book and knowing the story,
was that there wasn't a happy ending. ''They thought Paper Mill was going to do
something to end it on a good note,'' she said.

The comment may go to the heart of what Mr. Gennaro considers another of his
theater's responsibilities, which is participating in the development of young
theatergoers in the age of instant telecommunications and TiVo, an age where
most entertainment that children watch do have happy endings, or at least
contrived ones.

''The schools aren't doing as much as they used to,'' Mr. Gennaro said,
referring to arts education.

In an offhand poll of students during one of the post-performance discussions
with the cast and members of the Paper Mill staff, about 85 percent of the 110
who stayed for a talk-back session said they had been to professional theater
productions in the past. ''Wicked,'' ''The Lion King'' and ''Beauty and the
Beast'' were representative of the shows most mentioned.

When asked how many nonmusicals they had seen, less than 10 percent raised their
hands, and ''Aladdin on Ice'' was as close as any could come to a dramatic title
they had seen.

''Anne Frank'' was the first professional live drama for most of them, strangely
in a theater most known through the years for its ''happy ending'' musical
productions. And though the play is set decades before they were born, it still
resonates for them in today's world.

''The kids today, since 9/11, have all sorts of fears they didn't have before,''
said Jane Freeman, chairwoman of the upper school English department at the
Schechter school.

But are they afraid that such an event as the Holocaust could happen again?

''Yes,'' said William Vargas, a student at Lincoln Park Middle School.

When asked why, he thought for a second before giving his answer.

''Why not?'' he said plaintively.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: State-mandated Holocaust studies have boosted student audiences
at ''The Diary of Anne Frank'' at the Paper Mill. (Photo by Richard Perry/The
New York Times)(pg. 1)
 A sold-out audience of more than 1,000 students for a recent performance of
''The Diary of Anne Frank'' at the Paper Mill. (Photo by Richard Perry/The New
York Times)(pg. 6)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIMARY & SECONDARY EDUCATION (90%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(90%); THEATER (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (89%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR
HIGH SCHOOLS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); ADOLESCENTS
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EXECUTIVES (78%);
HIGH SCHOOLS (77%); CURRICULA (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (66%); WAR CRIMES (66%); PAPER & PACKAGING (58%) Theater; Children and
Youth; Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Education and Schools; Theater

ORGANIZATION: PAPER MILL PLAYHOUSE (91%) Paper Mill Playhouse (Millburn, NJ)

PERSON: RICK PERRY (74%) Stephen Wells

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New Jersey

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Diplomat Without Portfolio In Davos

BYLINE: By WILLIAM J. HOLSTEIN.

William J. Holstein is editor in chief of Chief Executive magazine.

SECTION: Section 3; Column 1; Money and Business/Financial Desk; OFFICE SPACE:
ARMCHAIR M.B.A.; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 1094 words


DR. DANIEL VASELLA, chief executive of Novartis, the Swiss pharmaceutical giant,
attracted attention in Europe when he questioned Secretary of State Condoleezza
Rice in a videoconference at the recent World Economic Forum in Davos,
Switzerland. He asked whether the United States was ''playing into the hands of
enemies'' through its tactics in fighting terrorism. Here are excerpts from a
recent conversation with him:

Q. Are there winners and losers in the process of globalization?

A. The concept of winners and losers is wrong. If one looks at economic growth,
child mortality and other factors, which you can take as the measure of a
country's health, you can see that the number of people living on less than $1
per day has declined steadily, from 38 percent of the world's population in 1970
to 20 percent today.

But there has been a very different evolution of various parts of the world.
Some countries have benefited much more than others. The advanced countries have
benefited more. If you look at Latin America, East Asia and South Asia, their
average income per capita has increased significantly. There is one remarkable
exception, where we see stagnation, which is Africa. In sub-Saharan Africa,
there has been very slow and poor development.

Q. Do you think the distribution of wealth needs to be improved?

A. There is a maldistribution in the sense that we have about 20 percent of the
richest 6.1 billion people in the world getting 74 percent of the income, and 80
percent get 26 percent of the income. If you take the poorest 20 percent, they
only have 2 percent of the income. So there is no way we can say it is well
distributed.

Q. Why would you, as a chief executive, raise these issues with Secretary Rice
and other world leaders?

A. The first responsibility of a C.E.O. is to run his company successfully and
generate products which are useful to your customers, resulting in economic
value creation. We also have to act responsibly, respecting not only the law,
but also fulfilling legitimate expectations that society has of us. Today these
expectations in most instances go beyond short-term profit maximization. What
people want is that businesspeople behave in a responsible way in communities in
which they live, that they treat employees fairly, respect the environment and
demonstrate sensitivity to the problems of other, disadvantaged people in the
world. I think corporate social responsibility has taken a much more important
role than it used to.

Q. What did you say to Secretary Rice about the war on terror?

A. It is not a question of whether one should fight terror or not fight terror.
Terror is absolutely unacceptable. What we have to stand for is to create and
maintain a free and open society. With terror, you destroy open societies.

But in an open society, there must be a place for expressing one's opinion.
Critiquing is in some ways an expression of respect. If you do not respect
somebody, you do not bother to critique them. Having said that, I do believe
that if you are economically, politically and militarily a superpower, then you
have to be a role model for the world. If you talk about values and you stand
for democracy and respect for human rights, then you have to act accordingly.
The world will look very closely to see if there is consistency between what you
say and how you act. You will empower your enemies and weaken your supporters if
you deviate from your values and principles.

Q. What do you mean specifically?

A. You cannot fight a war without casualties and without taking prisoners. But
other questions remain, like, Do you torture? We, the open societies in the
world, have to apply the strictest standards. We need to treat people with
respect. We need to be very thoughtful about not offering ground for anybody to
be against us. We have to be thoughtful about the fact that poverty and the lack
of education are excellent breeding grounds for terrorists. They can
indoctrinate children. That's what's happening in many countries. The perception
in people's minds about who we are gets very distorted.

Q. So you're suggesting that there is a connection between poverty and
terrorism?

A. No question. You are more willing to risk one's life and one's family when
you have nothing to lose. People become more thoughtful when they have something
to lose.

Q. Are your views typical of most European chief executives?

A. I don't know about C.E.O.'s, but you would hear these views from many people.
I'm certainly not a complete outlier.

Q. Do you think you are more willing to discuss these issues publicly than
American chief executives?

A. I don't know about that. But I think if we want an open society and want to
have the freedom to express oneself, we have the responsibility to do so. What
does it help if you have the right to express yourself and you don't use that
right? One must speak up when you believe you have something to say.

Q. Why do you think American chief executives are so reluctant to talk about
poverty and the roots of terrorism?

A. I don't know. You will have to ask them. I know that some of my fellow
C.E.O.'s believe they should not express themselves on political issues at all.
They should just do business. I think that is not the right attitude. First of
all, we are citizens of whatever country we are from. We have a citizenship
responsibility. Secondly, I do believe we have to examine our own beliefs and
value systems regularly. We cannot act in a void. I think there is very clear
responsibility.

Q. Might expressing your views hurt your business in America?

A. I don't believe so. I believe the Americans are tolerant and self-assured
enough to stand up to these questions. I would say that Secretary Rice was very
articulate and very impressive. She is an excellent representative of the U.S.
abroad. In some ways, you could even say that only if one is confronted with
these questions can you clearly explain your position.

Q. But do you think any American chief executive would publicly confront
Secretary Rice on these issues?

A. Why not? It depends on the understanding of your role as a business leader.
Do you just have responsibility for your business and just your people?

Or if you are given this kind of job as a result of fate, your skills or
whatever circumstances, do you have also to take stands on subjects that are not
directly linked to your business but are important? Many think that politics
have supremacy over business, but does this also imply that business is just a
tool for government? On this, history teaches us some interesting lessons.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Condoleezza Rice faced some tough questioning from Dr. Daniel
Vasella of Novartis, right, via video link. (Photo by Sebastian Derungs/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Text

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION
MFG (90%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (90%); TERRORISM (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%);
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS (77%); POPULATION SIZE (77%);
EMERGING MARKETS (76%); POPULATION & DEMOGRAPHICS (74%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (72%);
GLOBALIZATION (71%); ECONOMIC NEWS (71%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (70%); TRENDS
(70%); CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (67%); BUSINESS ETHICS & CORPORATE
CITIZENSHIP (67%) Terrorism; United States International Relations; World
Economic Forum; Economic Conditions and Trends

COMPANY: NOVARTIS AG (58%)

ORGANIZATION: WORLD ECONOMIC FORUM (91%) Novartis Ag

TICKER: NVS (NYSE) (58%); NOVN (SWX) (58%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS339115 OPHTHALMIC GOODS MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS325412
PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC3851 OPHTHALMIC GOODS (58%);
SIC2834 PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATIONS (58%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (91%) Daniel (Dr) Vasella; Condoleezza (Sec) Rice;
William J Holstein

STATE: GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); AFRICA (92%); EUROPE (92%);
LATIN AMERICA (79%); EASTERN ASIA (79%); SUB SAHARAN AFRICA (79%); SOUTHERN ASIA
(55%)

REGION: Davos (Switzerland)

LOAD-DATE: February 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             719 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hamas Leader Faults Israeli Sanction Plan

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER; Steven Lee Myers contributed reporting from Moscow
for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 664 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 17


The man many expect to become the new Palestinian prime minister, Ismail Haniya
of the militant Islamic group Hamas, on Friday criticized Israeli proposals to
restrict the movement of money, people and goods into and out of the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank under a Hamas-run Palestinian Authority.

''These Israeli decisions are part of the policy of repression, terrorism and
collective punishment against our people,'' Mr. Haniya said after leaving Friday
Prayer in Gaza City. ''Hamas reflects the choice of our people, who will not be
broken by a few measures taken by the Israeli occupiers.''

A new, Hamas-dominated parliament will be sworn in on Saturday at simultaneous,
videoconferenced sessions in Gaza and the West Bank, and afterward, Israeli
officials say, relations with the Palestinians will change.

The Israeli cabinet, led by the acting prime minister, Ehud Olmert, decided to
wait until after the swearing in to approve measures aimed at isolating and
destabilizing a Hamas government -- measures coordinated with the United States,
officials of both countries say.

The effort is intended to force Hamas to satisfy the three conditions imposed by
Israel and other countries: to recognize Israel's permanent right to exist, to
forswear violence and to accept the validity of previous Palestinian-Israeli
agreements, which are based on the concept of a two-state solution as the
foundation stone for a peace treaty.

Otherwise, Hamas will face international isolation and a form of economic siege,
with a sharp cut in direct budget support needed to pay 140,000 Palestinian
workers, even as most so-called humanitarian aid, through the United Nations and
private organizations, continues at lower levels. All American and European aid
projects are currently under review, officials say.

Dov Weissglas, an adviser to the prime minister, was quoted by the Israeli news
media as telling an official meeting: ''It's like a meeting with a dietitian. We
need to make the Palestinians lose weight, but not to starve to death.'' Mr.
Weissglas was quoted in the past as saying that Israel would be ready to make
peace with the Palestinians when they became as responsible as the citizens of
Finland.

Israel is in conflict with Washington and the Europeans over timing, with its
allies choosing to wait until a new government is formed, which could take
another two weeks or even much longer, before restricting relations with and
financing to the Palestinian Authority.

The United States and the European Union -- which along with Russia and the
United Nations make up the so-called Quartet that has been trying to foster
peace negotiations -- want to preserve their ties to the Palestinian president,
Mahmoud Abbas. They consider him the leader of an interim government until a new
prime minister, presumably Mr. Haniya, can form a new government.

The Israeli cabinet will meet as usual on Sunday and is expected to approve the
sanctions, drawn up by the security services and the Defense Ministry. Israel is
in the midst of an election campaign. If it takes its measures now, the cabinet
will not have to approve the payment of February's customs duties and taxes that
Israel collects for the Palestinian Authority, about $50 million a month.

The recommendations also include separation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip
by closing the Erez crossing between Gaza and Israel to Palestinians lacking a
permit. Use of the Karni crossing between Gaza and Israel would be limited to
the passage of basic goods, fuel, water and relief aid.

Russia angered Israel by inviting Hamas leaders to Moscow for a meeting next
month. On Friday the Russian foreign minister, Sergey V. Lavrov, said the talks
were intended ''to move toward a situation in which Hamas is a legitimate and
useful part of the Middle East peace process.''

He said Russia would be guided by the ''coordinated position'' of the Quartet
and ''many leaders'' in the Middle East who have contacts with Hamas.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HAMAS (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (86%); TERRORISM
(78%); RELIGION (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);
BUDGETS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); APPROVALS (72%); PEACE PROCESS
(72%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%); STARVATION (63%) Embargoes and Economic
Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) Hamas; Palestinian Authority

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (58%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (58%) Steven Erlanger; Ismail Haniya

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%)

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); UNITED STATES
(94%); EUROPE (92%); FINLAND (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (78%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             727 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Shining a Light Into the Abyss of Chile's Dictatorship

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1172 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


LONG before he became a judge, Juan Guzman Tapia revered the rule of law. So it
may be the supreme irony of his career that he will be forever associated with a
man notorious for his disrespect for the law: Gen. Augusto Pinochet.

Take, for example, the autobiography Mr. Guzman published last year after
retiring from the judiciary. He titled it ''At the Edge of the World,'' but his
publicity-conscious publisher insisted it carry the subtitle, ''Memoirs of the
Judge Who Prosecuted Pinochet.''

In the Chilean legal system, investigative judges like Mr. Guzman decide whether
criminal charges can be filed against suspects, and during the last years of his
career he occupied himself almost exclusively with the abuses that occurred when
General Pinochet was in power. The judge ordered mass graves excavated, visited
clandestine prisons, interviewed relatives of the disappeared and dead, even
interrogated General Pinochet himself.

That made Mr. Guzman a hero to some and a pariah to others, and has left him
with a reputation as a maverick and contrarian. In person, however, he is
formal, quiet and reserved, and admits that he initially sympathized with the
military government when General Pinochet first seized power in a bloody coup in
1973.

''There has been an evolution,'' he acknowledged. ''I've ended up a long way
from where I started, with different ideas and different friends.''

Mr. Guzman, 66, was born not in Chile but in El Salvador, where his father, a
poet and diplomat, was chief of mission at the Chilean Embassy. His exposure to
the whims of military autocrats, in fact, began there and then: at the request
of the country's dictator, Gen. Maximiliano Hernandez Martinez, Mr. Guzman was
given Salvador as his middle name. It still is, though he does not use it.

When Mr. Guzman was 4, his father was posted to the United States. The family
spent most of the next eight years there, first in San Francisco, then in
Washington, with young Juan quickly absorbing American values.

''It is obvious that my education and training as a judge began there, in the
United States,'' he acknowledged. ''I was never able to understand the tricks
and subterfuges that people used, so it was clear to me that I was going to
study law and that the only path for me was to work in an area where I would not
have to give way to trickery and deception.''

IN the United States Mr. Guzman also played baseball and football. But his
favorite sport was boxing, at least until he returned to South America as an
adolescent and discovered that the behavior of his opponents in the ring was
different from what he was used to.

''There were a lot of low blows to the kidneys and testicles that went
unpunished, so instead of boxing being something enjoyable, with clear rules in
which you know where and how to defend yourself, it became a different sport
altogether,'' he recalled. ''I liked to play within the rules, and still do
today, so I wasn't prepared for that. I valued fair play, and I was shocked to
encounter this admiration for cheating, for using one's wits to get around the
rules.''

From his father, Mr. Guzman inherited a love for literature, with an admiration
for Shakespeare, Dickens, Wilde and Maugham, and dreamed of being a writer. So
when he finished law school, he boarded a freighter to Europe, where he made his
way to Paris.

Once there, he lived on the Left Bank, where he worked on a novel while
witnessing the student uprising of May 1968, undergoing psychoanalysis and even,
he admits, smoking marijuana.

Mr. Guzman returned to Chile just in time for the election of Salvador Allende
in September 1970. His parents' politics were conservative, and like most
members of his class, he opposed Allende and supported the military coup that
overthrew the Socialist government on Sept. 11, 1973.

But Mr. Guzman's views had already begun to change when he qualified to become a
judge and was assigned to Panguipulli, a small town in southern Chile, just
north of Patagonia. ''A Wild West, frontier mentality'' prevailed there, he
said, with killings, rapes and robberies, and an entrenched local elite that
looked to the judicial system to protect its wealth and privileges.

''Panguipulli was a caricature of what goes on in the rest of Chile, but it
introduced me to the history of the real Chile, and how social castes are
formed,'' he said. ''I came to realize that the biggest problem in our country
was ignorance and, obviously, the terrible gap between the rich and the poor.''

After he returned to Santiago, his doubts about the dictatorship hardened after
the national police came to him and asked for a warrant for what they said would
be a raid on an illegal still. It was only later that he realized ''that it was
a deception, that they were really looking for arms and supposed terrorists.''

Keeping his thoughts to himself and doing his job ''quietly and discreetly,''
without supporting the dictatorship, he managed to rise to the Court of Appeals
and remained there after the return of democracy in 1990. Early in 1998 he was
asked to rule on a request to hold General Pinochet responsible for the
disappearance and presumed murder of a small group of opponents.

About 4,000 people were killed or disappeared during the Pinochet dictatorship,
and thousands more were jailed, tortured or forced into exile. The military had
sought to protect itself from being held accountable by declaring an amnesty in
1978, but Mr. Guzman paved the way for prosecution by ruling that the
disappearances were a form of ''permanent kidnapping'' not covered by the
amnesty.

Until the Pinochet case came along, Mr. Guzman was on a track that could have
taken him to the Chilean Supreme Court, an institution he describes as having
been ''obsequious to the dictatorship.'' But his fellow judges were often upset
at some of his methods, particularly his habit of allowing reporters to
accompany him on his field investigations.

''The deeper I got into my inquiry into the crimes of the dictatorship, the more
I realized that people in Chile were either unaware or wanted to be unaware of
those crimes,'' he said. ''So I told myself that one way I could contribute is
to talk to the press, and take people from the various television channels to
clandestine burial sites, and show the terrible wounds that were often present
on the skeletons.''

AS a result, Mr. Guzman has become something of a hero to ordinary people, who
were unused to seeing authorities held accountable for their actions. Walking
with him at the Central University here, where he is dean of the law school, he
was recognized and congratulated by the vendor at a newsstand and many others.

''They see me as part of the fight against injustice, and that is more important
than those who consider me a traitor to our class,'' he said. ''The important
thing is what we leave to our children, and here they are going to be able to
say, 'Look, here a dictator was judged.'

''I believe that my mission has been accomplished.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: JUAN GUZMAN TAPIA

GRAPHIC: Photo: JUAN GUZMAN TAPIA (Photo by Tomas Munita for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RULE OF LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (90%); MILITARY RULE (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); LEGAL EDUCATION (78%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (77%); PUBLISHING (77%);
LITERATURE (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WRITERS (77%); BIOGRAPHY
PUBLISHING (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); GENOCIDE (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%);
JUDGES (73%); COUPS (71%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (70%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (69%);
ADOLESCENTS (69%); BOXING (65%); BASEBALL (60%); POLITICS (60%) Politics and
Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Books and
Literature

ORGANIZATION: Central University (Santiago, Chile)

Larry Rohter; Juan Guzman Tapia; Augusto (Gen) Pinochet

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); EL SALVADOR
(79%)

REGION: Chile; Chile

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             728 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 25, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Tribunal Rejects Milosevic Travel Demand

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 72 words


International judges trying Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president,
on genocide charges turned down his request to travel to Moscow for medical
treatment for his heart condition and other ailments. The judges said that they
were not convinced that he would return from Moscow, where his wife and son
live, to complete his trial and said that his medical needs could be met doctors
visiting him here.   MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); MEDICAL TOURISM (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (87%); CARDIOVASCULAR
DISEASE (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); EUROPE (90%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands); Russia; Moscow (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             740 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Court Orders U.S. to Allay 9/11 Spy Fears

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 344 words


A federal magistrate in Brooklyn ordered government lawyers at a hearing
yesterday to guarantee in writing that the United States was not secretly
monitoring communications between the plaintiffs and their lawyers in a
class-action lawsuit against former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other top
officials.

The plaintiffs in the case are Muslim immigrants who were swept up in the New
York area after Sept. 11, 2001, detained for months and deported after being
cleared of any links to terrorism. Several briefly returned to New York from
Egypt and Pakistan this year to give depositions at an undisclosed hotel.

Their lawyers have asked if the rooms where they and their clients conferred
were bugged or videotaped and if their e-mail messages and telephone calls were
intercepted. If so, they ask, on whose authority? But the government has refused
to answer, saying the questions were outside the realm of the lawsuit.

Rachel Meeropol, a lawyer for the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
represents many of the detainees, wrote the magistrate that the questions were
prompted by disclosures that the National Security Agency has intercepted
electronic communications inside and outside the United States, without a
warrant, under an executive order being challenged in a separate lawsuit.

The magistrate, Steven M. Gold, said that the questions were probably outside
the scope of the lawsuit. But, he said, the plaintiffs' lawyers were ''at
minimum'' entitled to assurance that the government litigation team and any
potential witnesses -- who include Mr. Ashcroft and Robert S. Mueller III, the
F.B.I. director, did not know of any spying. Magistrate Gold said he also wanted
''a commitment'' that no information collected through such eavesdropping would
be used in the case.

''They can't be expected to prepare their case if they think someone is
listening to them,'' he told Stephen E. Handler, a Justice Department lawyer.
''I don't want them looking over their shoulders and worrying that you're
getting phone calls from some N.S.A.'' agent.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (95%); LITIGATION (95%); MAGISTRATES (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(91%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%);
DEPORTATION (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); DEPOSITIONS (78%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); WIRETAPPING (78%); WITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CLASS ACTIONS (77%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); RELIGION (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (73%); REFUGEES (72%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(70%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (67%) Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Decisions and
Verdicts; Islam; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods ;
Immigration and Refugees; Deportation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (56%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY
(55%)

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (67%) Nina Bernstein; Steven M Gold; John Ashcroft

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); PAKISTAN (79%); EGYPT (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             742 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Issues Secret Ruling In Case of 2 At Mosque

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 706 words


A federal judge issued a highly unusual classified ruling yesterday, denying a
motion for dismissal of a case against two leaders of an Albany mosque who are
accused of laundering money in a federal terrorism sting operation.

Because the ruling was classified, the defense lawyers were barred from reading
why the judge decided that way.

The defense lawyers had asked the judge to dismiss the case, saying that they
believed the government's evidence came from wiretaps obtained without a warrant
by the National Security Agency.

The two mosque leaders, Yassin M. Aref, 35, and Mohammed M. Hossain, 50, were
charged in August 2004 with conspiring with a government informant to take part
in what they believed was a plot to import a shoulder-fired missile and
assassinate a Pakistani diplomat.

The classified order by Judge Thomas J. McAvoy of United States District Court
for the Northern District of New York came only a few hours after the government
filed its own classified documents to the judge. Prosecutors were responding to
a motion filed on Jan. 20 by Mr. Aref's lawyer, Terence L. Kindlon.

The prosecutors asked the judge to review their papers in his chambers without
making them public or showing them to the defense. At midafternoon the judge
issued a document announcing that he had entered the classified order denying
Mr. Kindlon's request.

It is common in federal court for judges to place documents and legal
discussions under seal, meaning that the judge and the lawyers can be informed
of the proceedings, but the public cannot. In this case, Judge McAvoy's order is
classified, a higher degree of secrecy. As of late yesterday, Mr. Kindlon, even
though he has a federal security clearance to represent Mr. Aref in the trial,
had not been able to see the substance of the ruling.

''Frankly, I'm taken aback,'' Mr. Kindlon said. The ruling ''holds out no
promise of anything'' for him to see the decision, he said.

Christopher Dunn, a lawyer for the New York Civil Liberties Union, which has
asked to participate in the case, said such decisions appeared to be rare. Mr.
Dunn said his group had no record of a classified decision in a case that it had
handled.

In his motion, Mr. Kindlon cited an article in The New York Times on Jan. 17
that reported that ''different officials agree'' that the security agency's
program had ''played a role'' in the arrest of Mr. Aref and Mr. Hossain. Mr.
Hossain's lawyer, Kevin A. Luibrand, joined the request to dismiss the case.

Mr. Kindlon asked that all evidence in the case stemming from N.S.A. wiretaps be
given to the defense. He argued that the program was unconstitutional and so the
evidence should be suppressed.

''The government engaged in illegal electronic surveillance of thousands of U.S.
persons, including Yassin Aref, then instigated a sting operation to attempt to
entrap Mr. Aref into supporting a nonexistent terrorist plot, then dared to
claim that the illegal N.S.A. operation was justified because it was the only
way to catch Mr. Aref,'' Mr. Kindlon wrote in his brief.

Whether or not the program is constitutional is a matter of intense political
and legal debate that has not been resolved by the courts. Since the government
classified its motions, there is no way at this point to know what argument
persuaded Judge McAvoy.

The arrest of Mr. Aref, an Islamic scholar who is the imam of Masjid As-Salaam
in Albany, and Mr. Hossain on Aug. 5, 2004, came after a yearlong sting
operation in which the informant posed as a terrorist. They are accused of
agreeing to launder $50,000 in payments for a Chinese missile that he showed
them.

At first, prosecutors said that both men had ties to a terrorist group known as
Ansar-al-Islam. The government soon dropped those claims after it turned out
they were based on a bad translation of a piece of evidence by the Defense
Department. Mr. Aref was free on bail for 13 months, but he was sent to prison
to await trial after the government brought new charges. Mr. Hossain remains
free on bail.

Mr. Kindlon said Judge McAvoy's action convinced him that there was N.S.A.
wiretap evidence in the case. ''If they were not involved, the government would
have told me, 'You're delusional,' '' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (93%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); MONEY LAUNDERING (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(89%); WIRETAPPING (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); ARRESTS (77%);
CONSPIRACY (77%); ASSASSINATION (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
SURVEILLANCE TECHNOLOGY (50%) Terrorism; Money Laundering; Assassinations and
Attempted Assassinations; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (57%)

PERSON: ROSEMARY S POOLER (79%) Julia Preston; Thomas (Judge) Mcavoy; Yassin M
Aref; Mohammed M Hossain

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (88%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%)

REGION: Albany (NY); Pakistan

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             744 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Netherlands: Croatian Journalist Fined

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 103 words


The Yugoslav war crimes tribunal fined a journalist and a former Croatian
intelligence chief $18,000 each for publishing the name of a secret witness and
the testimony he gave in the trial of Tihomir Blaskic, a Croatian officer. The
court said that Markica Rebic, the former intelligence chief, provided the
material that was published by Ivica Marijacic, the editor of the Hrvatski List
newspaper in November 2004. It is the first time the tribunal has punished a
journalist for contempt of court. Four other Croatian journalists are awaiting
trial for similar disclosures of secret information.   MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); JOURNALISM (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WRITERS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
PUBLISHING (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) News and News Media; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Ivica Marijacic; Markica Rebic; Tihomir Blaskic

COUNTRY: CROATIA (95%); EUROPE (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO
(79%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             745 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 11, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  South: Alabama: Army Punishes Abu Ghraib Officer

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 132 words


The Army has reprimanded a senior Congressional aide who served in Iraq for his
role in the abuse of detainees at the Abu Ghraib prison. The aide, Capt.
Christopher Brinson, deputy chief of staff for Representative Mike D. Rogers of
Alabama, led the platoon of Army reservists that included Specialist Charles A.
Graner Jr., a prison guard and a central figure in the scandal who was sentenced
in January 2005 to 10 years in prison. Captain Brinson's lawyer, David P.
Sheldon, declined to discuss the reason for the punishment. Mr. Sheldon said
that Captain Brinson was unaware of his soldiers' actions and faulted his
superiors for allowing the abuse and that Captain Brinson had submitted a
rebuttal. Captain Brinson received the reprimand in January, and it was reported
yesterday by Salon.com.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (88%);
SENTENCING (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(74%); GENOCIDE (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%) United States Armament and
Defense; Prisoners of War; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: SALON MEDIA GROUP INC (56%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%)

PERSON: MIKE ROGERS (78%) Christopher (Capt) Brinson; Mike (Rep) (Ala) Rogers

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             749 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Slobodan Milosevic, 64, Former Yugoslav Leader Accused of War Crimes, Dies

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and ALISON SMALE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 2899 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 11


Slobodan Milosevic, the Communist leader whose embrace of Serbian nationalism
set off almost a decade of Balkan warfare, was found dead early Saturday in his
cell at the United Nations detention center in The Hague, where he had been
since 2001. He was 64.

Mr. Milosevic appeared to have died from natural causes, but tribunal officials
said they would not be able to give a full account until an autopsy and
toxicological report were completed. He was found lifeless on his bed in his
cell, a court statement said. Mr. Milosevic's wife, and his partner of almost
five decades, Mirjana Markovic, who, like his brother, Borislav, is living in
Moscow, was informed of Mr. Milosevic's death, the court said.

Death came as Mr. Milosevic's four-year trial for war crimes, crimes against
humanity and genocide was drawing to a close. A verdict had been expected later
this year.

He was the first former head of state to answer charges of such crimes and his
was the longest war-crimes trial of modern times, delayed by Mr. Milosevic's
frequent bouts of illness related to high blood pressure and a bad heart.

The complex indictment covered the events of three wars -- in Croatia, Bosnia
and Kosovo -- and almost a decade of bloodshed and vengeance that killed more
than 200,000 people and earned Mr. Milosevic the sobriquet ''Butcher of the
Balkans.''

On the advice of medical specialists, Mr. Milosevic went to court only three
days a week. A lawyer by training, he insisted on conducting his own defense,
often speaking for hours and summoning witnesses, including, just last month,
former President Bill Clinton, who declined. Although Mr. Milosevic had become
less blustery of late, his trademark defiance allowed him to act the role of
martyr for the Serbian cause until the very end.

In December, Mr. Milosevic asked to travel to Moscow for medical treatment. The
judges in The Hague refused to let him leave, arguing that adequate treatment
was available in the Netherlands.

Fueling Nationalist Grudges

  As he rose and then clung to power by resurrecting old nationalist grudges and
inciting dreams of a Greater Serbia, Mr. Milosevic became the prime engineer of
wars that pitted his fellow Serbs against the Slovenes, the Croats, the
Bosnians, the Albanians of Kosovo and ultimately the combined forces of the
entire NATO alliance.

By stirring a dormant but incendiary nationalism, he succeeded in rallying
support for himself in the late 1980's, at a time when Communism in the rest of
Eastern Europe was in its death throes.

Exercising carefully calculated control of the media and operating ruthlessly
behind the scenes, Mr. Milosevic established a cult of personality that struck
fear into non-Serbs in Yugoslavia.

The Croats reacted by turning to their own nationalist, Franjo Tudjman, and so
the stage was set for a deadly showdown between Yugoslavia's two largest ethnic
groups, whose leaders manipulated centuries of historical differences -- the
Serbs are Orthodox Christians, the Croats Roman Catholic; the Serbs endured
Ottoman rule, the Croats the Hapsburgs -- into a brutal civil war that spread
from Croatia into Bosnia-Herzegovina.

There, the Muslim plurality led by Alija Izetbegovic proved powerless to enlist
sufficient international support to prevent Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Tudjman from
trying to dismember his state. Three and a half years of war ravaged Bosnia,
leading to some 200,000 deaths and the eviction of millions from homes in a
practice that became known globally as ethnic cleansing.

The consequences of Mr. Milosevic's rule for Serbia were devastating. His final
confrontation, with the Albanians of Kosovo, provoked a NATO bombing assault in
the spring of 1999 that destroyed government buildings, factories and much
infrastructure in a land already ruined by years of international sanctions
intended to punish Mr. Milosevic for instigating earlier wars.

As Stojan Cerovic of the independent Belgrade weekly Vreme once wrote, ''he
turned Serbia into a colossal ruin.''

By the fall of 2000, even Mr. Milosevic's appeals to nationalism and blatant
manipulation of every election he contested were no longer enough to sustain him
in power.

Opposition forces who had mustered huge street protests, in 1991 and 1996, to
try to oust Mr. Milosevic finally succeeded in October 2000.

Security forces, who had helped Mr. Milosevic carve out large chunks of Croatia
and Bosnia for Serbs and then served his cause in Kosovo, turned against him and
joined opposition forces led by Vojislav Kostunica, who had beaten Mr. Milosevic
in a presidential election that the Serbian leader refused to recognize.

After his ouster, Mr. Milosevic was placed under house arrest in his villa in
the elegant Belgrade district of Dedinje. Zoran Djindjic, then the prime
minister, helped organize his transfer to The Hague in the summer of 2001.

But even that did not end the violence and chaos in the Serbia that Mr.
Milosevic did so much to ruin. Mr. Djindjic, a charismatic leader who was trying
to propel his country toward Europe, was himself assassinated in 2003.

While Mr. Milosevic instigated large-scale destruction, he was then needed to
halt it. His career reached its zenith, perhaps, in late 1995, when he, along
with Mr. Tudjman and Mr. Izetbegovic, traveled to Dayton, Ohio, to negotiate,
under American auspices, the agreement that finally ended the Bosnian war.

Slavoljub Djukic, a prominent Serbian journalist who wrote several books about
Mr. Milosevic, neatly captured this paradox, noting that ''he is both the
pyromaniac and the fireman.''

''He creates disorder,'' Mr. Djukic added, ''and manages to convince people only
he can resolve it.''

Engineering Disorder

  Mr. Milosevic's emergence from an obscure career in the Yugoslav Communist
Party dates to April 1987. For 25 years, Mr. Milosevic had ridden the coattails
of a university friend, Ivan Stambolic, who had power and standing in the League
of Communists founded by Tito to rule Yugoslavia.

In that spring of 1987, Mr. Stambolic, the new Communist party leader in Serbia,
dispatched Mr. Milosevic to Kosovo, the region in southern Serbia treasured by
all Serbs as the heart of their medieval empire but which had by then fallen
under the control of ethnic Albanians who made up some 90 percent of Kosovo's
population.

Kosovo's Serbian minority claimed that the Albanians were continuing to drive
Serbs from the province, where the legend of Serb sacrifice and victimhood was
established in 1389, when the Ottoman Turks defeated Serbs on the battlefield at
Kosovo Polje and began their 500 years of domination in the Balkans.

Tito, who had squashed Yugoslavia's simmering and powerful nationalisms, had
died seven years earlier. The Albanians of Kosovo had violently rebelled against
Yugoslav rule just months later, in the spring of 1981, and were smarting under
the fierce suppression of that revolt.

Serbian nationalism, meanwhile, was simmering through the ranks of intellectuals
and others in Belgrade.

Mr. Stambolic was nonetheless utterly unprepared for Mr. Milosevic to embrace
this nationalism.

Instead of papering over the Albanian-Serbian dispute, Mr. Milosevic left a
meeting of the mostly Albanian Communist leaders of Kosovo and wandered into a
group of Serbian demonstrators in Kosovo Polje who were complaining that the
police had used batons to push them back. Looking into the television cameras,
Mr. Milosevic instantly vaulted into the Serbian consciousness by declaring,
''No one will dare to beat you again.''

The crowd turned from hostility to cheering, ''Slobo, Slobo.''

The apparently spontaneous incident was in fact carefully orchestrated by Mr.
Milosevic. He had arrived in Kosovo the day before and talked with some of the
people who planned to demonstrate. He took advantage of close ties to television
managers to obtain coverage and to assure that his utterance would be captured
and repeatedly rebroadcast throughout Serbia over the next few weeks, so that
the refrain became a catchphrase.

Galvanized by this exposure, Mr. Milosevic mounted a campaign that soon became a
full-scale cult of personality.

Pictures of the politician with his brushed back hedgehog haircut appeared
everywhere. Mobs of ''Slobo'' chanters were shuttled from demonstration to
demonstration. Newspaper editors and television commentators were primed to
praise him. Jingles and songs were written, among them one that played on his
first name, which incorporates the Serbian word for freedom.

''Slobodan, they call you freedom/ You are loved by big and small/ So long as
Slobo walks the land/people will not be enslaved.''

Then, in the fall of 1987, Mr. Milosevic mounted an extraordinary assault on Mr.
Stambolic, in a televised Communist party meeting that riveted Serbia. By the
meeting's end, he had engineered Mr. Stambolic's ouster and had become the
Serbs' leader, Communist by name and nationalist by choice.

Years later, Mr. Stambolic ruefully looked back on his long friendship with Mr.
Milosevic and his ambitious wife. ''When somebody looks at your back for 25
years, it is understandable that he gets the desire to put a knife in it at some
point,'' he said. ''Many people warned me but I did not acknowledge it.''

(In 2000, Mr. Stambolic disappeared while jogging in Belgrade. His remains were
found in 2003, hilly region in northern Serbia. He had been shot twice. In July
2005, a special court in Belgrade found the chief of the secret service under
Mr. Milosevic and a paramilitary commander guilty of planning and carrying out
the assassination.)

A Lifelong Partner

  Throughout his career, Mr. Milosevic trusted perhaps only one person -- his
wife, a onetime professor of Marxism, who served as his brain trust, helping him
organize his political strategy and tactics.

A more doctrinaire ideologue than her husband, Ms. Markovic was at times
demonized as the ''Red Witch.'' Critics routinely deprecated her, mocking
outlandish diaries published in fawning Belgrade publications, but she was a
formidable presence in Serbian politics.

The couple had met in high school in Pozarevac, a provincial town some 50 miles
south of Belgrade, where Mr. Milosevic was born on Aug. 20, 1941.

While Slobodan and his older brother, Borislav, were in grade school, their
father left the family for his native Montenegro. Mr. Milosevic's mother, who
reared him, was also a teacher, and a dedicated Communist activist.

As a youth, Mr. Milosevic was a pudgy loner with few friends. He shunned sports
and wrote poetry. In 1962 while he was at university, his father committed
suicide by shooting himself. His mother hanged herself 11 years later. An uncle,
his mother's brother, a former general, also took his own life.

While Mr. Milosevic had effusive moments, and loved to engage the many Western
diplomats and politicians with whom he negotiated during the war years in
lengthy, alcohol-laced discussions of Balkan history, he was most often
described as a loner, reclusive and moody. He and his wife had few close
friends, relying on each other and their two children, Maria and Marko, who
became infamous for driving cars at high speed and toting a gun.

In the late 1980's and early 1990's Mr. Milosevic intensified his nationalist
rhetoric, stepped up his Kosovo campaign and broadened his assaults on fellow
Communists from other parts of Yugoslavia.

In June 1989, on the 600th anniversary of the Ottomans' defeat of the Serbs, Mr.
Milosevic returned once more to Kosovo Polje. Standing on the ancient
battlefield, before a crowd of hundreds of thousands of Serbs, he signaled that
there would be war. ''Six centuries later, we are again in battles and
quarrels,'' he said. ''They are not armed battles, though such things should not
be excluded yet.''

Over the next two years, Mr. Milosevic secretly plotted war. The minority Serbs
in Croatia, led by Milan Babic, a dentist from the town of Knin, served as his
first instrument to whip up trouble.

Croatia's Serbs felt bitterly betrayed by the election, in 1990, of Mr. Tudjman,
an unswerving Croatian nationalist, as president of Croatia. Minority Serbs
almost immediately started to lose influential jobs in the government apparatus.

Serb-Croat confrontations became ever more frequent during late 1990 and early
1991. The small, wealthy northern republic of Slovenia, meanwhile, decided that
it would leave the quarrelsome Yugoslav federation by June 1991 if it proved
impossible to negotiate a looser confederation that would allow the Slovenes and
others much more autonomy from the dominant Serbs.

Croatia, with tacit and later explicit support from Austria and Germany,
followed.

In June 1991, first Croatia and then Slovenia declared independence. Federal
forces in Slovenia fought well-organized Slovenes before alarmed European
diplomats helped negotiate a cease-fire, and the federal forces eventually
withdrew.

In Croatia, the battles between the minority Serbs -- backed by the
Serb-dominated Yugoslav military and armed by Mr. Milosevic's security forces --
and Mr. Tudjman's army proved much more deadly. The Serbian minority was able to
carve out enclaves covering about one third of Croatian territory before peace
was negotiated by the veteran American diplomat Cyrus Vance at the very start of
1992.

But the war in Croatia, it turned out, was merely the prelude to a much more
horrific conflict. In Bosnia, Mr. Milosevic had been working behind the scenes
for months, with his security forces ensuring that their Bosnian Serb allies
were well armed and ready to take power throughout some 60 percent of Bosnia
that they claimed historically belonged to the Serbs.

That spring, bands of well-armed men from Serbia descended on towns in eastern
Bosnia and systematically killed Muslims.

In the Bosnian capital, Sarajevo, meanwhile, Mr. Milosevic's ally, Radovan
Karadzic, engineered unrest. A city that had prided itself for centuries on its
blend of Muslim, Orthodox Christian, Roman Catholic and Jewish faiths and had
put that cosmopolitan face on display in hosting the 1984 Winter Olympics
swiftly found itself under siege.

For three and a half years, at the end of the 20th century, Sarajevo endured
scenes more readily imagined as medieval. Almost 10,000 people were killed by
the shells launched by Serbian forces in the surrounding mountains, or bullets
fired by snipers from both sides hidden in city buildings.

Some of the dead perished from hunger and cold in a city kept alive largely by
United Nations peacekeeping forces who frequently found themselves forced to
suspend incoming flights of aid and food because of Serbian attacks on the
planes.

Eventually, Mr. Milosevic, his economy ruined by sanctions and his patience with
Mr. Karadzic and the Bosnian Serbs' military leader, Ratko Mladic, wearing thin,
decided that the war had to end.

In the late spring of 1995, the American diplomat Richard C. Holbrooke started
reaching out to the Serbs, signaling that Washington might be prepared to do an
unsavory deal with the war's protagonists.

The international impulse to end the violence was then strengthened in July 1995
by the massacre of some 7,000 Muslim men and boys by General Mladic's men after
they overran the town of Srebrenica, an enclave supposedly guarded by the United
Nations in eastern Bosnia.

Trouble in Kosovo

  But domestically, disillusionment had set in, and Mr. Milosevic faced new
trouble, in Kosovo, where the Albanians, long admired for their nonviolent
resistance to the Serbian security forces who took over the province in the
early 1990's, had decided to turn to armed rebellion.

Attacks by the Kosovo Liberation Army multiplied during 1998. Mr. Holbrooke and
other outsiders returned to the Balkans and their long sessions with Mr.
Milosevic, trying to prevent a renewed outbreak of war. But the Serbian leader
would not withdraw from Kosovo. And so, in March 1999, NATO, for the first time,
went to war, bombing Serbia until Mr. Milosevic eventually agreed, in June that
year, to pull back his men and allow NATO peacekeepers to enter the province,
which remains to this day a United Nations protectorate.

This defeat, the economic ruin and isolation that Mr. Milosevic had brought upon
Serbia stirred up opposition at home, culminating in his election defeat in
2000, and then to his dispatch to The Hague in 2001.

Although he ended his days in a jail cell, Mr. Milosevic carved an indelible
mark on the 20th century history of Europe.

Mr. Babic, the erstwhile Milosevic ally who died just days before his onetime
patron, summed up Mr. Milosevic's legacy when testifying against him in The
Hague in 2002. ''You brought shame upon the Serbian people,'' he said. ''You
brought misfortune on the Croatian people, on the Muslim people'' and
''orchestrated'' the Balkan conflict.

Indeed, Mr. Milosevic dashed all the joy that came with the fall of the Berlin
Wall and the crumbling of Communism across the rest of Eastern Europe.

''At a time when there was real optimism in Europe, Milosevic almost
single-handedly -- with help from some Croats and some Serbs -- managed to
plunge Europe into a profound crisis,'' said Misha Glenny, a British expert on
the Balkans. ''Even in Serbia, there will be few people mourning his death
because he did great damage to Serbia, as he did to other Yugoslav republics.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Politics and Gov't (Foreign)

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14, 2006



CORRECTION: The obituary of Slobodan Milosevic on Sunday referred incorrectly in
some copies to the year in which his former ally, Milan Babic, testified against
him at his trial in The Hague. It was 2002, not 1992.

GRAPHIC: Photos: THE NATIONALIST -- Slobodan Milosevic, then the Serbian leader,
spoke in Kosovo on June 28, 1989, on the 600th anniversary of the Battle of
Kosovo. His nationalist dreams plunged the Balkans into war. (Photo by Tomislav
Peternek/Polaris)
THE NEGOTIATOR -- Mr. Milosevic, at the table top right, agreed to a peace deal
in Dayton, Ohio, in 1995. Although he was forced to give up his dream of a
greater Serbian state, he was able to consolidate his power. (Pool photo by Joe
Marquette)
 THE DEFENDANT -- Mr. Milosevic, shown here in The Hague in 2003, was standing
trial on charges of genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity in
connection with his actions while he was in power in Belgrade. (Photo by Paul
Vreeker/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); DEATHS (90%);
GENOCIDE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); INDICTMENTS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%);
LITIGATION (76%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (76%); AUTOPSIES (73%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (71%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (71%); MEDICAL TOURISM (64%);
ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS (50%) Deaths (Obituaries); War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

BILL CLINTON (53%) Marlise Simons; Alison Smale

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (67%);
DAYTON, OH, USA (59%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); CROATIA (94%); KOSOVO (94%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); NETHERLANDS (91%); SLOVENIA (79%); ALBANIA (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); FRANCE (67%); EASTERN EUROPE (51%)

REGION: Serbia; Bosnia; Kosovo (Serbia); Croatia

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             750 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

To His Death in Jail, Milosevic Exalted Image of Serb Suffering

BYLINE: By ROGER COHEN

SECTION: Section 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk; DEATH OF MILOSEVIC: AN APPRAISAL;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1815 words


To the last, a solitary death yesterday in a United Nations cell near an
international court he derided, Slobodan Milosevic clung to the notion that all
the Balkan destruction he ignited and presided over was no more than a response
to aggression against his long-suffering Serbian people.

''My aim is to present the truth, and that takes time,'' the former Serbian
president told the tribunal in The Hague, a prelude to painstaking
circumlocutions that sought over more than four years to cast the author of
Yugoslavia's destruction as a misunderstood man bent only on that country's
defense.

In fact, the truth for Mr. Milosevic was always a commodity to be manipulated in
the single-minded pursuit of power. Everyone -- Croats reinvented as World War
II fascists, Bosnian Muslims recast as marauding Ottoman Turks, multiplying
Kosovo Albanians redrawn as agents of ''demographic genocide'' against the Serbs
-- was fit material for Mr. Milosevic's overriding myth of Serbian suffering.

That myth held a heady power over many years. As Communism collapsed in Europe
and his own Yugoslavia in the late 1980's, Mr. Milosevic seized the potential of
nationalism as what Miroslav Hroch, a Czech political theorist, has called ''a
substitute for factors of integration in a disintegrating society.''

Deploying a blunt slogan -- ''Serbia does not kneel'' -- Mr. Milosevic, 64,
engineered a giddy apotheosis from what had been a humdrum career as a banker
and Communist bureaucrat. He was found dead in his bed, apparently of natural
causes, according to the tribunal. An autopsy was to be performed today in the
Netherlands. [Page 12.]

His method was unsubtle -- the defense of Serbs and a glorious vision of Serbian
history -- but it played well to a people with a long-held conviction that
Tito's Communist Yugoslavia had cheated them of rightful power.

One result was a violence not seen in Europe since 1945. No Stalin, no Hitler,
Mr. Milosevic nevertheless proved himself over 13 years in power to be a ruler
of exceptional ruthlessness always ready to use force in a series of wars, from
Croatia in 1991 to Kosovo in 1999. [Obituary, Page 34.]

In effect, Mr. Milosevic destroyed the delicate balance of the Yugoslavia he
professed to defend and then expressed wonderment at its violent destruction.
''Who, me?'' he always seemed to ask, both as leader and later during his long
season in court, when confronted with the repetitive evidence of his own
destructiveness.

By the time Yugoslavia began to unravel in 1991 in the wars that left more than
200,000 people dead, Mr. Milosevic has quashed the autonomy of Kosovo and
another province, Vojvodina, and installed a subservient leadership in
Montenegro. As a result, he controlled four votes in the eight-member collective
Yugoslav presidency.

When the leaders of other Yugoslav republics balked, suggesting Mr. Milosevic
had transformed Yugoslavia into ''Serboslavia,'' the Serbian leader performed a
typical pirouette, declaring that Serbs were on the defensive because they only
wanted to remain within a threatened Yugoslav state. Having smashed all the
furniture, Mr. Milosevic blamed everyone else for no longer wanting to sit down
with him.

Wars followed -- briefly in Slovenia, then in Croatia, most devastatingly in
Bosnia, and finally in Kosovo. As they did -- and that delicate early
20th-century creation, Yugoslavia, was destroyed as utterly as the old Ottoman
bridge at Mostar -- Mr. Milosevic never wavered in attempting to portray himself
and the Serbs as victims of ''Muslim propaganda'' or other baleful forces beyond
his control.

''The national and historic being of Serbs is a liberating one,'' Mr. Milosevic
declared during his rise to power in the 1980's. It was to this vision that he
and many of his disoriented people clung through the discovery of an array of
Serbian concentration camps in Bosnia in 1992 and even through the killing of
thousands of Muslims near the eastern Bosnian town of Srebrenica in 1995.

During his trial on charges of crimes against humanity and genocide, Mr.
Milosevic, acting as his own lawyer, called dozens of witnesses, from former
Communist Party aides to Russian politicians, in an attempt to bolster his case
that none of the killings and forced evictions known as ''ethnic cleansing''
took place at his instigation.

Wars are nasty, he argued in essence, and bad things happen to everyone. But, he
insisted, the notion of a plan for a Greater Serbia brutally emptied of
non-Serbs was an invention of the many enemies of his people.

His argument ignored multiple realities -- the systematic arming of Serbs in
Croatia and Bosnia; the coordinated nature of the camps in which tens of
thousands of unarmed Muslim civilians suffered or were killed in 1992; the
conversion of the Serbian-dominated Yugoslav army into an agent of Serbian
expansionism; the financing of that operation from Belgrade; and the deployment
of highly trained Serbian militias in Bosnia and later in Kosovo.

But reality was never Mr. Milosevic's preferred domain. He only ventured into
Bosnia once, the better to conserve the fantasies that fed his rise to power.

Borislav Jovic, a senior aide to Mr. Milosevic, was much more forthright. In
interviews with the BBC for a documentary on the destruction of Yugoslavia, he
explained that the aim was always to use wars in Croatia and Serbia to
consolidate areas with large Serb population into a Greater Serbia.

Before war broke out upon Bosnia's declaration of independence from Yugoslavia
in April 1992, planning was already in place. ''We knew that when Bosnia was
recognized, we'd be seen as aggressors because our army was there,'' Mr. Jovic
said. ''So Milosevic and I talked it over, and we realized we'd have to pull a
fast one. We transferred all the Bosnian Serbs in our Yugoslav army to their
forces and promised to pay all the costs.''

One result was that for the initial year of the war, Serbs enjoyed a crushing
military domination that they put to use emptying wide swathes of eastern,
northern and northwestern Bosnia of Muslims and laying siege to Bosnia's
multiethnic capital, Sarajevo, whose plight became a symbol of the Balkan
madness set in motion by Mr. Milosevic.

The Bosnian campaign was led by Radovan Karadzic, the political leader of the
Bosnian Serbs, and by Gen. Ratko Mladic, its military architect, both of whom
remain fugitives.

But as Mr. Karadzic's risible little headquarters in the skiing village of Pale
always made clear, the prosecution of the war was unthinkable without
coordination and financing from Mr. Milosevic's Belgrade.

Still, the Serbian capital and its ruler, enveloped in the drumbeat of
propaganda, long contrived to keep the war at some distance. Indeed, many
Serbian illusions survived a full decade after the end of the Bosnian war, until
2005, when the showing of videotape of the execution of six Muslim men near
Srebrenica by a Serbian paramilitary police unit provoked widespread shock.

That the killings of six men could have such an effect in Serbia after the
killings of tens of thousands of Muslims at Serbian hands was one measure of the
powers of Mr. Milosevic as an illusionist. Convinced that Serbs were eternal
victims, he contrived to persuade his countrymen that they remained so as
Yugoslavia disintegrated.

Even today, as a democratic but still traumatized and relatively isolated Serbia
tries to move toward membership of the European Union, the country's ability to
face what happened under Mr. Milosevic often appears limited. Croatian and
Bosnian Muslim crimes against Serbs, whose existence is well documented, are
always seized upon to mask the far greater crimes of Serbs themselves.

Both American and United Nations investigations of war crimes in Bosnia
concluded that a vast majority of them -- 90 percent, according to a C.I.A.
report -- were committed by Serbs.

The trial of Mr. Milosevic, endlessly long and now forever inconclusive, seems
to have done little to provide the sort of clear accounting that would have
served a Balkan future by making history, and particularly Serbian
responsibility, clear. An old nostrum holds that justice delayed is justice
denied; its validity in this case seems hard to deny.

Such a failure, or at least absence of success, is no more than one of many. The
United States and Europe, disoriented by the cold war's end, took a very long
time to confront Mr. Milosevic and stop him.

At the Dayton talks of 1995, which ended the Bosnian war, he was still an
accepted interlocutor. Not until the Kosovo war of 1999 did NATO try --
successfully -- to undermine Mr. Milosevic and force him out.

As for Mr. Milosevic himself, nothing he said during more than four years in
court suggests he ever engaged in self-reproach or questioning of any kind. The
myriad victims of his heady nationalism, among those he fought and the Serbs he
professed to defend, never appeared to impinge on his stubborn defiance.

Robert C. Frasure, an American diplomat who died in an accident near Sarajevo in
1995, dealt extensively with Mr. Milosevic and said he was reminded of ''a Mafia
boss who desperately wants to get out of the business.''

As the Serbian nationalist tide ebbed during the 1990's, there is little
question that Mr. Milosevic tried to extricate himself from the frenzy of
killing he had inspired. Greater Serbia gave way to what an American official
described as ''Greater Serbia Lite''; that in turn gave way to nothing more than
''Greater Slobo,'' which is perhaps what drove the whole crazed enterprise from
the outset. Serbia's much vaunted military prowess proved largely empty in the
end.

A joke at the start of the Bosnian war held that the Serbian Tourism Ministry's
slogan was: ''Visit Serbia before it visits you.'' By the time Mr. Milosevic was
ousted in 2000, that slogan might have been recast as: ''Visit Serbia before it
disappears entirely.''

The unraveling that Mr. Milosevic set in motion has proved immensely costly to
his people and his region. The ''Serbian Question'' is still not solved; it is
still unclear, long after the 19th-century emergence of a Serbian nation state
in modern Europe, where Serbia's borders lie. The independence of Kosovo is
being discussed; Montenegro may choose to leave its partner in a truncated
federation.

''Nobody should dare to beat you,'' Mr. Milosevic declared in Kosovo on April
24, 1987, to thunderous cries of ''Slobo'' from the Serbian crowd. ''Your
ancestors would be defiled,'' he said, if Kosovo Albanians had their way.

The words had a ring to them and set a bloody tide in motion. But it is
precisely the past noble deeds of Serbs -- not least those during World War I
that led to the very creation of Yugoslavia -- that have been most defiled by
Mr. Milosevic's crushing defeat and failure in the name of a terrible but
persistent Serbian illusion.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 14, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about the death of Slobodan Milosevic, the
former president of Yugoslavia, misstated the surname of a former peace envoy to
the Balkans who was quoted in some copies as regretting that near the end of a
long trial for war crimes, justice had been cheated by Mr. Milosevic's death.
The former envoy is David Owen, not Owens. (He is formally Lord Owen.)

GRAPHIC: Photos: A woman lay dead in Sarajevo, Bosnia, in a 1994 attack by
forces closely allied to Slobodan Milosevic's army. (Photo by Reuters)
Pedestrians ducked to escape Serbian sniper fire in Sarajevo in 1993. (Photo by
Chris Helgren/Reuters)(pg. 12)
 Slobodan Milosevic (pg. 1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: An Appraisal

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CORRECTIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); DEATHS (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); POLITICS (76%); WORLD WAR II (73%); AUTOPSIES (73%);
RELIGION (53%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Biographical
Information; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Roger Cohen; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%);
KOSOVO (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); CROATIA (93%); MONTENEGRO (93%); EUROPE (92%);
ALBANIA (79%); TURKEY (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Kosovo (Serbia);
Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             751 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Village Waiting for Rape and Murder

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF.

Frank Rich is on a book leave.

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 748 words

DATELINE: KOLOY, Chad


Politely but insistently, the people in this town explained that they were about
to be massacred.

''The janjaweed militias have already destroyed all the villages east of
Koloy,'' Adam Omar, a local sheik, explained somberly. ''Any moment, they will
attack us here.

This remote market town of thatch-roof mud huts near the Chad-Sudan border is on
the front line of the genocidal fury that Sudan has unleashed on several black
African tribes. After killing several hundred thousand people in its own Darfur
region, Sudan's government is now sending its brutal janjaweed militias to kill
the same tribes here in Chad.

President Bush is showing signs that he may be ready to stand up to the thugs in
Sudan, but China is protecting Sudan, Europe is inert, and the African Union
can't even muster the courage to call for immediate U.N. peacekeepers. So the
people here are probably right to resign themselves to be slaughtered -- if not
sooner, then later.

Koloy has no electricity and no phones, so the people could not call for help.
But even if they could, no one could help them. Chad's small army had sent a few
trucks of troops the previous day, but after learning that they faced more than
500 janjaweed armed with heavy machine guns, the Chadian soldiers had dashed
away again. As I drove into town, the town's police force was fleeing on
horseback.

I visited the ''hospital'' -- an open-sided tent that lacked any medical
personnel but was filled with gunshot victims. Local leaders told me that the
janjaweed were only three miles away and had sent word that they would attack
Koloy that day.

''When they see you, they shoot you,'' said Adam Zakaria, the sheik of a nearby
village, Gindeiza, that had been attacked the day before. Mr. Adam had one
bullet wound in his foot and another in his thigh.

''I know the man who shot me,'' Mr. Adam said. ''He used to be my friend.'' That
man, Hussein al-Beheri, is an Arab neighbor. But last year, according to Mr.
Adam's account, Mr. Hussein joined the janjaweed and now regularly attacks
non-Arabs.

''I told him, 'Don't shoot me!' '' Mr. Adam recalled. ''Three or four times, I
pleaded, 'Don't shoot me.' And then he shot me.''

Ten people are known dead in his village, Mr. Adam said, but many others are
missing -- and no one has been able to look for dead bodies because the
janjaweed still occupy the village. Among those missing, he said, are his two
wives and four children.

''I have not seen them since yesterday, when they were in the village,'' he
said. ''In my heart, I think they are dead.''

This entire area gets no visits from diplomats and no help from the U.N. or aid
groups, because it is too risky. Only one organization, Doctors Without Borders,
sticks it out, sending in a convoy of intrepid doctors three days a week to pull
bullets out of victims.

It was nerve-racking to be in Koloy, and my local interpreter kept insisting
that we rush away. But I've never felt more helpless than the moment I pulled
away in my Toyota Land Cruiser, waving goodbye to people convinced that they
would soon be murdered.

In the end, there was no janjaweed attack that day. Perhaps that's because the
janjaweed have found that it is inconvenient to drive away absolutely all
Africans; now the janjaweed sometimes leave market towns alone so that their own
families can still have places to shop.

The people of Koloy are still waiting to be massacred. Think for a moment what
it would be like to huddle with your family every day, paralyzed by fear,
waiting for the end.

And then remember that all this can be stopped. You can go to
www.millionvoicesfordarfur.org and send a postcard to President Bush,
encouraging him to do more. At www.genocideintervention.net, you can find a list
of ''10 things you can do right now.''

Maybe it seems that you have no real power to change anything in Koloy, but,
frankly, right now you're the only hope that the people in Koloy have.

Bill O'Reilly refused to join me on this trip, passing up the $727,000 that my
readers had pledged to sponsor his trip to Darfur. But Ann Curry of the
''Today'' show and a top-notch NBC crew did travel with me on this trip. Unlike
Bill, Ann didn't flinch at traveling in janjaweed-infested areas or at staying
in a primitive $4-a-night ''hotel'' with no plumbing. (O.K., she did shudder
just a little at the wildlife in the hotel's outhouse.) If you want to break
your heart, watch her reports beginning tomorrow -- and ABC and CBS, where are
you?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SEX OFFENSES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ARMIES (75%); SHOOTINGS (75%); PEACEKEEPING (75%);
BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (74%); ARMED FORCES (71%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%);
GENOCIDE (68%); POLICE FORCES (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Television

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%) National Broadcasting Co

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (54%) Nicholas D Kristof; Bill O'Reilly; Ann Curry

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); CHAD (94%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Chad; Koloy (Chad); Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             752 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 12, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Math Murders

BYLINE: By Jim Holt.

Jim Holt is a frequent contributor to the magazine.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 3-12-06; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 1092 words


Counting the dead is a paradoxical business. Suppose I told you that around 150
million people have died over the last century in wars, genocides, man-made
famines and other atrocities. This number might evoke in you a certain horror.
But it is, of course, only a wild guess. Its very vagueness lends it an air of
unreality. Yet what purpose would be served by making it more precise? Where
mass death is concerned, the moral significance of scale seems to be one of
those things that our brains aren't equipped to handle. A single life may have
infinite value, but the difference between a million deaths and a million and
one strikes us as negligible.

The moral meaning of death counts is further obscured by their apparent lack of
objectivity. Take the war in Iraq. How many Iraqi civilians have died as a
consequence of the American invasion? Supporters of the war say 30,000, a number
that even President Bush finally brought himself to utter late last year.
Opponents of the war say more than 100,000. Surely there must be a fact of the
matter. In practice, though, there are only competing methodologies and
assumptions, all of which yield different numbers. Even if we could put politics
aside and agree on one, it would be hard to say what it meant. Does it matter,
for instance, that the higher estimate of 100,000 is the same order of magnitude
as the number of Iraqi Kurds that Saddam Hussein is reckoned to have killed in
1987 and 1988, in a genocidal campaign that, it has been claimed, justified his
forcible removal?

''It is painful to contemplate that despite our technologies of assurance and
mathematics of certainty, such a fundamental index of reality as numbers of the
dead is a nightmarish muddle,'' wrote Gil Elliot in his 1972 volume, ''The
Twentieth Century Book of the Dead.'' Figuring out the number of man-caused
deaths is rarely as straightforward as counting skulls in a mass grave. You can
kill people with bombs, guns and machetes, but there are also more indirect
ways: causing them to die of starvation, say, or of exposure or disease. (The
disease need not be indirect -- witness the radiation victims of Hiroshima and
Nagasaki.) Of the nearly two million Cambodians killed by the Khmer Rouge, for
instance, perhaps half were executed outright. By contrast, in the ongoing civil
war in the Congo -- the deadliest conflict since World War II -- 2 percent of
the estimated 3.9 million victims have died of direct violence; the rest
perished when their subsistence-level lives were disrupted by the war.

Quantifying man-made death thus means, at the very least, having an idea of the
rate at which people die naturally. And that entails recordkeeping. In
17th-century Europe, registers kept by church parishes -- dates of baptisms,
marriages and burials -- made it possible to gauge the devastation caused by the
Thirty Years' War, which was deadlier for civilians than for soldiers. The last
century, strange to say, has not always matched this level of demographic
sophistication. Even in the case of Nazi Germany, supposedly a model of
efficiency, the implementation of the Final Solution was so chaotic that the
number of victims can be known only to the nearest million.

If our methodology of counting man-made deaths is crude, our moral calculus for
weighing the resulting numbers is even cruder. Quantification, it is often
thought, confers precision and objectivity. Yet it tells us very little about
comparative evil. We feel that Hitler was every bit as evil as Stalin, even
though Stalin was far more successful in murdering people (in part because he
had a longer run). Mao may have been more successful still; in their recent
book, ''Mao: The Unknown Story,'' Jung Chang and Jon Halliday estimate that the
Chinese leader was responsible for ''well over 70 million deaths,'' which would
come to nearly half of the total number of man-made deaths in the 20th century.
In relative terms, however, Mao is easily eclipsed by Pol Pot, who directed the
killing of more than a quarter of his fellow Cambodians.

Raw death numbers may not be a reliable index of evil, but they still have value
as a guide to action. That, at least, is the common-sense view. It is also part
of the ethical theory known as utilitarianism, which holds that sacrificing x
lives to save y lives is always justified as long as y is greater than x. This
utilitarian principle is often invoked, for example, in defense of President
Truman's decision to drop atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, which killed
between 120,000 and 250,000 Japanese civilians, on the assumption that the death
toll would have been worse had the war been prolonged.

Yet some thinkers (like the British philosopher Elizabeth Anscombe) have
questioned whether, morally speaking, numbers really count. In a choice between
saving 5 lives and saving 10, they ask, why should we be dutybound to act in
behalf of the greater number? Because, you say, it would be worse for 10 people
to die than for 5 people. They reply: Worse for whom? Arithmetic misleads us
into thinking that deaths aggregate the way numbers do. Yet in reality there are
only individuals suffering. In a dilemma where the deaths of one group of people
or another is unavoidable, why should someone have to die merely by reason of
being in the smaller group?

This sort of skepticism about the significance of numbers has some perverse
consequences. It implies that all atrocities have an equal command on our moral
attention, regardless of scale.

Yet a refusal to aggregate deaths can also be ethically salubrious. It helps us
realize that the evil of each additional death is in no way diluted by the
number of deaths that may have preceded it. The ongoing bloodbath in Darfur has,
all agree, claimed an enormous number of victims. Saying just how many is a
methodological nightmare; a ballpark figure is a quarter of a million, but
estimates range up to 400,000 and beyond. Quantitatively, the new deaths that
each day brings are absorbed into this vast, indeterminate number. Morally, they
ought to be as urgent as those on the first day of the slaughter.


  ''What is the moral context in which we should see those killed by violence?
There exists a view that one violent death has the same moral value as a
thousand or a million deaths. . . . The killer cannot add to his sin by
committing more than one murder. However, every victim of murder would claim, if
he could, that his death had a separate moral value.''    Source: ''The
Twentieth Century Book of the Dead,'' by Gil Elliot (1972)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Bruno Stevens
 Cosmos/Aurora)Chart: ''BLOODY NUMBERS''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
GENOCIDE (89%); FAMINE (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (85%);
STARVATION (78%); WORLD WAR II (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); BOMBINGS (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); POLITICS
(72%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%); GEORGE W BUSH (53%) Jim Holt

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); CAMBODIA (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             754 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Showing Concern At a Time Of Mass Murder

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than 100 rabbis from the major streams of Judaism gathered
near the United Nations yesterday in a demonstration calling attention to the
slaughter in Darfur, Sudan. Rabbi David Saperstein, director and counsel of the
Religious Action Center of Reform Judaism, was thanked by Yahya Osman, of the
Darfur Rehabilitation Project. The rally urged that the United Nations take
stronger action against the Sudan government. The demonstration was held on the
eve of Purim, a Jewish holiday recalling a narrow escape from slaughter in
ancient Persia. (Photo by Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); GENOCIDE (89%); PURIM (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); JEWISH
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (86%) Demonstrations and Riots; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Jews

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Yahya Osman

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (74%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Sudan; New York City; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             756 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Inaction on Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 103 words



To the Editor:

I am grateful that Nicholas D. Kristof continues to report on the atrocities
that are happening in Sudan and now Chad (''A Village Waiting for Rape and
Murder,'' column, March 12). And my question is, How do we allow this to happen?

How can civilized nations allow this to happen? Why has the United States not
gotten involved in a meaningful way?

I thought that the Bush administration wanted to distance itself from the
Clinton administration, but it is doing the same exact thing the Clinton
administration did in the case of Rwanda, allowing genocide to occur.

Gloria Spiritas
Dallas, March 13, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (87%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Gloria Spiritas; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (91%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             758 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Correction; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 48 words


An editorial in Tuesday's Times gave the wrong figures for the numbers of people
charged and convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The tribunal has indicted 160 men and one woman, not 161 men. Forty
people have been found guilty by the tribunal, not 32.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (84%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (84%) Correction Stories; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (84%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

COUNTRY: SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (54%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             759 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

2 Times Reporters Win Prize for Articles on Spying

BYLINE: By MICHAEL JANOFSKY

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 488 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 15


James Risen and Eric Lichtblau of The New York Times have won the Goldsmith
Prize for Investigative Reporting for their coverage of the Bush
administration's domestic eavesdropping program.

The award, worth $25,000, is given annually by the Joan Shorenstein Center on
the Press, Politics and Public Policy at the John F. Kennedy School of
Government at Harvard University. The prize was created in 1991 to honor
journalism that discloses excessive secrecy, impropriety and mismanagement. The
awards were officially presented Tuesday night in Cambridge, Mass.

The center also presented a special award to Nicholas D. Kristof, an Op-Ed
columnist for The Times, for his reporting on genocide in the Darfur region of
Sudan. Mr. Kristof was cited for reporting that led to ''saving many thousands
of lives.''

The Times eavesdropping articles revealed that government agents were secretly
monitoring telephone calls and e-mail messages inside the United States without
court approval. The articles touched off a national debate focused on the
intersection of national security and civil liberties.

''The judges felt that, in a field of hugely important investigations, the
revelation of systemic domestic spying by the government was the most
important,'' said Alex S. Jones, director of the Shorenstein Center. ''They
wanted to send a message that this kind of reporting is essential to our
democracy.''

Bill Keller, executive editor of The Times, said: ''Jim and Eric performed an
extraordinary feat of reporting that has provoked an important national debate
about the balance between security and liberty. But their work has also set off
an intensive leak investigation carrying the threat of legal reprisals. So
besides being a gratifying acknowledgment of professional achievement, this
award also constitutes a welcome vote of moral support.''

The judges considered five other finalists. They included Joshua Boak, James
Drew, Steve Eder, Christopher D. Kirkpatrick, Jim Tankersley and Mike Wilkinson
of The Blade in Toledo, Ohio, whose articles on the state's investment into rare
coins led to convictions of Gov. Bob Taft and others on ethics charges.

Three Washington Post reporters -- Susan Schmidt, James V. Grimaldi and R.
Jeffrey Smith -- were nominated for articles that revealed the political
activities of Jack Abramoff, the Washington lobbyist.

Another Post reporter, Dana Priest, was nominated for articles that revealed a
network of secret prisons outside the United States where the American
authorities held terror suspects.

Three reporters from The Los Angeles Times -- Evelyn Larrubia, Robin Fields and
Jack Leonard -- were nominated for a series that examined guardians of the
elderly who preyed on them.

Marcus Stern and Jerry Kammer of Copley News Service were nominated for articles
about former Representative Randy Cunningham, Republican of California, who was
sentenced to prison for taking bribes.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); NEWS
REPORTING (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); POLITICS
(89%); PRISONS (87%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); ETHICS (77%);
WIRETAPPING (77%); LITIGATION (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(74%); WAR CRIMES (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); SENTENCING (73%); CORRECTIONS
(73%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%); WRITERS (71%);
LOBBYING (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%); APPROVALS (68%); ELECTRONIC MAIL
(68%); BRIBERY (67%); TERRORISM (60%); COINS & COINAGE (50%) Terrorism;
Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Goldsmith
Prize; News and News Media

COMPANY: LOS ANGELES TIMES (62%)

ORGANIZATION: HARVARD UNIVERSITY (57%) New York Times; New York Times;
Shorenstein, Joan, Center on Press, Politics and Public Policy

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (62%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (62%)

PERSON: Michael Janofsky; Eric Lichtblau; James Risen; Nicholas D Kristof;
George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: TOLEDO, OH, USA (52%)

STATE: OHIO, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); SUDAN (94%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             761 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Lawyers Keep Silence On Listening In

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 393 words


Is the government secretly monitoring communications between plaintiffs and
their lawyers in a federal class-action lawsuit against former Attorney General
John Ashcroft and other top officials? Government lawyers yesterday politely
refused a court order that they answer that question, asking instead that the
court reconsider the order.

The plaintiffs in the case are Muslim immigrants who were swept up in the New
York area after Sept. 11, 2001, detained for months and deported after being
cleared of any links to terrorism.

Magistrate Judge Steven M. Gold of United States District Court in Brooklyn
ordered the government on March 7 to guarantee in writing that neither the
litigation team nor the potential witnesses -- who include the F.B.I. director,
Robert S. Mueller III -- were aware of such eavesdropping, and that no such
evidence would be used in the case.

But Stephen E. Handler of the Justice Department wrote in a filing yesterday
that if knowledge of such activity were denied in one case, a refusal to confirm
or deny it in another case ''could itself tend to reveal classified
information.''

A legal scholar said the government's refusal raised new concerns about the
scope of a program of electronic interceptions conducted without a warrant by
National Security Agency inside and outside the United States under an executive
order being challenged in a separate lawsuit.

''This is a pretty clear red flag'' that eavesdropping occurred in the
detainees' case, said Stephen J. Schulhofer, a professor of law at New York
University who is an expert on national security. ''The kind of surveillance
that the president authorized under the N.S.A. wiretap was very likely deployed
against these individuals when one party to the conversation was abroad and one
party to the conversation, probably their lawyers, were in this country.''

Rachel Meeropol, a lawyer for the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
represents the detainees, said she was shocked by the government's stance.

''The implication of this letter is that attorneys defending the United States
in civil cases could have access to the confidential communication between their
opponents and their opponents' clients,'' she said. ''You can't ethically
represent a client if you can't have a conversation with them where you're
secure that your opponent can't hear it.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (95%); LITIGATION (94%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (91%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); WIRETAPPING (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%); MAGISTRATES (78%);
PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ATTORNEY CLIENT PRIVILEGE
(78%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); JUDGES (78%); MISCONDUCT (76%);
RELIGION (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY (75%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (74%); ETHICS (73%); REFUGEES (72%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); EXECUTIVE
ORDERS (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%) Murders and Attempted
Murders; Police Brutality and Misconduct  ; Organized Crime  ; Terrorism;
Attorney-Client Privilege; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and
Methods ; Islam; Immigration and Refugees; Deportation  ; Terrorism;
Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(56%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (55%) Luchese Crime Family; Federal Bureau of
Investigation

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (71%) Alan Feuer; Stephen Caracappa; Anthony Casso; Louis
Eppolito; Burton Kaplan; Nina Bernstein; Steven M (Judge) Gold; John (Atty Gen)
Ashcroft

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City; New York City

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             764 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 18, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dutch Autopsy on Milosevic Finds No Evidence of Unusual Drugs

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS and ELISABETH ROSENTHAL; Marlise Simons reported from
The Hague for this article, and Elisabeth Rosenthal from Rome.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 926 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 17


A Dutch autopsy on Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president who was
found dead in his cell last week, detected no evidence of any toxin,
nonprescribed medication or even abnormal levels of his prescribed medicines,
the United Nations war crimes tribunal announced Friday.

''So far, no indications of poisoning have been found,'' Judge Fausto Pocar, the
tribunal president, said at a crowded news conference.

Judge Pocar stressed that the results were preliminary, but reiterated that the
autopsy had already disclosed two underlying ''heart conditions that Slobodan
Milosevic suffered from.'' Those conditions, he said, could ''explain the heart
attack.'' The autopsy report did not identify the maladies further.

Even so, the new toxicology results from the autopsy on Sunday did not resolve
the mystery surrounding the presence of an unusual, and potentially dangerous,
antibiotic found in one of Mr. Milosevic's earlier blood samples.

Court officials confirmed at the news conference that the antibiotic,
rifampicin, had been found in a blood sample drawn from Mr. Milosevic in
January. Even if investigators determine that rifampicin played no part in Mr.
Milosevic's death, the presence of such a potent, nonprescribed medicine in his
system suggests some sort of foul play or at least medical manipulation within
the walls of the United Nations detention center.

How Mr. Milosevic consumed the antibiotic, to what end and how it got into the
high-security detention unit is unclear. ''That is the burning question, and I
have no ready answer to that,'' said Hans Holthuis, the court's registrar, or
chief administrator. ''The prison pharmacy has never stocked this drug.''

Rifampicin is used to treat tuberculosis, but one of its side effects is to
reduce the effects of other medicine, including a blood pressure pills. Court
officials and two toxicologists have speculated that Mr. Milosevic took it
intentionally to exacerbate his longstanding high blood pressure, in an attempt
to gain a temporary medical release.

But no traces of rifampicin were found during the autopsy. The Dutch public
prosecutor who provided the court with the results said that according to the
Dutch Forensic Institute, ''rifampicin disappears from the body quickly,'' and
finding no traces ''implies only that it is not likely that rifampicin had been
ingested or administered in the last few days before death.''

Some doctors have said the investigation into Mr. Milosevic's death should focus
more on whether he was evaluated or treated properly for heart disease while in
prison. Judge Pocar said internal investigations were still going on.

Dr. Leo Bokeria, a Russian heart specialist who flew to The Hague to review the
autopsy records this week, suggested that Mr. Milosevic had died from undetected
blockages in his coronary arteries. ''Two stents'' could have saved his life and
given him ''many long years,'' he said, according to the Itar-Tass news agency,
referring to tubes placed in arteries to reopen blockages.

Other doctors seemed to agree that causes other than the nonprescribed
antibiotic were to blame.

''You can now exclude rifampicin; the story was exaggerated,'' said Dr. Joris
Delanghe, a toxicologist at the University of Ghent, in Belgium, who had not
treated Mr. Milosevic. ''He has high blood pressure, he was 64, incarcerated in
a foreign country,'' he said. ''There was certainly cardiac risk.''

Even so, Dr. Donald Uges, the toxicologist at the University of Groningen who
first found the rifampicin in Mr. Milosevic's blood, suggested that even if the
drug was absent at the time of his death, it might still have played a role. He
said Mr. Milosevic could have precipitated a heart attack by stopping rifampicin
a few days before his death, for fear that court officials suspected his illicit
use of the drug.

If he had abruptly stopped taking rifampicin after using it to keep his blood
pressure high, it could have caused his blood pressure to plummet abruptly and
brought on a heart attack, Dr. Uges said.

Mr. Milosevic found out three days before his death that the rifampicin had been
discovered in his blood tests. The next day he wrote a letter to the Russian
Embassy, mentioning the drug, and his lawyer said he feared he was being
poisoned.

In November, lawyers for Mr. Milosevic brought in three outside specialists who
concluded that there had not been an adequate evaluation of his heart. They
recommended a series of tests, which were never performed, according to Florence
Leclercq, a French cardiologist who made the recommendation.

''We felt he needed additional investigations,'' Dr. Leclercq said. Court
officials said they could not discuss what tests might have been done since
then, until a full internal inquiry is complete.

Since December, Mr. Milosevic had been requesting release to receive medical
treatment in Moscow, where his wife, son and brother live. The court denied that
request, saying that all the medical care he needed was available in the
Netherlands and that any outside specialists were welcome.

During his nearly five years in prison, Mr. Milosevic was often seen by court
doctors and independent specialists. It is not clear what tests were done, since
the records are sealed. Reached by phone, Dr. Paul van Dijkman, Mr. Milosevic's
court-appointed cardiologist, said that under Dutch confidentiality law, he
could not comment.

On Thursday, the court said it would turn over all of Mr. Milosevic's medical
reports to Dutch prosecutors investigating the death.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ANTIBIOTICS (91%); AUTOPSIES (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); DEATHS (90%); HEART DISEASE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
TOXICOLOGY (89%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE (89%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (89%);
FORENSICS (78%); POISONINGS (78%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); HYPERTENSION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); PRESS CONFERENCES (77%); CORRECTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); CARDIOLOGY (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); GENOCIDE
(72%); TUBERCULOSIS (68%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (67%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Autopsies

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Elisabeth Rosenthal; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA
(79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: March 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             765 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

In Secret Unit's 'Black Room,' A Grim Portrait of U.S. Abuse

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT and CAROLYN MARSHALL

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; TASK FORCE 6-26: Inside Camp Nama;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 3710 words


As the Iraqi insurgency intensified in early 2004, an elite Special Operations
forces unit converted one of Saddam Hussein's former military bases near Baghdad
into a top-secret detention center. There, American soldiers made one of the
former Iraqi government's torture chambers into their own interrogation cell.
They named it the Black Room.

In the windowless, jet-black garage-size room, some soldiers beat prisoners with
rifle butts, yelled and spit in their faces and, in a nearby area, used
detainees for target practice in a game of jailer paintball. Their intention was
to extract information to help hunt down Iraq's most-wanted terrorist, Abu Musab
al-Zarqawi, according to Defense Department personnel who served with the unit
or were briefed on its operations.

The Black Room was part of a temporary detention site at Camp Nama, the secret
headquarters of a shadowy military unit known as Task Force 6-26. Located at
Baghdad International Airport, the camp was the first stop for many insurgents
on their way to the Abu Ghraib prison a few miles away.

Placards posted by soldiers at the detention area advised, ''NO BLOOD, NO
FOUL.'' The slogan, as one Defense Department official explained, reflected an
adage adopted by Task Force 6-26: ''If you don't make them bleed, they can't
prosecute for it.'' According to Pentagon specialists who worked with the unit,
prisoners at Camp Nama often disappeared into a detention black hole, barred
from access to lawyers or relatives, and confined for weeks without charges.
''The reality is, there were no rules there,'' another Pentagon official said.

The story of detainee abuse in Iraq is a familiar one. But the following account
of Task Force 6-26, based on documents and interviews with more than a dozen
people, offers the first detailed description of how the military's most highly
trained counterterrorism unit committed serious abuses.

It adds to the picture of harsh interrogation practices at American military
prisons in Afghanistan and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as well as at secret Central
Intelligence Agency detention centers around the world.

The new account reveals the extent to which the unit members mistreated
prisoners months before and after the photographs of abuse from Abu Ghraib were
made public in April 2004, and it helps belie the original Pentagon assertions
that abuse was confined to a small number of rogue reservists at Abu Ghraib.

The abuses at Camp Nama continued despite warnings beginning in August 2003 from
an Army investigator and American intelligence and law enforcement officials in
Iraq. The C.I.A. was concerned enough to bar its personnel from Camp Nama that
August.

It is difficult to compare the conditions at the camp with those at Abu Ghraib
because so little is known about the secret compound, which was off limits even
to the Red Cross. The abuses appeared to have been unsanctioned, but some of
them seemed to have been well known throughout the camp.

For an elite unit with roughly 1,000 people at any given time, Task Force 6-26
seems to have had a large number of troops punished for detainee abuse. Since
2003, 34 task force members have been disciplined in some form for mistreating
prisoners, and at least 11 members have been removed from the unit, according to
new figures the Special Operations Command provided in response to questions
from The New York Times. Five Army Rangers in the unit were convicted three
months ago for kicking and punching three detainees in September 2005.

Some of the serious accusations against Task Force 6-26 have been reported over
the past 16 months by news organizations including NBC, The Washington Post and
The Times. Many details emerged in hundreds of pages of documents released under
a Freedom of Information Act request by the American Civil Liberties Union. But
taken together for the first time, the declassified documents and interviews
with more than a dozen military and civilian Defense Department and other
federal personnel provide the most detailed portrait yet of the secret camp and
the inner workings of the clandestine unit.

The documents and interviews also reflect a culture clash between the
free-wheeling military commandos and the more cautious Pentagon civilians
working with them that escalated to a tense confrontation. At one point, one of
Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's top aides, Stephen A. Cambone, ordered a
subordinate to ''get to the bottom'' of any misconduct.

Most of the people interviewed for this article were midlevel civilian and
military Defense Department personnel who worked with Task Force 6-26 and said
they witnessed abuses, or who were briefed on its operations over the past three
years.

Many were initially reluctant to discuss Task Force 6-26 because its missions
are classified. But when pressed repeatedly by reporters who contacted them,
they agreed to speak about their experiences and observations out of what they
said was anger and disgust over the unit's treatment of detainees and the
failure of task force commanders to punish misconduct more aggressively. The
critics said the harsh interrogations yielded little information to help capture
insurgents or save American lives.

Virtually all of those who agreed to speak are career government employees, many
with previous military service, and they were granted anonymity to encourage
them to speak candidly without fear of retribution from the Pentagon. Many of
their complaints are supported by declassified military documents and e-mail
messages from F.B.I. agents who worked regularly with the task force in Iraq.

A Demand for Intelligence

  Military officials say there may have been extenuating circumstances for some
of the harsh treatment at Camp Nama and its field stations in other parts of
Iraq. By the spring of 2004, the demand on interrogators for intelligence was
growing to help combat the increasingly numerous and deadly insurgent attacks.

Some detainees may have been injured resisting capture. A spokesman for the
Special Operations Command, Kenneth S. McGraw, said there was sufficient
evidence to prove misconduct in only 5 of 29 abuse allegations against task
force members since 2003. As a result of those five incidents, 34 people were
disciplined.

''We take all those allegations seriously,'' Gen. Bryan D. Brown, the commander
of the Special Operations Command, said in a brief hallway exchange on Capitol
Hill on March 8. ''Any kind of abuse is not consistent with the values of the
Special Operations Command.''

The secrecy surrounding the highly classified unit has helped to shield its
conduct from public scrutiny. The Pentagon will not disclose the unit's precise
size, the names of its commanders, its operating bases or specific missions.
Even the task force's name changes regularly to confuse adversaries, and the
courts-martial and other disciplinary proceedings have not identified the
soldiers in public announcements as task force members.

General Brown's command declined requests for interviews with several former
task force members and with Lt. Gen. Stanley McChrystal, who leads the Joint
Special Operations Command, the headquarters at Fort Bragg, N.C., that supplies
the unit's most elite troops.

One Special Operations officer and a senior enlisted soldier identified by
Defense Department personnel as former task force members at Camp Nama declined
to comment when contacted by telephone. Attempts to contact three other Special
Operations soldiers who were in the unit -- by phone, through relatives and
former neighbors -- were also unsuccessful.

Cases of detainee abuse attributed to Task Force 6-26 demonstrate both confusion
over and, in some cases, disregard for approved interrogation practices and
standards for detainee treatment, according to Defense Department specialists
who have worked with the unit.

In early 2004, an 18-year-old man suspected of selling cars to members of the
Zarqawi terrorist network was seized with his entire family at their home in
Baghdad. Task force soldiers beat him repeatedly with a rifle butt and punched
him in the head and kidneys, said a Defense Department specialist briefed on the
incident.

Some complaints were ignored or played down in a unit where a conspiracy of
silence contributed to the overall secretiveness. ''It's under control,'' one
unit commander told a Defense Department official who complained about
mistreatment at Camp Nama in the spring of 2004.

For hundreds of suspected insurgents, Camp Nama was a way station on a journey
that started with their capture on the battlefield or in their homes, and ended
often in a cell at Abu Ghraib. Hidden in plain sight just off a dusty road
fronting Baghdad International Airport, Camp Nama was an unmarked, virtually
unknown compound at the edge of the taxiways.

The heart of the camp was the Battlefield Interrogation Facility, alternately
known as the Temporary Detention Facility and the Temporary Holding Facility.
The interrogation and detention areas occupied a corner of the larger compound,
separated by a fence topped with razor wire.

Unmarked helicopters flew detainees into the camp almost daily, former task
force members said. Dressed in blue jumpsuits with taped goggles covering their
eyes, the shackled prisoners were led into a screening room where they were
registered and examined by medics.

Just beyond the screening rooms, where Saddam Hussein was given a medical exam
after his capture, detainees were kept in as many as 85 cells spread over two
buildings. Some detainees were kept in what was known as Motel 6, a group of
crudely built plywood shacks that reeked of urine and excrement. The shacks were
cramped, forcing many prisoners to squat or crouch. Other detainees were housed
inside a separate building in 6-by-8-foot cubicles in a cellblock called Hotel
California.

The interrogation rooms were stark. High-value detainees were questioned in the
Black Room, nearly bare but for several 18-inch hooks that jutted from the
ceiling, a grisly reminder of the terrors inflicted by Mr. Hussein's
inquisitors. Jailers often blared rap music or rock 'n' roll at deafening
decibels over a loudspeaker to unnerve their subjects.

Another smaller room offered basic comforts like carpets and cushioned seating
to put more cooperative prisoners at ease, said several Defense Department
specialists who worked at Camp Nama. Detainees wore heavy, olive-drab hoods
outside their cells. By June 2004, the revelations of abuse at Abu Ghraib
galvanized the military to promise better treatment for prisoners. In one small
concession at Camp Nama, soldiers exchanged the hoods for cloth blindfolds with
drop veils that allowed detainees to breathe more freely but prevented them from
peeking out.

Some former task force members said the Nama in the camp's name stood for a
coarse phrase that soldiers used to describe the compound. One Defense
Department specialist recalled seeing pink blotches on detainees' clothing as
well as red welts on their bodies, marks he learned later were inflicted by
soldiers who used detainees as targets and called themselves the High Five
Paintball Club.

Mr. McGraw, the military spokesman, said he had not heard of the Black Room or
the paintball club and had not seen any mention of them in the documents he had
reviewed.

In a nearby operations center, task force analysts pored over intelligence
collected from spies, detainees and remotely piloted Predator surveillance
aircraft, to piece together clues to aid soldiers on their raids. Twice daily at
noon and midnight military interrogators and their supervisors met with
officials from the C.I.A., F.B.I. and allied military units to review operations
and new intelligence.

Task Force 6-26 was a creation of the Pentagon's post-Sept. 11 campaign against
terrorism, and it quickly became the model for how the military would gain
intelligence and battle insurgents in the future. Originally known as Task Force
121, it was formed in the summer of 2003, when the military merged two existing
Special Operations units, one hunting Osama bin Laden in and around Afghanistan,
and the other tracking Mr. Hussein in Iraq. (Its current name is Task Force
145.)

The task force was a melting pot of military and civilian units. It drew on
elite troops from the Joint Special Operations Command, whose elements include
the Army unit Delta Force, Navy's Seal Team 6 and the 75th Ranger Regiment.
Military reservists and Defense Intelligence Agency personnel with special
skills, like interrogators, were temporarily assigned to the unit. C.I.A.
officers, F.B.I. agents and special operations forces from other countries also
worked closely with the task force.

Many of the American Special Operations soldiers wore civilian clothes and were
allowed to grow beards and long hair, setting them apart from their uniformed
colleagues. Unlike conventional soldiers and marines whose Iraq tours lasted 7
to 12 months, unit members and their commanders typically rotated every 90 days.

Task Force 6-26 had a singular focus: capture or kill Mr. Zarqawi, the Jordanian
militant operating in Iraq. ''Anytime there was even the smell of Zarqawi
nearby, they would go out and use any means possible to get information from a
detainee,'' one official said.

Defense Department personnel briefed on the unit's operations said the harsh
treatment extended beyond Camp Nama to small field outposts in Baghdad, Falluja,
Balad, Ramadi and Kirkuk. These stations were often nestled within the alleys of
a city in nondescript buildings with suburban-size yards where helicopters could
land to drop off or pick up detainees.

At the outposts, some detainees were stripped naked and had cold water thrown on
them to cause the sensation of drowning, said Defense Department personnel who
served with the unit.

In January 2004, the task force captured the son of one of Mr. Hussein's
bodyguards in Tikrit. The man told Army investigators that he was forced to
strip and that he was punched in the spine until he fainted, put in front of an
air-conditioner while cold water was poured on him and kicked in the stomach
until he vomited. Army investigators were forced to close their inquiry in June
2005 after they said task force members used battlefield pseudonyms that made it
impossible to identify and locate the soldiers involved. The unit also asserted
that 70 percent of its computer files had been lost.

Despite the task force's access to a wide range of intelligence, its raids were
often dry holes, yielding little if any intelligence and alienating ordinary
Iraqis, Defense Department personnel said. Prisoners deemed no threat to
American troops were often driven deep into the Iraqi desert at night and
released, sometimes given $100 or more in American money for their trouble.

Back at Camp Nama, the task force leaders established a ritual for departing
personnel who did a good job, Pentagon officials said. The commanders presented
them with two unusual mementos: a detainee hood and a souvenir piece of tile
from the medical screening room that once held Mr. Hussein.

Early Signs of Trouble

  Accusations of abuse by Task Force 6-26 came as no surprise to many other
officials in Iraq. By early 2004, both the C.I.A. and the F.B.I. had expressed
alarm about the military's harsh interrogation techniques.

The C.I.A.'s Baghdad station sent a cable to headquarters on Aug. 3, 2003,
raising concern that Special Operations troops who served with agency officers
had used techniques that had become too aggressive. Five days later, the C.I.A.
issued a classified directive that prohibited its officers from participating in
harsh interrogations. Separately, the C.I.A. barred its officers from working at
Camp Nama but allowed them to keep providing target information and other
intelligence to the task force.

The warnings still echoed nearly a year later. On June 25, 2004, nearly two
months after the disclosure of the abuses at Abu Ghraib, an F.B.I. agent in Iraq
sent an e-mail message to his superiors in Washington, warning that a detainee
captured by Task Force 6-26 had suspicious burn marks on his body. The detainee
said he had been tortured. A month earlier, another F.B.I. agent asked top
bureau officials for guidance on how to deal with military interrogators across
Iraq who used techniques like loud music and yelling that exceeded ''the bounds
of standard F.B.I. practice.''

American generals were also alerted to the problem. In December 2003, Col.
Stuart A. Herrington, a retired Army intelligence officer, warned in a
confidential memo that medical personnel reported that prisoners seized by the
unit, then known as Task Force 121, had injuries consistent with beatings. ''It
seems clear that TF 121 needs to be reined in with respect to its treatment of
detainees,'' Colonel Herrington concluded.

By May 2004, just as the scandal at Abu Ghraib was breaking, tensions increased
at Camp Nama between the Special Operations troops and civilian interrogators
and case officers from the D.I.A.'s Defense Human Intelligence Service, who were
there to support the unit in its fight against the Zarqawi network. The discord,
according to documents, centered on the harsh treatment of detainees as well as
restrictions the Special Operations troops placed on their civilian colleagues,
like monitoring their e-mail messages and phone calls.

Maj. Gen. George E. Ennis, who until recently commanded the D.I.A.'s human
intelligence division, declined to be interviewed for this article. But in
written responses to questions, General Ennis said he never heard about the
numerous complaints made by D.I.A. personnel until he and his boss, Vice Adm.
Lowell E. Jacoby, then the agency's director, were briefed on June 24, 2004.

The next day, Admiral Jacoby wrote a two-page memo to Mr. Cambone, under
secretary of defense for intelligence. In it, he described a series of
complaints, including a May 2004 incident in which a D.I.A. interrogator said he
witnessed task force soldiers punch a detainee hard enough to require medical
help. The D.I.A. officer took photos of the injuries, but a supervisor
confiscated them, the memo said.

The tensions laid bare a clash of military cultures. Combat-hardened commandos
seeking a steady flow of intelligence to pinpoint insurgents grew exasperated
with civilian interrogators sent from Washington, many of whom were novices at
interrogating hostile prisoners fresh off the battlefield.

''These guys wanted results, and our debriefers were used to a civil
environment,'' said one Defense Department official who was briefed on the task
force operations.

Within days after Admiral Jacoby sent his memo, the D.I.A. took the
extraordinary step of temporarily withdrawing its personnel from Camp Nama.

Admiral Jacoby's memo also provoked an angry reaction from Mr. Cambone. ''Get to
the bottom of this immediately. This is not acceptable,'' Mr. Cambone said in a
handwritten note on June 26, 2004, to his top deputy, Lt. Gen. William G.
Boykin. ''In particular, I want to know if this is part of a pattern of behavior
by TF 6-26.''

General Boykin said through a spokesman on March 17 that at the time he told Mr.
Cambone he had found no pattern of misconduct with the task force.

A Shroud of Secrecy

  Military and legal experts say the full breadth of abuses committed by Task
Force 6-26 may never be known because of the secrecy surrounding the unit, and
the likelihood that some allegations went unreported.

In the summer of 2004, Camp Nama closed and the unit moved to a new headquarters
in Balad, 45 miles north of Baghdad. The unit's operations are now shrouded in
even tighter secrecy.

Soon after their rank-and-file clashed in 2004, D.I.A. officials in Washington
and military commanders at Fort Bragg agreed to improve how the task force
integrated specialists into its ranks. The D.I.A. is now sending small teams of
interrogators, debriefers and case officers, called ''deployable Humint teams,''
to work with Special Operations forces in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Senior military commanders insist that the elite warriors, who will be relied on
more than ever in the campaign against terrorism, are now treating detainees
more humanely and can police themselves. The C.I.A. has resumed conducting
debriefings with the task force, but does not permit harsh questioning, a C.I.A.
official said.

General McChrystal, the leader of the Joint Special Operations Command, received
his third star in a promotion ceremony at Fort Bragg on March 13.

On Dec. 8, 2004, the Pentagon's spokesman, Lawrence Di Rita, said that four
Special Operations soldiers from the task force were punished for ''excessive
use of force'' and administering electric shocks to detainees with stun guns.
Two of the soldiers were removed from the unit. To that point, Mr. Di Rita said,
10 task force members had been disciplined. Since then, according to the new
figures provided to The Times, the number of those disciplined for detainee
abuse has more than tripled. Nine of the 34 troops disciplined received written
or oral counseling. Others were reprimanded for slapping detainees and other
offenses.

The five Army Rangers who were court-martialed in December received punishments
including jail time of 30 days to six months and reduction in rank. Two of them
will receive bad-conduct discharges upon completion of their sentences.

Human rights advocates and leading members of Congress say the Pentagon must
still do more to hold senior-level commanders and civilian officials accountable
for the misconduct.

The Justice Department inspector general is investigating complaints of detainee
abuse by Task Force 6-26, a senior law enforcement official said. The only
wide-ranging military inquiry into prisoner abuse by Special Operations forces
was completed nearly a year ago by Brig. Gen. Richard P. Formica, and was sent
to Congress.

But the United States Central Command has refused repeated requests from The
Times over the past several months to provide an unclassified copy of General
Formica's findings despite Mr. Rumsfeld's instructions that such a version of
all 12 major reports into detainee abuse be made public.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 22, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article on Sunday about detainee abuse by a Special
Operations unit in Iraq, Task Force 6-26, misstated the given name of the
Defense Intelligence Agency's former director for human intelligence, who said
he had not heard reports of abuse until he was briefed in June 2004. He is Maj.
Gen. Michael E. Ennis, not George.

GRAPHIC: Photos: A placard from Camp Nama in Iraq, where some detainees were
used as paintball targets. (pg. 1)
 In 2004, Stephen A. Cambone, a top Pentagon official, ordered his deputy, Lt.
Gen. William G. Boykin, to look into allegations of detainee abuse at Camp Nama.
(pg. 4)Chart/Map: ''Inside Camp Nama''From mid-2003 to mid-2004, Task Force
6-26, a shadowy American military unit, operated at this secret camp that served
as the first stop for many detainees on their way to Abu Ghraib. Remnants of the
camp are visible on this recent satellite image.Battlefield Interrogation
FacilityHas at least four rooms used for interrogations, including one known as
the Black Room and another called the V.I.P. Room. High-value detainees were
held in a dark, cramped area known as Hotel California. Intelligence material
recovered from raids was also processed and stored here.Motel 6Outdoor cells
made of plywood, reeking of urine and excrement. Cells were barely big enough to
stand in, forcing many prisoners to squat or crouch.Map of Camp Nama highlights
the following:Area used for tents and sleeping quartersHangar for helicopters
used to transport prisoners to and from campBaghdad International Airport
taxiway(2006 satellite image by Digital Globe via Google Earth)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARMED FORCES (93%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY BASES (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); TERRORISM
(88%); ARMIES (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (77%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (76%); AIRPORTS (71%); LAWYERS (70%);
INVESTIGATIONS (68%) Abu Ghraib (Iraqi Prison); camp nama (Iraq); Prisoners of
War; Torture; Terrorism; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (59%) Central
Intelligence Agency

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%) Eric Schmitt; carol marshall; Abu Musab Al- Zarqawi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (91%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); CUBA (67%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             766 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Silence Of Bystanders

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 750 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE CHAD-SUDAN BORDER


I saw a lot of heartbreak on my latest visit to the fringes of Darfur: two
orphan boys living under a tree after their family was murdered, a 13-year-old
girl shot in the chest and a 6-year-old boy trying desperately not to cry as
doctors treated shrapnel wounds to his leg.

But the face of genocide I found most searing belonged to Idris Ismael, a
32-year-old Chadian. Mr. Idris said that a Sudan-sponsored janjaweed militia had
attacked his village, Damri, that very morning. He had managed to run away. But
his wife, Halima, eight months pregnant, could only hobble. And so she was still
in the village, along with their four children, ages 3 to 12.

''The village is surrounded by janjaweed, with civilians inside,'' Mr. Idris
said. ''There's no way for people to escape. The janjaweed will kill all the
men, women and children, take all our blankets and other property, and then burn
our homes. They will kill every last person.''

''The janjaweed will rape and kill my family,'' Mr. Idris added. ''And there's
nothing I can do.''

Elie Wiesel once said, referring to victims of genocide: ''Let us remember: what
hurts the victim most is not the cruelty of the oppressor but the silence of the
bystander.'' And it's our own silence that I find inexplicable.

In Darfur, we have even less excuse than in past genocides. We have known about
this for more than two years, we have photos and eyewitnesses, our president has
even described it as genocide, and yet we're still paralyzed. Part of the
problem is that President Bush hasn't made it a top priority, but at least he is
now showing signs of stirring -- and in fact he's done more than most other
world leaders, and more than many Democrats. Our failure in Darfur is utterly
bipartisan.

Mr. Bush met recently at the White House with Mudawi Ibrahim Adam, an authentic
Sudanese hero, to get advice on Darfur, and he seems engaged -- though still not
ready to leap into the issue publicly by making a major speech on Darfur, or by
welcoming refugees for a photo op at the White House. Alas, Mr. Bush is far more
timid than the American people.

A new poll by Zogby International that surveyed 1,000 Americans a few days ago
asked about Darfur. Sixty-two percent said that ''the United States has a
responsibility to help stop the killings in the Darfur region of Sudan''; only
24 percent disagreed.

In response to another question, only 24 percent said that ''the U.S. has done
enough diplomatically to help end the crisis.'' In contrast, 59 percent said
that more could be done.

One measure we could take would be to enforce a no-fly zone from the air base in
Abeche, Chad. The president of Chad says he would be happy to have Americans do
this, and it would be easy: instead of keeping airplanes in the air, we would
simply wait until a Sudanese plane bombed a village, then strafe that plane on
the ground afterward. (The first time, we would just damage the plane; we would
destroy any after that.)

Asked about such a no-fly zone in the Zogby poll, 70 percent said they supported
the idea, and only 13 percent opposed it.

So Americans are, I think, better than our national policy. How do we align our
government with our hearts? The only way is to push our leaders, whether by
calling the White House or members of Congress, or by attending the rally in
Washington on April 30 planned by the Save Darfur Coalition
(www.savedarfur.org).

Darfur is not hopeless. We need a new peace initiative, focused on the sheiks of
the region. We need a well-equipped U.N. peacekeeping force and a no-fly zone.
We need a public pledge by France to use its military forces in Chad to stop any
invasion from Sudan. And we need Arab leaders to speak up for the Muslim victims
of Darfur: where are you, Hosni Mubarak? With those measures, Darfur might again
be a place where children play, rather than one in which they are thrown into
bonfires.

Among the few heroes in this genocide are the ordinary Chadian villagers. They
are desperately poor, but when 200,000 Darfuris escaped into Chad, these
villagers shared water, forage and food with them.

Now these same Chadians are themselves becoming victims of an ever-expanding
Sudanese genocide. In the town of Borota, I talked to Fatima Adam, 15, who
described being gang-raped and beaten by six janjaweed a few days earlier. As
often happens, the men had used racial slurs against blacks to justify the
attack.

''The same things they were doing in Darfur,'' Fatima said, ''now they are doing
to us.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
EYEWITNESSES (79%); ORPHANS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (76%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%); CHILDREN (74%); REFUGEES (71%); PREGNANCY
& CHILDBIRTH (69%); US PRESIDENTS (68%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (67%) United States
International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: ZOGBY INTERNATIONAL INC (51%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541910 MARKETING RESEARCH & PUBLIC OPINION POLLING (51%);
NAICS541613 MARKETING CONSULTING SERVICES (51%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHAD (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             768 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

In Serbian Capital, Rites For Milosevic Draw Throng

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD and IAN FISHER; Nicholas Wood reported from Belgrade
for this article and Ian Fisher from Pozarevac.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1220 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 18


Well over 50,000 Serbs massed on the central square here on Saturday in a public
wake for Slobodan Milosevic, the large numbers representing, in this nation's
deep divide, either his final victory or one last embarrassment for Serbia at
his hands.

A week after Mr. Milosevic died of a heart attack in his jail cell in The Hague,
his coffin was carried at midday to a stage in front of Serbia and Montenegro's
Parliament, formerly Yugoslavia's federal assembly.

''We are bidding farewell to the best one among us,'' said Milorad Vucelic,
deputy president of Mr. Milosevic's Socialist Party. ''There is no better place
than this square for us to say our goodbye. Let us do it in a dignified manner.
Let us shout his name as one.''

The square had heavy symbolism for his supporters: it lent an official setting
for a funeral not recognized by the Serbian state, and it was where large
opposition rallies forced him from power in 2000, opening the way for his
extradition to The Hague on charges of war crimes.

Crowds in Belgrade of the mostly middle-aged, bused from Bosnia, Croatia,
Montenegro and Kosovo, chanted his nickname -- ''Slobo! Slobo!'' -- before the
coffin was taken to his hometown for the funeral.

But even in Pozarevac, where he was buried at dusk under the lime tree where he
first kissed his future wife, affection for him was far from unanimous. Many
hoped that Saturday was merely a day to say goodbye, and that it did not mean a
return to nationalist policies that isolated and impoverished Serbia in the
1990's.

''I can't believe what is going on here,'' said Iva, 41, who would not give her
last name because she was speaking against Mr. Milosevic in his hometown on the
day of his funeral. ''It looks like it is collective amnesia.''

And after Mr. Milosevic's body left the capital, a relatively small group of
demonstrators, perhaps several thousand, held a counterrally in the center of
Belgrade to remind Serbs of the miseries they say he inflicted on them and their
neighbors. But, compared with the numbers at the wake, people who rallied there
despaired at the poor turnout.

''It is humiliating that so many people appeared there,'' said Branislava
Miloradovic, an English teacher. ''If they forgot, they are idiots, and I hope
there are more of us who still remember.''

But while the mass display of defiance proved that Serbia's nationalist forces
can still assemble large crowds, the long-term impact of this demonstration is
harder to judge.

The Socialist and Radical parties who remain faithful to Mr. Milosevic clearly
hope the turnout will bolster their nationalist and anti-Western policies,
despite polls that show them with relatively little support. There is talk that
it may be harder now for Serbia to hand over to The Hague Ratko Mladic, the
former top Serbian military commander, or that sentiment will be even stronger
against any deal for the independence of Kosovo, the southern province dominated
by Albanians.

''I can't even go to Pristina to visit my husband's grave,'' said Dostana
Nikolic, 62, referring to the capital of Kosovo, as she waited for Mr.
Milosevic's body to arrive in Pozarevac. She was among the thousands of Serbs
who fled Kosovo amid Albanian reprisals there after the war in Kosovo ended in
1999.

But experts note that Serbia is not cooperating much with The Hague anyway, and
that it was never likely to let Kosovo go easily. And contrary to the angry tone
set by the speakers on Saturday, many in the crowd seemed less sure that Serbia
should retreat from steps to join the European Union.

''We are in Europe, and we need to stay in Europe,'' said Aleksandar
Anastasovic, 66, who said he knew Mr. Milosevic in his hometown when the two
were young Communist Party members. ''But Europe needs to change its policies
and find a place for the Serbs.''

In the long drama of Yugoslavia's breakup, the return of Mr. Milosevic's body
made a fitting chapter: After four years of trial on charges of genocide, he
died last Saturday several months before its end -- sparing him, and by
extension Serbia itself, the stain of a guilty verdict.

Before his death, Mr. Milosevic, 64, who had suffered for years from heart
trouble and high blood pressure, had said he worried about being poisoned. The
accusation of poisoning is commonplace now, despite a coroner's report on Friday
that there was no poison in his body.

His coffin arrived as cargo on Wednesday, and the crowds to see it the next day
as it was laid out in the Museum of the Revolution were relatively small. But on
Friday, the crowds grew to many thousands and hours of waiting, before the large
rally on Saturday.

The pro-Western government here refused a state funeral for Mr. Milosevic, but
many critics said Serbian leaders made enough concessions to give the
proceedings all the frills of an officially authorized funeral.

After the coffin was paraded through the streets, speaker after speaker told the
mass gathering in front of Parliament that the display of grief for the former
president's death would indicate an end to Serbia's cooperation with the
tribunal and forever change Serbian politics.

''As of today he will be one of the most powerful factors in the life of the
Serbian state,'' said Vranko Radic, a member of Mr. Milosevic's legal counsel in
The Hague.

Ramsey Clark, the former United States attorney general and counsel to Mr.
Milosevic, and Gennadi A. Zyuganov, the head of the Russian Communist Party,
were among a number of foreign delegates to address the crowd, all helping to
reinforce the conviction that the former Yugoslav leader was the victim of a
foreign conspiracy.

''It was not death, it was murder,'' said Mr. Zyuganov, a candidate for Russia's
next presidential election in 2008.

Even if the funeral was not state-authorized, it was highly organized and
carried many of the trappings of an official function. Supporters wore the same
buttons and pins with his face, and the police lined the roads amid a
well-calibrated arrival of buses from around Serbia. In Pozarevac, a municipal
building was converted into a media center, with wireless Internet access and
badges that journalists were required to wear also emblazoned with Mr.
Milosevic's picture.

The coffin arrived in Pozarevac, about 50 miles southeast of the capital, in the
late afternoon in a silver Mercedes hearse to a smaller and more local crowd
than in Belgrade. People threw flowers in the path of the hearse and chanted
slogans against the war crimes tribunal in The Hague during a second round of
angry speeches.

The coffin was then taken to the Milosevic family house, a two-story building
with a red roof behind a gate piled high with flowers. The coffin was lowered
into a grave in a garden next to the lime tree, as a brass band played and
messages were read from his absent wife and son.

''We two, we have always been on the same side of the world,'' said the message
from his wife, Mirjana Markovic, who had been powerful here in her own right.
''I'll fight on for our ideals.''

His wife, who lives in Moscow, did not come, though Serbian officials had agreed
to suspend an arrest warrant for her. Socialist Party members said they feared
that the authorities would still confiscate her passport. Neither his son Marko
nor daughter Marija were present.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Supporters of the former Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic,
attended his funeral yesterday in his hometown, Pozarevac. He died March 11.
(Pool photo by Srdjan Ilic)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (91%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%);
POLITICS (76%); DEATHS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); GENOCIDE (71%);
RIOTS (60%) Demonstrations and Riots; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Ian Fisher; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); SERBIA (96%); MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Belgrade (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             769 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Throngs Mourn for Milosevic

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 21, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page picture caption in some copies on Sunday about the
funeral procession for Slobodan Milosevic, Yugoslavia's former president,
misstated the location. It was Pozarevac, Serbia, Mr. Milosevic's hometown, not
Belgrade.

GRAPHIC: Photo: More than 50,000 Serbs gathered yesterday in Belgrade, Serbia,
for the funeral of Slobodan Milosevic. Page 10. (Pool photo by Nikola Solic)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (91%)

REGION: Serbia; Belgrade (Serbia)

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             773 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Librarian Is Still John Doe, Despite Patriot Act Revision

BYLINE: By ALISON LEIGH COWAN

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1159 words


The hotel ballroom was packed as a sensibly dressed, well-read crowd from around
the country gathered in San Antonio on Jan. 21 to celebrate one of their own.

Yet, as many expected, the guest of honor was a no-show, despite the $500
intellectual freedom prize that awaited.

Attendees at an American Library Association gathering blamed Washington for the
empty chair. Lawmakers may be giving themselves credit for having improved
safeguards on civil liberties when they reauthorized the nation's antiterrorism
law, otherwise known as the USA Patriot Act, earlier this month.

But many librarians and civil liberties lawyers say the revisions did nothing to
enable the guest of honor to take the stage and discuss the Patriot Act without
risk of prosecution.

Known as John Doe in court filings, the guest of honor was the Connecticut
librarian who was visited by the Federal Bureau of Investigation last year and
presented with what is known as a national security letter demanding patron
records.

The subpoena, issued as part of a counterterrorism investigation, not only
barred him from disclosing the target of the inquiry, but also forbade him and
others at his place of work to ever discuss the letter or even to acknowledge
its receipt.

Though some 30,000 national security letters are issued a year without arousing
public protest, the librarian was reluctant to comply because of professional
ethics aimed at keeping library records confidential.

On the advice of the American Civil Liberties Union, his employer went to court
to challenge the constitutionality of the subpoena, the provisions of the
Patriot Act that broadened the use of national security letters after Sept. 11,
2001, and the order permanently forbidding discussion of the F.B.I.'s demand.

As the Bush administration pushed for the act to be reauthorized, a handful of
Democratic and Republican lawmakers argued that it went too far in encroaching
on civil liberties. In the end, they persuaded the White House to accept a
compromise that placed library records beyond the reach of a national security
letter if they were gathered by libraries operating in what many people
understand to be their traditional roles.

The final bill also gave recipients of national security letters the explicit
right to consult lawyers.

While those concessions have allowed lawmakers to say that new safeguards on
civil liberties have been put in place, another powerful provision in the
Patriot Act, known as Section 215, remains on the books. It gives law
enforcement another confidential way to demand information but has seldom been
used because it requires judicial approval. National security letters, in
contrast, require merely the signature of an F.B.I. official.

Between Section 215 and the new language governing national security letters,
some opponents of the new version of the Patriot Act are skeptical that the
revisions will provide much protection against unwanted invasions of privacy or
infringements on free speech.

''The revised law provides almost no protection whatsoever for libraries,'' said
Ann Beeson, the civil liberties union lawyer representing the organization that
brought the suit in Connecticut. ''It's virtually meaningless.''

The section of the new law that addresses ''privacy protection for library
patrons'' states that library records are beyond the reach of national security
letters so long as the library is not operating as an ''electronic communication
service.'' Elsewhere, that term is defined as ''any service which provides to
users thereof the ability to send or receive wire or electronic
communications.''

But much of what a modern library does courses through its computers. Patrons
can research topics on the Web. They can even reserve books from home. ''A
national security letter can be used to get any library record that is
maintained via an electronic communication service,'' Ms. Beeson said. ''That
definitely includes Internet access and e-mail records and can also include
patron borrowing records.''

The new law does establish the recipient's right to challenge the nondisclosure
orders that typically accompany national security letters and Section 215
requests. But the recipient would have to wait a year before raising the
question anew if the government continued to assert the need for secrecy.

''If you're a business that has resources to challenge it every year, you can,''
Ms. Beeson said. But she said a judge would be hard pressed to rule against a
government request to keep the information secret for reasons of national
security. In the Connecticut John Doe's case, she said, ''nothing in the new law
permits John Doe to disclose his identity.''

Though government lawyers demanded that John Doe's identity be shielded in court
filings, the government failed to completely conceal the name in those filings,
which revealed the plaintiff to be the Library Connection of Windsor, Conn., a
nonprofit organization that provides back-office services to some two dozen
libraries in the Hartford area.

Eager to testify publicly about the Patriot Act, the group's officers won the
right last summer to identify their organization as the recipient of a national
security letter after Judge Janet C. Hall of Federal District Court in
Bridgeport found that the government had unjustly imposed a prior restraint on
free speech. But her decision was stayed while the government appealed, and the
United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in Manhattan, has yet to
rule.

''I am rather appalled that our country's laws silence John Doe and require him
to remain anonymous for standing by his professional ethics, for standing up for
the principle that it is nobody's business what you read, or listen to, or look
at in the library but yours,'' Judith F. Krug, the executive director of the
Freedom to Read Foundation, told the crowd in San Antonio, as she accepted the
University of Illinois's annual Robert B. Downs Intellectual Freedom Award in
John Doe's absence.

Alice S. Knapp, a Stamford librarian who is this year's president of the
Connecticut Library Association, said she was there ''taking pictures left and
right.'' But the Library Connection's executive director, George Christian, and
the vice president of its board, Peter Chase, did not attend. Mr. Chase's
absence was especially odd since he was to be the Connecticut Library
Association's advocate on intellectual freedom this year.

Without commenting on John Doe's likely identity, Ms. Knapp confirmed that she
had assumed many of Mr. Chase's speaking duties this year. For moral support,
she has been nominating John Doe for other awards.

''We nominate them for everything we can,'' Ms. Knapp said. ''Never mind the
pressure they're under. Just the sheer act of bravery to decide not to comply
and to decide to make an issue of it was incredibly huge, and within the library
community, there is a lot of respect for them.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US PATRIOT ACT (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
LIBRARIANS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); SUBPOENAS (88%); TERRORISM (87%);
ETHICS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%);
LIBRARIES (76%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (76%); LAWYERS (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(76%); BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (76%); LEGISLATION (75%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); HOTEL MEETING FACILITIES (73%);
FREEDOM OF SPEECH (72%); LITIGATION (70%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (69%) Terrorism;
Libraries and Librarians; Suits and Litigation; Law and Legislation; Awards,
Decorations and Honors; Terrorism; Privacy

COMPANY: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (58%)

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN LIBRARY ASSOCIATION (84%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%) American Library Assn;
Library Connection (Orgn); Federal Bureau of Investigation

PERSON: Alison Leigh Cowan

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: Windsor (Conn); United States

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             777 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Young Americans, Doing Good

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 132 words



To the Editor:

I am not a university student. I am a 59-year-old former active-duty marine who
served in a combat unit in Vietnam.

I am deeply concerned with the genocide in Darfur and neighboring Chad, as I was
with the genocide and ethnic cleansing in Rwanda, Bosnia and Cambodia.

As a Jew, I would welcome the opportunity to give personal witness to the
rallying cry ''never again.''

Should not being a university student preclude me from entering Nicholas D.
Kristof's contest? Wouldn't I, as a citizen, gain from the experience?

Might I not use this experience to educate some of my fellow citizens upon my
return? Is it inconceivable that my own life experience might contribute to the
success of the reporting trip?

Consider this my application.

Bob Raphael
New York, March 21, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (88%);
WAR & CONFLICT (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (87%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%)

PERSON: Bob Raphael; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (91%); UNITED STATES (91%); VIET NAM (90%); RWANDA (87%); AFRICA
(56%)

REGION: Africa

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             778 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Afghan Christian Who Faces Death

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 123 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Outrage in Afghanistan'' (editorial, March 23):

The case of the Afghan who converted from Islam to Christianity, and is now
threatened with a death sentence for doing so, should bring all Muslim and
non-Muslim supporters of basic human rights together to express unambiguous
horror at and opposition to the trial, and to firmly affirm a person's freedom
to choose his or her religion and to be able to convert from one religion to
another.

Muslims keep repeating the quotation from the Koran, ''There is no compulsion in
religion.'' Here is an opportunity to show that they truly believe in this
quotation and not in an age-old practice based on a faulty interpretation of
religion.

Ghulam Faruki
Albany, March 23, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (97%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); TALIBAN (88%); FREEDOM OF
RELIGION (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (72%) Capital
Punishment; Christians and Christianity; Freedom of Religion; Islam

ORGANIZATION: Taliban

PERSON: Ghulam Faruki

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (88%)

REGION: Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             789 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 27, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Detainee Case Will Pose Delicate Question for Court

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 26


The Supreme Court's announcement four months ago that it would rule on the
validity of the military commission by which the Bush administration wants to
try Osama bin Laden's former driver, on charges of conspiracy to commit
terrorism, appeared to mark a resumption of a struggle for supremacy between the
court and the White House.

That struggle initially played out in three cases on terrorism and civil
liberties in June 2004. In accepting the new case, as in the previous ones, the
justices rejected the administration's argument that the court should simply
stay out and let the president conduct his fight against terrorism unconstrained
by judicial oversight.

But no one foresaw back in November that the case of the driver, Salim Ahmed
Hamdan, to be argued on Tuesday, would present the Supreme Court with an
additional and perhaps even greater challenge.

In the face of a measure that Congress passed and President Bush signed into law
in late December to strip the federal courts of jurisdiction over cases brought
by detainees at the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, where Mr.
Hamdan has been held since 2002, the court must decide whether it retains the
right to proceed with this case at all.

For a court that has been highly protective of its own prerogatives, but at the
same time notably attentive to the often arcane limits on federal court
jurisdiction, the question is one of great delicacy, infused with historical
resonance. Not since the immediate aftermath of the Civil War, in a case that
arose from the power struggles of the Reconstruction era, has the Supreme Court
permitted Congress to divest it of jurisdiction over a case it has already
agreed to decide.

In that case, Ex Parte McCardle, the court had already heard four days of
argument in an appeal brought by a rabble-rousing Mississippi newspaper editor
who had been taken into custody and charged by the military government with
fomenting insurrection.

Fearful that a Supreme Court ruling in favor of the editor, William H. McCardle,
could result in invalidating military control of the former Confederate states,
Congress enacted a law over President Andrew Johnson's veto to deprive the court
of jurisdiction. The court then dismissed the appeal, rejecting the argument by
McCardle's lawyer that it was permitting Congress to usurp the judicial
function.

In the new case, Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, No. 05-184, the Bush administration filed a
motion with the court in early January, days after the Detainee Treatment Act
was signed into law, urging immediate dismissal of Mr. Hamdan's appeal.

''It is well settled that statutes that remove jurisdiction apply to pending
cases and ordinarily should be given immediate effect,'' the administration,
citing the McCardle case, said in the brief accompanying its motion.

More than a month later, on Feb. 21, the court declined to act on the motion,
announcing instead that it would take up the jurisdictional question as part of
the argument on the merits of the case. It added 30 minutes to Tuesday's
argument, originally scheduled for one hour, for that purpose.

The McCardle case has been seen by many modern legal scholars as problematic, a
regrettable expression of judicial weakness. Mr. Hamdan's lawyers cite it as
well, but for a different proposition. While Congress spoke clearly in the
court-stripping amendment at issue in the McCardle case, their brief tells the
court, the Detainee Treatment Act is ambiguous on its application to pending, as
opposed to future, cases. The court should interpret the act as not applying to
the Hamdan case to avoid the ''grave constitutional questions'' that would
otherwise arise, they say.

A group of law professors who filed a brief on this point on Mr. Hamdan's behalf
warn the court that to give up jurisdiction would be to yield to ''an
unconstitutional interference with access to courts and an attack on the
fundamental structure of the Constitution.''

The argument rests in part on the observation that according to the language of
the Detainee Treatment Act, Guantanamo detainees who are tried by a military
commission will have only a circumscribed right to a subsequent appeal in
federal court, in which they could not raise the basic challenge to the
commission's operation that Mr. Hamdan is presenting in his Supreme Court case.
So if the justices cannot decide his case, or cases brought by some 150 of the
other 500 Guantanamo detainees now pending in the lower courts, fundamental
questions about this alternative system of justice will go unresolved.

There may be a separate obstacle in the Supreme Court's way. Only eight justices
are participating in the case, raising the prospect of a 4-to-4 tie. Chief
Justice John G. Roberts Jr. is recused because he was a member of the
three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the District of
Columbia Circuit that upheld the government's position in the Hamdan case last
July, four days before Mr. Bush nominated him to the Supreme Court.

A tie vote in the Supreme Court ordinarily simply affirms the lower court
decision, without issuing an opinion or setting a precedent. But in this case,
there is no lower court opinion on the jurisdictional question, since there was
no Detainee Treatment Act when the appeals court ruled last July.

It would require a majority, five of the eight votes, to grant the government's
motion to dismiss the case, but the matter might not be as straightforward as
that. Even if the government had not filed its motion, the court would still be
obliged to assure itself that it has jurisdiction to proceed, in this as in any
other case. Whether a tie favors jurisdiction or dismissal appears to be an open
question of Supreme Court procedure.

Military commissions are not new; they were first used by Gen. Winfield Scott
during the war with Mexico in the 1840's. But there have been none since the
World War II era. If the court addresses the merits of the Hamdan case, it must
decide whether Mr. Bush's military order of Nov. 13, 2001, establishing military
commissions to try noncitizens for ''acts of international terrorism,'' had
proper authorization.

The administration argues that there were ''multiple authorizations'': from the
Congressional resolution known as the Authorization for the Use of Military
Force, adopted days after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001; from the
Uniform Code of Military Justice, which refers to military commissions and
authorizes the president to prescribe rules for their operation; and from the
president's inherent powers as commander in chief.

In addition, the administration argues that the Detainee Treatment Act itself
ratified the establishment of military commissions when it circumscribed
judicial review of their operations.

Mr. Hamdan's military and civilian lawyers, as well as the dozens of
organizations and individuals supporting his appeal as ''friends of the court,''
argue to the contrary that no Congressional enactment or inherent power
authorized the president to set up what they call a ''jerrybuilt tribunal'' that
falls short of the procedural protections offered by American military law and
required by the Geneva Conventions.

In addition, they argue, conspiracy, with which Mr. Hamdan has been charged, is
not a war crime and is therefore not subject to trial by military commission.

The administration argues that the Geneva Conventions do not apply to the
conflict with Al Qaeda and that their protections cannot, in any event, be
invoked by individual detainees. These assertions have provoked a flood of
counterarguments from international law specialists, former senior diplomats and
federal judges, and human rights organizations.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Salim Ahmed Hamdan, Osama bin Laden's former driver, is at the
center of a legal battle. (Photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); JURISDICTION (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); APPEALS (89%); MILITARY RULE (78%); WAR ON
TERROR (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); NAVIES (78%); VETO (78%);
CONSPIRACY (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%) Terrorism;
Suits and Litigation; Constitutions; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); United
States Armament and Defense

ORGANIZATION: Supreme Court (US)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (73%) Salim Ahmed Hamdan; George W
(Pres) Bush; Linda Greenhouse; Osama Bin Laden

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CUBA (90%)

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             790 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Status of Liberia's Indicted Ex-President Is Unclear

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 9

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 27


Confusion reigned Monday over the status of Charles G. Taylor, the onetime
warlord who became president of Liberia and who is wanted for war crimes by an
international court based here for atrocities affecting Sierra Leone during
neighboring Liberia's civil war.

Liberia's current president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, who had asked Nigeria on
March 17 to extradite Mr. Taylor to face trial in Sierra Leone, told religious
leaders in Monrovia, the capital, on Monday that Mr. Taylor should be moved
directly to Sierra Leone.

''Taylor was indicted by a Sierra Leone court,'' Ms. Johnson Sirleaf said,
according to Reuters. ''Taylor should rather go to Sierra Leone than come to
Liberia because he was not indicted by a Liberian court.''

Mr. Taylor, with the backing of Libya and other powers, ignited a cycle of civil
war in the 1990's that engulfed much of West Africa, killed more than 300,000
people and left millions homeless, raped and maimed. He faces 17 counts of war
crimes for his role in fomenting a bloody civil war in Sierra Leone over control
of the country's vast trove of diamonds, some of which Mr. Taylor sold to pay
for his own rebellion in Liberia.

Nigeria's government had offered Mr. Taylor asylum after rebel forces threatened
to remove him by force in 2003, ending Liberia's brutal, 14-year civil war.
Nigeria has said Liberia is free to come and arrest Mr. Taylor; it has made no
public move to detain him.

''Taylor is not a prisoner in Nigeria,'' Remi Oyo, spokeswoman for President
Olusegun Obasanjo, said Monday, according to Reuters. She added that Ms. Johnson
Sirleaf ''is free to come and take President Taylor into her custody.''

A State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, said at a briefing on Monday that
the responsibility to secure Mr. Taylor lay with the Nigerian government.

''We have made clear, both in public and private, to the Nigerians that it is
their responsibility to see that he is able to be conveyed and face justice,''
Mr. McCormack said. ''So that would be the Nigerian government's
responsibility.''

Desmond de Silva, the chief prosecutor of the international court, said that
arranging the transfer of Mr. Taylor to Sierra Leone, either directly from
Nigeria or via Liberia, where United Nations peacekeepers are authorized to
arrest him, was bound to be a complex matter. But he insisted that Nigeria was
bound to detain Mr. Taylor, even as the details of the transfer were worked out.

''They are in fact sitting on a warrant for his arrest,'' Mr. de Silva said.
''Our view is that the moment the Nigerian government decided that Taylor was
going to be handed over they must have understood that the Liberian authorities
were going to turn him over to the special court. Therefore Taylor had every
inducement to abscond at that stage.''

Mr. Taylor's spokesman, Sylvester Paasewe, said Mr. Taylor had not left Calabar,
Nigeria, where he has lived since leaving Liberia in 2003, Reuters reported.

But adding further confusion, K. A. Paul, an American evangelical Christian
leader who has acted as a spiritual guide and spokesman for Mr. Taylor in the
past, said he was seeking a new place of asylum for Mr. Taylor, and that Mr.
Taylor had left his residence in Calabar.

''In the last 48 hours I cannot reach him,'' Mr. Paul said in an interview from
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, where he said he was seeking refuge for Mr. Taylor. ''He
is no longer in Calabar.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); CIVIL WAR (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); EXTRADITION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); ARRESTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); PEACEKEEPING (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%); RELIGION (56%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (79%) Lydia Polgreen; Charles G Taylor; Ellen
Johnson (Pres) Sirleaf

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (88%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (58%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (98%); LIBERIA (97%); NIGERIA (95%); LIBYA (79%); WESTERN
AFRICA (79%); AFRICA (78%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone; Nigeria; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             791 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New York: Albany: Secret Ruling Challenged

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON (NYT); Compiled by John Sullivan

SECTION: Section B; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 115 words


The New York Civil Liberties Union asked a federal appeals court yesterday to
make public a secret ruling in a terrorism case that may involve warrantless
domestic wiretaps by the National Security Agency. Judge Thomas J. McAvoy issued
the classified ruling in federal court in Albany on March 10, after two
defendants, Yassin M. Aref and Mohammed M. Hossain, asked him to dismiss charges
against them if the government's evidence included warrantless wiretaps. Judge
McAvoy declined to dismiss the case, but the defendants were barred from reading
his ruling. Following an F.B.I. sting, Mr. Aref, who is a Muslim imam, and Mr.
Hossain were accused of financing terrorism.    JULIA PRESTON (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); WIRETAPPING (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); APPELLATE
DECISIONS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (88%); APPEALS COURTS (88%); LITIGATION (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (84%)
Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and
Methods

COMPANY: NEW YORK RESTAURANT GROUP INC (91%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (91%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(59%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%) National Security Agency; American
Civil Liberties Union

INDUSTRY: SIC5812 EATING PLACES (91%)

PERSON: Julia Preston; Thomas (Judge) Mcavoy; Yassin M Aref; Mohammed M Hossain

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (91%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%)

REGION: Albany (NY)

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             797 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain Backs Request to Move Liberian's Trial to The Hague

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, March 31


Britain circulated a draft resolution to Security Council members on Friday that
would transfer the war crimes trial of Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian
president, to the Netherlands because of what it said was a threat to regional
peace posed by his continued presence in West Africa.

Under its terms, Mr. Taylor would be tried in the International Criminal Court
complex in The Hague under the auspices of the United Nations-backed court that
was established in Sierra Leone to try people suspected of responsibility for
atrocities during the country's civil war, from 1991 to 2002.

Mr. Taylor was indicted by that court in March 2003, while still president of
Liberia, on 17 counts of war crimes and crimes against humanity. He had been
living in exile in Nigeria from August 2003 until Wednesday, when he was
arrested while trying to flee to Cameroon and flown to Sierra Leone.

Mr. Taylor is accused of backing rebels who, in a civil war that killed 50,000
people, gained grisly notoriety for raping victims and maiming and killing
people by chopping off their arms, legs, hands, ears and lips.

The draft resolution said Mr. Taylor's presence in West Africa constituted ''an
impediment to stability and a threat to the peace of Liberia and of Sierra
Leone, and to international peace and security in the region.''

The plan to move the proceedings to The Hague came at the request of the Sierra
Leone court.

Mr. Taylor, 58, a warlord turned president, has many loyalists in the region and
was able to maintain contact with them while in Nigeria.

His arrest and detention in Sierra Leone were put into motion two weeks ago when
Liberia's new president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, formally asked President
Olusegun Obasanjo of Nigeria to extradite him.

The resolution asks the Netherlands to allow unrestricted access to the court
for witnesses and others required for the trial. It also would exempt Mr. Taylor
from the travel ban that currently blocks his passage to Europe.

Asked about the transfer plan, Secretary General Kofi Annan told reporters, ''I
think everybody agrees it to be wiser to do that.''

At the State Department, Adam Ereli, the deputy spokesman, said the United
States backed the action as ''frankly, in the interests of the court and the
defendants and those connected with the trial.'' He said, ''It is a move that
reinforces, I think, justice, transparency and fairness.''

A statement from the tribunal in Sierra Leone on Friday said Mr. Taylor would
make his first public appearance in court there on Monday.

On Thursday, lawyers from the court's defense office met with Mr. Taylor and
said he had been cooperative as they explained his rights to him and ''addressed
personal matters as well as detention-related issues,'' according to the
statement. It also said, ''Mr. Taylor is in fairly good health and is in good
spirits.''

British officials said they expected the resolution to be formally considered
early next week.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL
WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); EXTRADITION (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
LAWYERS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); POLITICS (73%) Politics
and Government; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (57%) Warren Hoge; Charles G Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (94%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (97%); SIERRA LEONE (96%); NETHERLANDS (94%); NIGERIA (94%);
AFRICA (93%); WESTERN AFRICA (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CAMEROON (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Great Britain; Nigeria; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             798 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 1, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: Europeans Postpone Ultimatum

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 36 words


The European Union gave Serbia another month to arrest Gen. Ratko Mladic, the
Bosnian Serb fugitive, for trial at the international war crimes tribunal in The
Hague or face a suspension of accession talks with the bloc.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (88%); EUROPEAN UNION (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); GENOCIDE (84%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (93%) European Union

PERSON: Ratko (Gen) Mladic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (68%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (93%); EUROPE (93%); MONTENEGRO (79%); NETHERLANDS
(73%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             803 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Milosevic Lessons: Faster and More Efficient Trials

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1047 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE


The trial of Slobodan Milosevic generated about 120 DVD's, 46,000 pages of
transcripts and more than 300,000 pages of oral and written evidence. The number
of documents had reached 1.2 million pages, and more were on the way.

All that work stopped in its tracks. On March 13, two days after Mr. Milosevic's
death, the international war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia ended the
case here, leaving lawyers and court officials, witnesses and victims abruptly
bereft.

So, has the first international criminal trial of a head of state bequeathed
more than immense frustration? Yes, even if accidentally.

The prosecution set out to tell the detailed history of three Yugoslav wars of
the 1990's because it saw this as the only way to uncover Mr. Milosevic's often
hidden hand in them.

Still, prosecutors are not historians; their focus is on establishing proof.

''Proof will include truth, but it will not present the full picture,'' Geoffrey
Nice, the lead prosecutor, once said. ''We have a limitless field of evidence
from the wars, but we are not inquiring like scientists; we are asked to extract
from it.''

With Mr. Milosevic's death of a heart attack in his jail cell, no judges will
weigh this evidence. So what remains is not a verdict, but the prosecution's
account -- that the former Serb leader was almost the sole driving force behind
the three wars.

The court did not indict his wartime counterparts. Franjo Tudjman, the president
of Croatia, was under investigation but died in 1999. The court never focused on
the role of the Bosnian leader Alija Izetbegovic.

Other trials are dealing with senior Muslims and Croats, aiming to provide a
balanced view of the wars that accompanied the breakup of Yugoslavia.

Mr. Milosevic devoted almost his entire defense to charges related to the 1999
war in Kosovo. Because both sides had a say, a tested version of that history
exists, and it may influence future cases.

Even without a verdict, the Milosevic case will help shape a collective memory
of the Balkan tragedy, and the trial created building blocks and procedural
lessons for future trials. Not least, it established the precedent, long
unthinkable, of having a former head of state face a criminal trial before an
international court.

Even some of the evidence presented in the Milosevic trial may have a further
life.

At the trial's great predecessor, the Nuremberg trials of Nazi leaders, the
occupying Allied troops had an immense paper trail of signed orders. But Mr.
Milosevic wrote very little, so over the four-year trial, prosecutors
painstakingly reconstructed events, drawing on testimony of witnesses and
insiders, as well as affidavits, letters and transcripts of phone taps and radio
intercepts.

All that has been incorporated into a vast database, where evidence may be
retrieved for other trials. It may be opened to scholars, researchers and
journalists.

Eligible topics could include the role of Serbia's special forces, their links
to the paramilitary, Mr. Milosevic's use of secret parallel commands, and
Belgrade's payment of equipment, salaries and pensions to its proxy army in
Bosnia.

The Milosevic trial offers important lessons, which are now being debated. The
court has understood that its strategy of trying Mr. Milosevic for his whole
''criminal enterprise'' created an overly cumbersome case, signaling the
pitfalls for future high-profile trials.

It has not gone unnoticed here that in the trial of Saddam Hussein, the
prosecution has focused narrowly on one infamous case of brutality to which he
is linked as an active participant.

But unlike Mr. Hussein, Mr. Milosevic was always far from the scene of action.
He was accused of command responsibility, in planning and ordering the crimes of
others.

The way the prosecution made its case required charting the full political and
military structure of Yugoslavia and its dissolution. One lawyer said there was
no simple event, standing alone, that could be sliced off and pinned on Mr.
Milosevic.

Moreover, he argued, the point of the process was not just to seek retribution
but to help shape the history of the war, to spur Serbs to end their denial of
atrocities and reconnect Serbian society to the rest of Europe.

Lawyers will be debating for a long time whether this can or should be the role
of a criminal trial. Much fingerpointing has occurred over the trial's
inefficient and slow pace.

Judges tried several times to break the prosecution's vast indictment into more
manageable portions. Doctors imposed a part-time schedule because of Mr.
Milosevic's poor health.

Prosecutors complained that the judges' decision to let Mr. Milosevic act as his
own lawyer not only slowed the trial every time he was sick but also allowed him
to filibuster and to use the court as a political stage.

Other international tribunals have already drawn their conclusions, and as this
court deals with the rest of its caseload it will be harder for any accused to
obtain the right to defend himself, and nearly impossible for someone who is
sick or unruly.

Court officials also emphasized privately that international tribunals handling
complex war crimes cases need the most experienced judges.

Several judges who retired after serving in The Hague have said they deplored
working beside inexperienced judges who came from diplomatic, academic or
political posts. Patrick Robinson, who presided over the second half of the
Milosevic trial, had a long diplomatic career but almost no trial experience.

There is intense internal debate over whether complex war crimes trials are best
served by the adversarial system with its many witnesses and courtroom drama, or
by more of a civil law system with its more active role for the judges and far
more written evidence.

Steven Kay, a British court-appointed lawyer for Mr. Milosevic, said the
adversarial system ''utterly fails to deal with trials of the Milosevic type.''

Written evidence has already become more acceptable at the tribunal, and other
rules have been changed to streamline procedures.

But future shifts do not alter the plight of the Milosevic prosecutors, who
wrote a sweeping historical indictment and ended up, not with a verdict and a
sentence, but mostly with food for historians.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Slobodan Milosevic at the Hague tribunal in 2001. The four-year
trial ended with his death last month. (Pool photo by Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: News Analysis

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); TRANSCRIPTS (89%); EVIDENCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); WITNESSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); HISTORY
(77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); LAWYERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (74%); WIRETAPPING (73%); DEATHS (71%); RELIGION
(50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Computers and the
Internet

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); CROATIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS
(88%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); GERMANY (58%)

REGION: Serbia; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             804 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Story in Which Only the Happy Ending is Unusual

BYLINE: By HELENE COOPER

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Editorial Observer; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 759 words


A long time before Charles Taylor unleashed upon West Africa the tsunami of
rape, murder and dismemberment for which he will soon be tried as a war
criminal, the maniacs under his command kidnapped my oldest sister, Janice.

It happened on Nov. 3, 1990. My sister was living in the Monrovia suburb of
Paynesville, Liberia, with her family and a handful of orphans and other
refugees from the Liberian civil war. Charles Taylor's ragtag army had reached
the edge of Monrovia and was preparing to lay siege to the capital. In the case
of the Taylor forces, laying siege to the capital meant capturing, killing,
raping and torturing those who got in the way.

Janice, 30, her husband, Yao, and their 1-year-old son, Logosou, got in the way.
When the Taylor soldiers -- wearing their ''fighting attire'' of wedding gowns,
blond wigs and makeup -- began lobbing rocket-propelled grenades and artillery
fire into their house, Janice tried to shelter her son as she crouched next to a
bathroom wall. Logosou had become so used to daily visits from soldiers of the
various factions of the Liberian war that he usually didn't become scared.
Instead, he had acquired the habit of automatically putting his hands up in the
air whenever he saw soldiers. ''See, Mama? Hands up.''

But this was no typical extortion visit, and Janice crawled on top of him to try
to shield him. Finally, after three hours of shelling, about 10 Taylor fighters
stormed into the house, shooting wildly. ''You all want to die?'' they yelled.
They accused Janice of harboring rival fighters in the house. She wasn't; the
only people she was harboring were war orphans and refugees. The soldiers
ordered everyone out into the yard. They shot and killed Kona, a 9-year-old
orphan who had been injured during the siege. They shot and killed their
informant, for wrongly telling them that Janice was harboring rival soldiers.
They shot and killed another man, who just happened upon the group outside the
house.

The Taylor fighters took everyone else in the house hostage and marched them 10
miles away to the military barracks in Schieffelin. As Janice walked under the
blistering November sun, she held her son close, reciting the Hail Mary into his
cheek. Wave upon wave of Taylor fighters passed her, heading to the front, their
wigs bobbing through the trees and bushes surreally.

The group came upon a burning house. A female Taylor fighter walked up to Janice
and admired Logosou. ''Oh, what a fine baby!'' she cooed. ''I've killed two like
him today.''

At the barracks, the Taylor fighters locked Janice, her husband and Logosou in a
cell with nine others. They took away three older men who had been staying at
Janice's house and shot and killed them outside the cell. The next day, the
fighters inexplicably let Janice and her family go. But they had to make their
way, by foot, by hitchhiking and by begging, all the way through Taylor
territory to the Ivory Coast border.

It took 15 days.

For me, it feels strange to be reliving that time again. It was so long ago --
15 years -- and a lot has happened since. Janice, her husband and her son were
luckier than so many other Liberians who were victimized by Charles Taylor and
the soldiers under his command. Charles Taylor became president of Liberia and
set off wars in neighboring Sierra Leone and Ivory Coast.

Those wars spawned a generation of child soldiers, many of them kidnapped from
their families, drugged and turned into sadistic killers themselves.

Altogether, more then 500,000 -- most of them civilians -- were killed.

A few days ago, my cellphone rang just as I was leaving my apartment to head to
work. It was Janice.

''I assume you wrote the editorial today,'' she said.

I didn't need to ask which one she meant. The headline was ''The Least
Surprising Jailbreak Ever'' and it criticized Nigeria for letting Mr. Taylor
escape just when he was finally about to be tried as a war criminal. ''Hey, they
found him!'' I said.

''I know,'' she laughed. ''But it was still a good editorial.'' From Janice,
that's high praise, since she's a frequent critic of my musings about Liberia.

We chatted about this and that -- she was in the car driving to Boston -- and
then I heard a deep voice in the background say something. I perked up. ''Is
Logosou with you?''

''No, Logosou's in school. It's 9:30 in the morning for God's sakes,'' she
sniffed.

I smiled into the Brooklyn sunshine and hung up. My nephew, Logosou, was 16
years old, and exactly where he should be. And, finally, so too was Charles
Taylor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TSUNAMIS
(89%); SHOOTINGS (89%); ORPHANS (89%); ARMIES (78%); REFUGEES (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CHILDREN IN ARMED CONFLICT (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); CIVIL
WAR (78%); TORTURE (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); INFANTS
& TODDLERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS (69%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (64%); MURDER (58%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Politics and Government; Kidnapping

PERSON: Helene Cooper; Charles G Taylor

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (92%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (95%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); AFRICA (91%)

REGION: Liberia

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             805 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 2, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Master Plan Drawn in Blood

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD: LEGACY; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1448 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone


ON Christmas Eve, 1989, a small force of about 100 men led by an obscure former
Liberian government official crossed the border from Ivory Coast into Nimba
County in northern Liberia.

According to local legend, recounted by the Africa scholar Stephen Ellis in his
book ''The Mask of Anarchy,'' a baby born in Monrovia, Liberia's capital,
miraculously spoke English straight from the womb. It told its mother that a
rain of death would fall Christmas Day, and that it did not want to live in such
a vicious world, and promptly drew its last breath.

On Dec. 25, in a driving rain, the news that Charles Taylor had attacked Liberia
reached Monrovia. As the child predicted, a rain of death soon drenched West
Africa. It would last 14 years.

On Wednesday, with the apocalyptic deluge at a halt, Mr. Taylor was arrested on
the tarmac at Monrovia's airport and whisked immediately here, where he sat in a
jail cell at an international court set up to try suspected war criminals in
Sierra Leone's brutal, decade-long civil war, which Mr. Taylor is accused of
starting and supporting.

In Mr. Taylor's rise and fall, one can glean the story of West Africa, a history
of death, turmoil and tragedy. In many ways he was the perfect man to exploit
the drawn-out ending of one era -- the slow demise of nationalist Big Man
politics -- and the beginning of another, in which warlords presiding over
small, nonideological insurgencies played havoc across much of the region,
enriching themselves and laying waste to their homelands.

Indeed, the term Big Man, an overworked cliche of African reportage, seems
almost too small in describing Mr. Taylor, and calling him a warlord fails to
grasp the breadth of his ambition.

It was his blend of the two roles that proved so diabolical and deadly. By the
time he was pushed from power in 2003, more than 300,000 people had died in
conflicts he ignited. His forces and allies had looted Liberia and Sierra Leone,
and parts of their neighbors, down to the studs. Millions of people had been
scattered into half a dozen nations around West Africa. From Liberia alone he is
believed to have stolen at least $100 million as president between 1997 and
2003.

''Taylor had a map he carried around with him called Greater Liberia,'' said
Douglas Farah, an analyst and author who has written extensively about Mr.
Taylor's links of criminal and terrorist networks. ''It included parts of
Guinea, diamond fields in Sierra Leone. It wasn't something abstract to him. He
had a very clear idea of what he was trying to achieve. He had a grandiose plan,
and he almost succeeded.''

Mr. Taylor was born outside Monrovia, his mother a housekeeper from the Gola
tribe and his father a teacher descended from the returned slaves who founded
Liberia.

He was a student activist in the 1970's, railing against the corrupt regime of
William Tolbert. Then he went to Bentley College in Massachusetts to study
economics. He returned to Liberia in 1980, just in time to see a young army
sergeant, Samuel Doe, topple Mr. Tolbert's government, murdering the president.

Mr. Taylor immediately insinuated himself into Mr. Doe's clique, and eventually
took control of the government's purchasing arm. He fled back to the United
States after falling out with Mr. Doe, taking with him $1 million he allegedly
embezzled from the government.

He was jailed in Massachusetts, but escaped in 1985 by sawing through the bars
of his jail cell. Once back in Africa, he met with Liberian dissidents in Ghana
and then made common cause with revolutionaries in Burkina Faso, Ivory Coast
and, most critically, Libya, where Colonel Muammar al-Qaddafi was plotting and
supporting a continent-wide revolution. In Libya, he trained in camps that also
trained men who would later play starring roles in the great African tragedies
of the 1990's; they included Sierra Leone's Foday Sankoh, whose rebel movement
would become best known for hacking off the arms and legs of civilians, and the
Congo's Laurent Kabila, the central figure in a complex civil war that
ultimately killed four million people.

With money and arms from Libya and the political and financial backing of
Burkina Faso and Ivory Coast, he crossed into Liberia in December 1989. He had
never been a soldier and had only a small force behind him. Still, he managed to
wreak havoc on an almost unprecedented scale and dominate much of the region for
more than a decade. How did he do it?

In part, Mr. Taylor was adept at using and even creating the language of his
times. He blended a militant pan-Africanism that called for bloody revolutions
against neo-colonialism with a muscular vernacular in which might was
unapologetically right. The new pose fit well with the region's mood.

''There is a very strong current within West African diplomacy which basically
says you make a deal with the strongest actor because if you don't that person
will go back to the bush and fight or otherwise destabilize the situation,''
said Mike McGovern, an anthropologist with the International Crisis Group who
has studied West Africa's conflicts.

At the heart of Taylor's horrific genius was an ability to manipulate West
Africa's political, social and cultural values, seeming to smash deep taboos
while subtly co-opting them for his purposes.

In societies where power had always come with age and young people grew
frustrated under the authority of elders, he espoused a smash-and-grab
philosophy. Unable to marry without ''bride wealth,'' or dowries, and lacking
means to start their own lives until their fathers and uncles died and passed on
wealth and land, these young men proved ideal foot soldiers.

His commanders would force boys to kill their parents or other family members,
breaking the ultimate taboo, then ply them with methamphetamines, marijuana and
other drugs to keep their killing instincts keen. Often their pay came in the
form of a license to rape and plunder.

Yet even as he undermined traditional respect for elders, he subtly substituted
himself in those elders' place, simultaneously enthralling and enslaving a
generation of young boys who slaughtered on his behalf.

This explains his supporters' chilling election campaign cry in 1997: ''He
killed my ma, he killed my pa, I'll vote for him.''

Mr. Taylor also co-opted the secret societies that dominate life in many West
African countries, like the Poro hunting society in Liberia. This gave him
access to a world of unseen power and allowed him to project an aura of mystery
and invincibility. Rumors that he practiced cannibalism, human sacrifice and
blood atonement rituals merely added to his mystique.

''He created an aura around him of a man allied to powerful forces you cannot
easily comprehend,'' said Mr. Ellis, the historian.

Mr. Taylor surrounded himself with objects of protection -- scepters carved from
sacred trees and amulets of invisibility. It was impossible to say whether he
really believed in these objects, or merely used them as props.

He used conventional Christianity as well, managing to convince the Rev. Jesse
Jackson, former President Jimmy Carter and the evangelist Pat Robertson that he
was at heart a good Baptist Christian.

Mr. Taylor also had plenty of money. In his hands, the Liberian state
essentially became an adjunct to organized crime and terrorist networks that
included Al Qaeda.

''He ran this amazingly complex criminal enterprise where the state could
provide critical things like diplomatic passports and airplane registration to a
range of criminal networks,'' Mr. Farah said.

Even before he was elected president in 1997, the vast countryside he
controlled, with its rich endowment of diamonds, rubber and timber, generated an
estimated $100 million in revenues a year. During his time as president,
diplomats sometimes referred to Liberia as ''Charles Taylor Inc.''

Undoubtedly a greedy man, Mr. Taylor was not, however, stingy with his friends,
Mr. Farah said. He was more than willing to share the wealth he looted with the
regional powerbrokers who sponsored him, like Libya and Burkina Faso.

But mostly he ruled through fear. Even now, in a jail cell here, he made West
Africans tremble. Liberia and Sierra Leone asked that he be transferred to the
Hague for trial.

Tamba Ngawucha, whose hands were amputated by rebels backed by Mr. Taylor during
the war in Sierra Leone, said he was glad the tyrant arrested. But when asked if
he should be tried here, Mr. Ngawucha's eyes widened.

''We don't want any Charles Taylor here,'' Mr. Ngawucha said, flailing the
dimpled stumps where his hands once were for emphasis. ''We are too afraid he
will hurt us again. We just want peace.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Next Stop, the Hague? -- Charles Taylor bridged two violent
chapters in Africa's recent past: the fall of nationalist Big Man politics, and
the rise of warlordism. (Photo by Issouf Sanogo/Agence France-Presse -- Getty
Images)(pg. 1)
 Child Soldier -- Eight-year-olds with automatic rifles were fighting for
Charles Taylor in Liberia in 1996. (Photo by Christophe Simon/Agence
France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CHRISTMAS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (78%);
WRITERS (77%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (76%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (76%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (69%); TERRORISM (69%); POLITICS (69%); ARRESTS
(68%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%); GENOCIDE (67%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Politics and Government; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Charles G Taylor

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (94%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (55%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (96%); AFRICA (95%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (93%);
COTE D'IVOIRE (92%); GUINEA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Monrovia (Liberia); Sierra Leone; Africa; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             809 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 8, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: Court Issues First Sentence

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 57 words


A Bosnian Serb was sentenced to more than 13 years in prison for crimes against
humanity during the 1992-95 war. It was the first verdict and sentence by
Bosnia's war crimes chamber after a year of operation. The chamber was
established in 2005 to lighten some of the workload from the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); SENTENCING (91%); VERDICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); GENOCIDE (86%) Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER
YUGOSLAVIA (57%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); SERBIA (93%);
EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             816 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Librarians Win As U.S. Relents On Secrecy Law

BYLINE: By ANAHAD O'CONNOR

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 969 words


After fighting ferociously for months, federal prosecutors relented yesterday
and agreed to allow a Connecticut library group to identify itself as the
recipient of a secret F.B.I. demand for records in a counterterrorism
investigation.

The decision ended a dispute over whether the broad provisions for secrecy in
the USA Patriot Act, the antiterror law, trumped the free speech rights of
library officials. The librarians had gone to federal court to gain permission
to identify themselves as the recipients of the secret subpoena, known as a
national security letter, ordering them to turn over patron records and e-mail
messages.

It was unclear what impact the government's decision would have on the
approximately 30,000 other such letters that are issued each year. Changes in
the Patriot Act now allow the government discretion over whether to enforce or
relax what had been a blanket secrecy requirement concerning the letters.

Lawyers for the group, the Library Connection of Windsor, Conn., argued that
their client was eager to participate freely in the debate last year over the
reauthorization of the Patriot Act. But federal prosecutors asserted that the
Patriot Act required that the group's identity remain secret and that the
government would suffer irreparable harm if any information about its
investigations became known.

The decision by the Justice Department to drop the case was applauded by the
American Civil Liberties Union, which brought the lawsuit on behalf of the
librarians. The civil liberties group said it would identify its clients at a
news conference once court proceedings in the case are completed in a few weeks.

''We are obviously very much looking forward to the day where they can explain
how it felt to be under threat of criminal prosecution for merely identifying
themselves,'' said Ann Beeson, the civil liberties union's associate legal
director. ''The clients are happy that the fight over this gag is nearing its
end.''

Kevin J. O'Connor, the United States attorney in Connecticut, said yesterday
that the government decided drop its case largely because the Patriot Act's
secrecy provisions concerning national security subpoenas were changed to give
the Federal Bureau of Investigation discretion in allowing recipients to
identify themselves.

The government was also under pressure to drop its fight after mistakenly
disclosing in court records the very information it was fighting to keep secret.
Government lawyers failed to redact all of their references to the Library
Connection in court filings, leading to the disclosure of the group's identity
in The New York Times and other newspapers.

''Certainly that was a factor,'' Mr. O'Connor said. But he said ''the legal
basis'' for the decision was the change in the Patriot Act giving the government
the authority to allow recipients of the subpoenas to identify themselves.

''For both practical and legal reasons, we have determined that continuing to
pursue this appeal does not make sense,'' he said.

Mr. O'Connor was in the process of appealing a decision by a federal district
judge last September to allow the library to identify itself, saying the
nondisclosure provision in the national security letter violated the library's
First Amendment rights.

That appeal is pending in the United States Court of Appeals for the Second
Circuit in New York.

Mr. O'Connor said that in light of the changes to the Patriot Act, the Justice
Department would re-examine whether the secrecy requirements that apply to
recipients of past national security letters should continue to be enforced.

He said the government would also make a determination when sending future
letters whether the recipient would be prohibited from saying he had received
one.

George Christian, the executive director of Library Connection, a cooperative of
26 libraries that share an automated system, has answered ''no comment'' when
asked about the case by reporters. He did not respond to several messages
seeking comment last night.

According to court records, the federal government's national security letter to
Library Connection last year asked Mr. Christian to ''personally'' hand over
records that might be of use in a counterterrorism investigation and that he not
disclose the matter ''to any person.''

But the group challenged the request in federal court, arguing through its
lawyers that it wanted the ban lifted immediately. The group said that time was
of the essence in lifting the ban because the Patriot Act was set to be
reauthorized by Dec. 31 and, as a party with an interest in the matter, it
wanted the right to speak out against the act.

United States District Judge Janet C. Hall agreed with the group, ruling last
year that the order of silence should be lifted. But the federal government
appealed the decision, ultimately preventing the group from weighing in on how
the Patriot Act should be rewritten before the Dec. 31 deadline.

Ms. Beeson said yesterday that she believed the government's decision to drop
the appeal was politically timed.

''The issue over whether the government was using its Patriot Act powers to
demand library records was one of the hot-button issues in this debate,'' she
said. ''And our clients could have been extremely powerful spokespeople in
opposing the reauthorization of the act, because they had actually received one
of those national security letters.''

Now that the debate in Congress is over, she said, ''There's no longer any
reason to keep our clients quiet.''

Mr. O'Connor dismissed that argument and said that the language in the Patriot
Act was such that the federal government had no choice but to insist that
Library Connection refrain from speaking out.

''I know it's being perceived as a flip-flop, but that is simply not the case,''
he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (91%); US PATRIOT ACT (91%); LIBRARIANS
(91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); LIBRARIES (90%); SUBPOENAS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
LEGISLATION (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (75%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%) Terrorism; Law and Legislation; Suits and
Litigation; Electronic Mail; Privacy; Surveillance of Citizens by Government;
Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (91%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
(55%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (54%) Library Connection (Orgn); Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI)

PERSON: Anahad O'Connor

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New Windsor (Conn); United States

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             817 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Documents Show Link Between AT&T and Agency in Eavesdropping Case

BYLINE: By JOHN MARKOFF and SCOTT SHANE; John Markoff reported from San
Francisco for this article, and Scott Shane from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 17

LENGTH: 1144 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, April 12


Mark Klein was a veteran AT&T technician in 2002 when he began to see what he
thought were suspicious connections between that telecommunications giant and
the National Security Agency.

But he kept quiet about it until news broke late last year that President Bush
had approved an N.S.A. program to eavesdrop without court warrants on Americans
suspected of ties to Al Qaeda.

Now Mr. Klein and a few company documents he saved have emerged as key elements
in a class-action lawsuit filed against AT&T on Jan. 31 by a civil liberties
group, the Electronic Frontier Foundation. The suit accuses the company of
helping the security agency invade its customers' privacy.

Mr. Klein's account and the documents provide new details about how the agency
works with the private sector in intercepting communications for intelligence
purposes.

The documents, some of which Mr. Klein had earlier provided to reporters,
describe a mysterious room at the AT&T Internet and telephone hub in San
Francisco where he worked.

The documents, which were examined by four independent telecommunications and
computer security experts at the request of The New York Times, describe
equipment capable of monitoring a large quantity of e-mail messages, Internet
phone calls, and other Internet traffic.

The equipment, which Mr. Klein said was installed by AT&T in 2003, was able to
select messages that could be identified by keywords, Internet or e-mail
addresses or country of origin and divert copies to another location for further
analysis.

The security agency began eavesdropping without warrants on international phone
calls and e-mail messages of people inside the United States suspected of
terrorist links soon after the Sept. 11 attacks.

After disclosing the program last December, The New York Times also reported
that the agency had gathered data from phone and e-mail traffic with the
cooperation of several major telecommunications companies.

The technical experts all said that the documents showed that AT&T had an
agreement with the federal government to systematically gather information
flowing on the Internet through the company's network.

The gathering of such information, known as data mining, involves the use of
sophisticated computer programs to detect patterns or glean useful intelligence
from masses of information.

''This took expert planning and hundreds of millions of dollars to build,'' said
Brian Reid, director of engineering at the Internet Systems Consortium in
Redwood City, Calif. ''This is the correct way to do high volume Internet
snooping.''

Another expert, who had designed large federal and commercial data networks,
said that the documents were consistent with administration assertions that the
N.S.A. monitored only foreign communications and communications between foreign
and United States locations, partly because of the location of the monitoring
sites. The network designer was granted anonymity because he believed that
commenting on the operation could affect his ability to work as a consultant.

The documents referred to a second location, in Atlanta, and suggested similar
rooms might exist at other AT&T switching sites.

Mr. Klein said other AT&T technicians had told him of such installations in San
Jose, Calif.; Los Angeles; San Diego; and Seattle.

The Internet hubs there carry a significant amount of international traffic. The
network designer and other experts said it would be a simple technical matter to
reprogram the equipment to intercept purely domestic Internet traffic.

The Department of Justice initially asked the Electronic Frontier Foundation not
to file Mr. Klein's documents in court, but a review determined that they were
not classified and the government dropped its objection. The foundation filed
the documents under seal because of concern about releasing proprietary
information.

On Monday, AT&T filed a motion with a federal judge in San Francisco asking the
court to order the foundation to return the documents because they were
proprietary.

The documents showed that the room in San Francisco, which Mr. Klein says was
off-limits to most employees but serviced by a company technician working with
the security agency, contained computerized equipment that could sift through
immense volumes of traffic as it passed through the cables of AT&T's WorldNet
Internet service.

According to the documents, e-mail messages and other data carried by 16 other
commercial Internet providers reached AT&T customers through the San Francisco
hub.

One piece of filtering equipment described in the documents was manufactured by
Narus, based in Mountain View, Calif.

The equipment could be programmed to identify and intercept voice or data
conversations between e-mail, telephone or Internet addresses, said Steve
Bannerman, the company's vice president for marketing.

Buyers included companies trying to comply with the Communications Assistance
for Law Enforcement Act of 1994, which requires that communications systems have
a wiretapping capability built in.

Typically, law enforcement interceptions are done on a case by case basis and
require warrants.

Mr. Bannerman said he could not comment further because Narus had not announced
any sales to the federal government. William P. Crowell, a former deputy
director of the N.S.A, is on the Narus board.

In an interview, Mr. Klein said he did not have a security clearance but had
witnessed interactions between colleagues who did have clearances and the highly
secretive N.S.A. ''It was strange and sort of suspicious,'' he said.

Mr. Klein said he learned of an agency connection to the mysterious room in 2002
when a company manager told him to expect a visit from an N.S.A. official who
wanted to speak with another senior company technician about ''a special job.''
That technician later installed the equipment in the room, he said.

Based on his observations and technical knowledge, Mr. Klein concluded that the
equipment permitted ''vacuum-cleaner surveillance'' of Internet traffic. Mr.
Klein, 60, who retired in 2004 after 23 years with AT&T and lives near Oakland,
Calif., said he decided to make his observations known because he believed the
government's monitoring was violating Americans' civil liberties.

An AT&T spokesman at the company's corporate headquarters in San Antonio
declined to comment on Mr. Klein's statements.

''AT&T does follow all laws with respect to assistance offered to government
agencies,'' said Walt Sharp, the AT&T spokesman. ''However, we are not in a
position to comment on matters of national security.''

Asked to comment, Don Weber, a spokesman for the N.S.A., said, ''It would be
irresponsible of us to discuss actual or alleged operational issues as it would
give those wishing to do harm to the United States the ability to adjust and
potentially inflict harm.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TELECOMMUNICATIONS (91%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (90%); INTERNET & WWW (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
INTERNET TELEPHONY (78%); ENGINEERING (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (77%); COMPUTER NETWORK SECURITY (77%); APPROVALS (77%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WIRETAPPING (76%); ARREST WARRANTS (76%); LITIGATION (76%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (74%); COMPUTER NETWORKS (72%); AL-QAEDA (71%); CLASS ACTIONS
(71%); DATA MINING (69%) Terrorism; Computers and the Internet; Electronic Mail;
Privacy; Suits and Litigation; Terrorism; Surveillance of Citizens by
Government; Telephones and Telecommunications; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods

COMPANY: AT&T INC (95%)

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (92%); ELECTRONIC FRONTIER FOUNDATION
(83%); AL-QAEDA (57%) At&t Inc; Electronic Frontier Foundation; National
Security Agency

TICKER: T (NYSE) (95%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS517210 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (EXCEPT SATELLITE)
(95%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (95%); NAICS511140
DIRECTORY & MAILING LIST PUBLISHERS (95%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (57%) John Markoff; Scott Shane; Mark (AT&T) Klein

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (55%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             818 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hearing For Muslim Barred by U.S.

BYLINE: By JULIA PRESTON

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 472 words


Government lawyers clarified some mysteries yesterday and deepened others in the
case of Tariq Ramadan, a Swiss Muslim scholar and leading European theologian of
Islam who has been barred by the Bush administration from traveling to the
United States since July 2004.

Papers the government presented at a hearing in federal court in New York
revealed that, contrary to officials' statements, a clause in the USA Patriot
Act that bans any foreigner who ''endorses or espouses terrorist activity'' was
not the reason Mr. Ramadan's United States visa was revoked. The government also
said it did not intend to bar Mr. Ramadan in the future based on that clause.

But the government also said that Mr. Ramadan's case had been and remained a
national security matter, and that statements he made in recent interviews with
American consular officials in Switzerland had raised new ''serious questions''
about whether he should be allowed to come to the United States.

Neither the government's documents nor its lawyer, David S. Jones, an assistant
United States attorney, explained why Mr. Ramadan was first banned or provided
any detail about the new concerns.

The hearing, before Judge Paul A. Crotty in Federal District Court in Manhattan,
came in a lawsuit by the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of three
academic and writers' organizations who have invited Mr. Ramadan to speak. The
groups claim their First Amendment rights have been violated because they cannot
meet with Mr. Ramadan.

Mr. Ramadan's difficulties began in 2004, after he had been hired by the
University of Notre Dame as a tenured professor. On July 28, 2004, the State
Department revoked his visa without official explanation. A spokesman for the
Department of Homeland Security told reporters then that the visa had been
pulled under the clause barring foreigners who support terrorism.

In December 2004, after Notre Dame unsuccessfully pressed the administration to
reconsider, Mr. Ramadan resigned his position at the university and took a
nontenured professor's position at Oxford University in England.

After receiving a raft of invitations to speak in the United States, Mr. Ramadan
applied again for a visa in September. He was interviewed twice by consular
officials in Bern in December. In a recent interview, Mr. Ramadan said he had
spoken openly about his opposition to the American occupation of Iraq.

The government would not predict when it would decide on the visa, leaving Judge
Crotty frustrated.

The plaintiff's ''First Amendment rights can't wait forever,'' he said.

One group in the suit, the PEN American Center, has invited Mr. Ramadan to speak
at a conference in New York starting April 25.

Judge Crotty did not rule, but indicated he was inclined to order the government
to at least make a decision about Mr. Ramadan.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Tariq Ramadan is a Swiss Muslim scholar, lecturer and
theologian. (Photo by Laurent Gillieron/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); LAWYERS (91%); RELIGION (91%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(89%); INTERVIEWS (88%); ACADEMIC TENURE (87%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(86%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); JUDGES
(78%); LEGISLATION (77%); IRAQ WAR (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (76%); US PATRIOT ACT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (72%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (69%); WRITERS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%);
RESIGNATIONS (61%) Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Law and Legislation; Travel
Restrictions; Visas; Freedom of Speech and Expression; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (82%); UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME
(59%) University of Notre Dame; American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Julia Preston; Tariq Ramadan

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); BERN, SWITZERLAND (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SWITZERLAND (92%); ENGLAND (79%); IRAQ (79%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (58%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             819 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Scant Gains Raise Chance of Imposed Solution in Kosovo

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 775 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo, April 9


Nearly two months after talks began in Vienna in February on this province's
future, both sides appear to be maneuvering to change the facts on the ground to
help decide whether Kosovo will become an independent state or remain a province
within Serbia.

The issue has been regarded as the most intractable in the Balkans since NATO
bombers forced Yugoslav security forces to withdraw from Kosovo in 1999, halting
what international war crimes prosecutors say was a brutal campaign to force
ethnic Albanians to flee.

Ethnic Albanians make up more than 90 percent of Kosovo's population, estimated
at more than two million, and want total independence. Serbs, in and out of
Kosovo, want a return to rule from Belgrade. With little progress in the initial
phase of talks, the possibility of an eventual solution imposed by the
international community -- in the Albanians' favor -- grows more likely.

The United Nations has been administering Kosovo since the Yugoslav withdrawal,
and as a result has been paying the salaries of many local officials. Meanwhile,
Serbia has continued to finance many services in Serbian enclaves across the
province, including paying those local officials a second salary. In early
April, Serbia ordered all Serbian government employees in Kosovo to resign from
any responsibilities with the United Nations or lose their Serbian paychecks.

Diplomats say that if Serbia were to find and arrest the leading war crimes
suspect and former commander of the Bosnian Serb Army, Ratko Mladic, its
negotiating hand might be strengthened.

At the same time, Kosovo's ethnic Albanian leadership is trying to make the case
that an independent Kosovo would protect and nurture its minorities. Kosovo's
new prime minister, Agim Ceku, took office in March, after his predecessor,
Bajram Kosumi, was forced to step down under pressure from international
officials who considered his efforts at reconciliation with Kosovo's Serbs
ineffectual.

Mr. Ceku made his inaugural address to Kosovo's Albanian-dominated assembly
partly in Serbian, to the astonishment of several members of Parliament.

''I want to be seen as the prime minister of all Kosovo's citizens, Serb and
Albanian,'' he said in an interview on April 7. His primary challenge, he said,
is to persuade Kosovo's Albanian leaders and government officials to make
changes that benefit the Serbs, rather than just pay lip service to foreign
demands for multiethnicity.

Mr. Ceku, a former Croatian general, was a wartime commander of the Kosovo
Liberation Army, the ethnic Albanian guerrilla group. Serbian government
officials refuse to meet with him, but Western officials say he is one of the
few ethnic Albanian leaders with the standing to convince local Kosovar
authorities that they need to provide services to Serbian communities. He helped
calm ethnic tensions at several critical junctures in the last six years,
including during widespread rioting in March 2004 when 19 people were killed.

The negotiating teams -- a Kosovar panel of ethnic Albanians, and a Serbian
group drawn from Belgrade and Kosovo -- are to return to the table in Vienna on
May 4, when they will debate proposals to give more powers to local authorities.
That measure would allow Kosovo Serbs a greater say in running their affairs.
The next week discussions should start on the protection of religious and
historic sites, in particular the Serbian Orthodox churches and monasteries that
dot Kosovo.

But the negotiating teams have shown little room for compromise even on these
issues, and diplomats expect that they will have to be dealt with in the final
phase of negotiations. And comments from representatives of the United States,
Britain, France, Russia, Italy and Germany, who together make up the Contact
Group overseeing Kosovo's negotiation process, indicate there is little
alternative to granting the majority population its wish for an independent
state.

A statement issued by the group after meetings with Serbian leaders in Belgrade
on April 6 called on Serbia to be ''realistic'' in its proposals and to find a
solution ''acceptable to the people of Kosovo.''

The leader of the United Nations mission here, Soren Jessen-Petersen, said he
expected Martti Ahtisaari, the Finnish statesman and veteran negotiator, to
conclude the initial negotiations by midsummer, enabling talks on sovereignty to
begin.

Whatever course is taken on political authority, officials here expect the
international community to retain significant governing powers. The European
Union is expected to take a major role, while NATO will continue to keep the
peace. It has 17,000 troops in Kosovo.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Some ethnic Albanians want harmony with Kosovo Serbs. French
troops patrol a Serbian part of Mitrovica. (Photo by Filip Horvat for The New
York Times)Map of Kosovo highlighting Pristina.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); PRIME MINISTERS (87%); CIVIL SERVICES (78%);
POPULATION SIZE (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (75%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); POPULATION ESTIMATES &
PROJECTIONS (70%); INTERVIEWS (69%); RIOTS (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%)
United Nations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Ratko Mladic

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (92%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); ALBANIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); KOSOVO (96%);
MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); CROATIA (79%); FRANCE (79%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (73%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia
and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             822 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

If Not Peace, Then Justice

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 110 words


The United States government, especially under the current Bush administration,
does not often publicly reverse itself on any issue. That the government first
resisted and then acquiesced to the international community's efforts to address
the horrors in Darfur through the I.C.C. may indicate that the Bush
administration has become more supportive of multilateral cooperation, at least
on international criminal-justice issues. Having taken this first step, the
administration, which has called the crimes in Darfur ''genocide,'' should now
work with the United Nations and the I.C.C. to help bring peace and justice to
Darfur.

Zachary D. Kaufman

Stanford, Calif.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); GENOCIDE (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); WAR CRIMES (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%); UNITED NATIONS (56%)
International Criminal Court

PERSON: Zachary D Kaufman; Luis Moreno-Ocampo; Elizabeth Rubin

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (78%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             823 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

If Not Peace, Then Justice

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 59 words


Despite all obstacles, the International Criminal Court brings hope of a check
to unrestrained political power in international affairs. Just as our own court
system acts to balance the political branches of our government, I hope the
I.C.C. will bring accountability to heads of state when politics cannot offer a
solution.

Heather Alexander

San Francisco

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
POLITICS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (86%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: heather alexander; Elizabeth Rubin; Luis Moreno-Ocampo

COUNTRY: SUDAN (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             824 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 16, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

If Not Peace, Then Justice

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 111 words


Elizabeth Rubin (April 2) is to be commended for her effort to shine light upon
the potential of the newly created International Criminal Court, specifically
regarding the trial and punishment of those responsible for the ongoing genocide
in Darfur. But the workings of an evolving international criminal-justice system
can never hope to ensure comprehensive deterrence of genocide, crimes against
humanity and war crimes without the parallel development of the political will
necessary to the creation of effective humanitarian intervention. This must
include armed force to scotch potential disasters before they balloon out of
control.

H.C. Yourow

Riverdale, N.Y.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Photographs by Lynsey Addario/Corbis)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%) International Criminal Court

PERSON: Howard Charles Yourow; Luis Moreno-Ocampo; Elizabeth Rubin

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             825 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 17, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Can a DNA Test Give You an Edge?

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Editorial Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 185 words



To the Editor:

African-Americans are not searching for genetic proof of their Native American
ancestry simply for financial gain.

Through the end of the Civil War, people in the Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek,
Seminole and Cherokee nations owned and exploited African-Americans as slaves,
and factions of the nations sided with the Confederacy during the war.

Under their 1866 treaties with the United States, the five nations agreed to
abolish slavery and extend citizenship and equal rights to emancipated slaves
and their descendants.

Since the late 19th century, African-Americans in these Indian nations have been
pressing for equal treatment. Tribal governments' continued discrimination
against the ex-slaves' descendants, including those who also have Indian
ancestors, reveals the political construction of racial categories and the
persistence of racism.

The efforts by African-Americans to secure their status as citizens in these
Indian nations are a matter of justice, not genetics.

Barbara Krauthamer
New York, April 12, 2006

The writer is an assistant professor of history at New York University.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AFRICAN AMERICANS (92%); NATIVE AMERICANS (91%); GENETIC SCREENING
(90%); INDIGENOUS PEOPLES LANDS & GOVERNMENT (90%); DNA (90%); RACE & RACISM
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); DNA TESTING (89%); HISTORY
(88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (88%); SLAVERY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (87%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%) Indians, American; Blacks; Dna
(Deoxyribonucleic Acid); Treaties

PERSON: Barbara Krauthamer

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%)

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             826 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Darfur Genocide: Why We Should Care

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 217 words



To the Editor:

In ''The Slaughter Spreads'' (column, April 16), Nicholas D. Kristof describes
the Sudan-backed genocidal incursion by the janjaweed militias into neighboring
Chad and cries out for America and France to intercede.

But why aren't Arab and other Muslim nations interceding against this crime
against humanity?

The Arab street exploded over Danish cartoons that were deemed blasphemous, but
now there is only silence.

Nor did the Arab street have anything to say about an Afghan citizen who was
sentenced to death for the crime of converting to Christianity.

If Arab allegiance extends no further than one's tribe, and if what happens to
nonmembers is a matter of indifference, why should American foreign policy
consider Arab sensitivities beyond the needs of our own realpolitik?

If it suits our interests to support kings and dictators who abridge the rights
of Arab peoples and stifle their economies, why should we care?

The nations of the West care because we recognize the humanity of all people and
the sanctity of all human life, and our concept of right and wrong extends
beyond our own parochial interests.

That is why Mr. Kristof appeals to us in his outrage, and not to the people who
ought to be the focus of his entreaties.

Neil Chesanow
Montvale, N.J., April 16, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (85%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (76%); LITIGATION (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (76%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SENTENCING (71%); RELIGION (71%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (54%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Neil Chesanow; Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             827 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 19, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section D; Column 1; Sports Desk; Sports Briefing; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 471 words



AUTO RACING

MANAGER OF GANASSI TEAM RESIGNS -- Andy Graves, the first employee hired by the
car owner Chip Ganassi when he started his Nascar operation, resigned as team
manager yesterday as part of a shake-up in the three-car operation. The move
came one day after Jeff Vandermoss was replaced as crew chief on the rookie
David Stremme's struggling team. Graves, who began his career as a crew member
on Jeff Gordon's Rainbow Warriors team and worked his way up to crew chief for
Terry Labonte, joined Ganassi's operation in 2000. The team was competitive in
its first two seasons, winning five races and putting Sterling Marlin on top of
the points standings for 25 weeks in 2002, but it has not won a race since 2002.


COLLEGE BASKETBALL

PENN STATE FINES WOMEN'S COACH -- Penn State fined Rene Portland, its women's
basketball coach, $10,000 after concluding she violated university policy in her
treatment of a player who was perceived to be a lesbian. The university said
that Portland would be dismissed for any future violation of the college's
nondiscrimination policy. She was also ordered to take professional development
''devoted to diversity and inclusiveness.''

Reading from a statement at a news conference, Portland said that she disagreed
with the ruling and that the conclusions were flawed. She said she would return
as Penn State coach next season but declined to answer any questions.

The player, Jennifer Harris, who is black, filed a lawsuit in federal court. She
said that Portland, who is white, also discriminated against her because of her
race. The university said it found no evidence that Portland discriminated
against Harris because of race.

''The fact that she still says that she did nothing wrong, and not owning up to
anything, is the problem,'' said Harris, who transferred to James Madison last
year. ''That bothers me.''

MORRISON TO MAKE ANNOUNCEMENT -- Forward Adam Morrison has scheduled a news
conference for today at Gonzaga amid reports that he will forgo his senior year
and declare for the N.B.A. draft. Morrison, a first-team all-American and the
nation's leading scorer, has not commented on the reports.

SAILING

U.S. BOAT FINISHES THIRD IN AROUND-THE-WORLD RACE -- Pirates of the Caribbean,
the lone United States entry, finished third in the fifth leg of the Volvo Ocean
Race, crossing the finish line at Baltimore Light yesterday almost 11 hours
behind the second-place Movistar at the lone United States stopover port in the
annual race around the world.

With the skipper Paul Cayard at the helm, Pirates took 15 days 19 hours 12
minutes 48 seconds to complete the 5,000-nautical-mile journey from Rio de
Janeiro. dropped to fourth from third in the overall standings, half a point
behind ABN AMRO Two. The Dutch entry ABN AMRO One is the overall leader by 22
points over Movistar.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AUTO RACING (91%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (90%); SPORTS & RECREATION
EVENTS (90%); FINES & PENALTIES (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY SPORTS (90%);
BASKETBALL (90%); RESIGNATIONS (90%); LITIGATION (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%);
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); NASCAR RACING (78%); SAILING (78%);
BOAT RACING (78%); COACHES & TRAINERS (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (70%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (67%) Automobile Racing; Suspensions, Dismissals and Resignations

PERSON: JEFF GORDON (58%) Andy Graves

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             840 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: Compiled by Lawrence Van Gelder

SECTION: Section E; PT1; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Arts,
Briefly; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 328 words



Comedie-Francaise Drops Handke Play

  The Comedie-Francaise, citing the prominent avant-garde Austrian playwright
Peter Handke's support for Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of
Yugoslavia who died in March, has canceled plans to produce one of his works,
Agence France-Presse reported yesterday. According to a spokesman, the decision
by Marcel Bozonnet, the administrator of the theater company, not to present
''Voyage to the Sonorous Land, or the Art of Asking,'' an inquiry into language,
was made after reading a report of Mr. Handke's presence at Mr. Milosevic's
funeral in Serbia. Mr. Milosevic died while being tried on charges of genocide
and war crimes. Mr. Handke, above, perhaps best known as a co-writer of the
screenplay for ''Wings of Desire,'' gave a eulogy at the funeral. Mr. Bozonnet
told Le Monde, ''The theater is a tribune; its effect goes far beyond the
audience at a single performance.'' He went on to say that even if ''Voyage to
the Sonorous Land,'' originally scheduled for January, was not a piece of
propaganda, a performance would lend the playwright visibility.

Snoop Dogg Arrested


The rapper Snoop Dogg was grounded temporarily in London yesterday when he and
five other men were arrested in a fracas at Heathrow Airport, Reuters reported.
But he was later released on police bail, his lawyer said, meaning that he could
be recalled for further questioning. Scotland Yard said that seven police
officers suffered minor injuries after being called to the airport to deal with
a disturbance among about 30 people in a British Airways business lounge.
''Members of the group became abusive,'' a police spokesman said, after they
were told to reclaim their luggage. Snoop Dogg, 34, whose real name is Calvin
Broadus, was among them. Peter Binning, his lawyer, said, ''He has not been
charged with any offense,'' and added that after being released on bail, Snoop
Dogg was to travel to South Africa to meet concert commitments there.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DRAMA LITERATURE (91%); THEATER & DRAMA (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WRITERS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); VISUAL & PERFORMING
ARTS (78%); THEATER COMPANIES (78%); HIP HOP CULTURE (76%); BAIL (74%); GENOCIDE
(74%); ARRESTS (74%); THEATER (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (72%); LAWYERS (71%);
AIRLINES (71%); POLICE FORCES (69%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); RAP MUSIC (66%)
Theater; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (58%); BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC (54%)

ORGANIZATION: Comedie Francaise

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (58%); NAICS481111 SCHEDULED
PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (54%); SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (54%)

PERSON: Peter Handke; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (68%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
MONTENEGRO (79%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%); AUSTRIA (73%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             841 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 29, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Washington: New Abu Ghraib Charges

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 90 words


The former head of the interrogation center in Abu Ghraib, Iraq, became the
highest ranking officer to be charged in connection with the abuse of detainees
at the prison in 2003. The officer, Lt. Col. Steven L. Jordan, was charged with
cruelty and maltreatment, dereliction of duty and other offenses. A military
hearing will be held when Colonel Jordan's defense counsel is ready, the
Military District of Washington said. Officers above Colonel Jordan's rank have
been reprimanded and relieved of command, but none have faced criminal charges.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (88%); WAR CRIMES
(87%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); LAWYERS (83%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (83%) Prisoners of War;
United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Steven L (Lt Col) Jordan

COUNTRY: IRAQ (91%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             848 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 2, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Appeals Judges Hear Subway Search Debate

BYLINE: By ANEMONA HARTOCOLLIS

SECTION: Section B; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 596 words


A federal appeals court panel challenged a civil liberties lawyer yesterday to
explain how searching people's bags at random in city subways was different from
searching passengers at airports, which has become standard practice to combat
terrorism.

The often sharp questioning came as the New York Civil Liberties Union appealed
a lower court ruling allowing random searches in the subways -- which began last
July -- to continue because of the ''real and substantial threat'' of a
terrorist attack in the subway system.

In oral arguments in a Manhattan courtroom, Christopher Dunn, a lawyer for the
civil liberties union, argued that the airport analogy was a false one because
air travel was much more heavily regulated than subway travel.

Airline passengers, he said, are required to provide their name and address and
to present a boarding pass and a ''government-issued ID.'' In contrast, anyone
can ride the subway for the price of a MetroCard.

The subway system, he said, was more like a sidewalk or other public space, like
Times Square. He argued that if subway searches continue to be upheld, it will
be a short legal and psychological step to randomly stop and search people in
other public places.

''There are terrorists detonating bombs all over the world,'' he said, and not
just in subway stations.

But a lawyer for the city, Scott Shorr, rejected what he called the ''slippery
slope'' argument. He said the city's decision to search subway passengers was
''fact specific,'' based on the premise that the subway system was particularly
attractive to terrorists.

It did not follow, he said, that the police would regard other public places the
same way.

At issue is whether the searches violate the Fourth Amendment prohibition
against unreasonable search and seizure. The civil liberties union sued the city
to stop the searches last August, arguing that the program violated a basic
legal tenet that people could not be searched unless they were, as individuals,
suspected of criminal activity.

Last December, Judge Richard M. Berman of Federal District Court in Manhattan
found that any invasion of privacy caused by the searches was so minimal that it
was justified by the deterrent effect on terrorists.

Although the city has refused to disclose how many subway checkpoints are set up
each day, Mr. Shorr said yesterday that the program has sent a message to
terrorists that ''New York City is a tough place to operate. The temperature
here is hot. Stay away. Don't even try it.''

But Mr. Dunn disagreed, saying that since no terrorists have been caught through
subway searches, there is no proof they have been a deterrent. He questioned
whether even a minimally invasive search was justified if it was not effective.
''It's undisputed that the checkpoints here are easy to evade,'' he said.

Judge Jon O. Newman, one of the three judges on the panel, countered that there
was no way of knowing whether terrorists had been deterred. ''You don't poll the
terrorists, do you?'' Judge Newman asked Mr. Dunn.

But Judge Charles L. Brieant, who often seemed skeptical of the search program,
seemed to take the opposite tack. ''The subway hasn't been bombed so it's
effective?'' he said, quizzically.

Arguing for the city, Mr. Shorr said the program was reasonable because it was
not forcible -- people could simply leave the subway station if they did not
want to be searched; because it was ''random and neutral'' and did not try to
profile likely terrorists, and because the police only looked for explosive
devices, not other types of contraband.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The city has refused to say how many checkpoints are set up each
day to conduct random searches of bags. (Photo by Robert Stolarik for The New
York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRPORTS (91%); APPEALS COURTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); URBAN RAIL SYSTEMS (89%); JUDGES
(89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(78%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VEHICLE SEARCH (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (77%); AIRLINES (77%); RAIL STATIONS & TERMINALS (73%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (67%)

ORGANIZATION: New York Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Anemona Hartocollis; Christopher Dunn

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             849 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Metro Briefing  New Jersey: Newark: Group Sues Over Security Records

BYLINE: By RONALD SMOTHERS (NYT); Compiled by John Sullivan

SECTION: Section B; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 93 words


The American Civil Liberties Union's New Jersey office filed a public records
lawsuit yesterday to discover how municipalities determined potential threats in
their applications for federal Homeland Security Department grants. The A.C.L.U.
wants to know whether anyone was singled out because of legitimate political
activity. The group also accuses former state Attorney General Peter C. Harvey
of misleading them in his response to an earlier lawsuit seeking the
information. He called the accusation ''as frivolous as it is silly.''   RONALD
SMOTHERS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (90%); LITIGATION (90%); BUDGETS (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (88%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (87%); TERRORISM (85%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (85%)
Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Finances; Budgets and Budgeting

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (84%) American Civil Liberties Union

PERSON: Ronald Smothers; Peter C Harvey

CITY: NEWARK, NJ, USA (90%)

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New Jersey; United States

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             850 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: Compiled by Ben Sisario

SECTION: Section E; PT1; Column 5; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend Desk; Arts,
Briefly; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 829 words



At Comedie-Francaise, Censorship or Taste?


  Last week the Comedie-Francaise in Paris canceled a play by Peter Handke,
right, the avant-garde Austrian playwright, because of a eulogy he delivered at
the funeral for Slobodan Milosevic, the former president of Yugoslavia who died
in March while on trial on charges of genocide and war crimes. A few days later
Elfriede Jelinek, the Austrian writer who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in
2004, spoke in Mr. Handke's defense, saying the theater company ''functions
today like a censor.'' Yesterday the fracas continued as the administrator of
the Comedie-Francaise defended his move, Mr. Handke spoke out, and his publisher
called the theater's decision ''an attack on the foundations of a free
society.'' At a news conference to announce the company's next season, Marcel
Bozonnet, the administrator, said the cancellation of the play, ''Voyage to the
Sonorous Land, or The Art of Asking,'' was not an act of censorship, Agence
France-Presse reported.

''It is one theater director who has decided not to put on a play,'' he said,
and added, ''I am not a muckraker, but I was scandalized by what Peter Handke
said.'' Mr. Handke said he was disgusted by the theater's decision and was not
an apologist for war crimes. ''The so-called world knows everything about
Slobodan Milosevic. The so-called world knows the truth,'' he told Le Monde.
''But I don't know the truth.'' He added: ''But I watch. I feel. I remember. I
question.''

Jurowski to Succeed Masur At London Philharmonic

  Vladimir Jurowski will succeed Kurt Masur as the principal conductor of the
London Philharmonic Orchestra the season after next, the orchestra announced.
Mr. Jurowski, 34, left, is currently its principal guest conductor, and is also
the music director at the Glyndebourne Festival Opera and principal guest
conductor with the Russian National Orchestra. ''I am thrilled and deeply
honored to be offered the position,'' Mr. Jurowski said in a statement,
''following in the footsteps of such illustrious names as Bernard Haitink, Sir
Georg Solti, Klaus Tennstedt and Kurt Masur.'' He will take over in the 2007-8
season, as the orchestra returns to the refurbished Royal Festival Hall.

Pop Notes

  Debbie Harry of Blondie, above right, has recorded a tribute in rap to Lil'
Kim, who has been in jail since September for lying to a grand jury. ''We're all
dying to hear your dirty rap again,'' Ms. Harry purrs in the song, ''Dirty N
Deep,'' which is available on Ms. Harry's MySpace page
(www.myspace.com/debbieharrymusic) and on Blondie's Web site (www.blondie.net).
Guns N' Roses will open for the Rolling Stones at two concerts in Germany this
summer, according to a note posted on the Rolling Stones' Web site yesterday.
The concerts will be July 10 in Nuremberg and July 12 in Leipzig. Guns N' Roses
last opened for the Stones in 1989.  Last year Rihanna had the song of the
summer with her dancehall-tinged ''Pon de Replay.'' Now she has another hit, if
a little premature for the summer. ''SOS'' rose 33 spots to No. 1 on the
Billboard Hot 100 chart, pushing last week's top song, Daniel Powter's
tearjerker ''Bad Day,'' to No. 2.

Gay Soap Opera Stirs Cuba

  The talk of Cuba is a soap opera that broaches the subject of homosexuality
for the first time on the country's television, the BBC reported. Besides
dealing with a taboo subject and becoming a dominant subject of conversation on
the job and in the streets, the telenovela ''The Dark Side of the Moon,'' about
the problems of a married bisexual man, has led to discrimination against its
leading actor, Rafael Lahera. ''People think I'm gay,'' he said, adding that he
has been turned down for acting jobs because prospective employers don't want to
hire a gay man. The men in the telenovela are not shown having physical contact,
but the dialogue has created a stir. Yaser (Mr. Lahera), the bisexual who learns
about himself through a sexual relationship with a male friend, is rejected by
his parents and is met by revulsion among his other friends. ''Everything I have
sacrificed myself for, I have lost,'' he says. His partner expresses
understanding. ''I also lost the affection of my parents and siblings,'' he
says. Reacting to ''The Dark Side of the Moon,'' an unidentified retired man
told the BBC, ''I cannot get used to it, because what we were taught when we
were young was morally different.''

Footnotes

  Kimberley Mathers, twice the wife of Eminem, right, has responded to his
latest petition for divorce with documents that seek financial support and
physical custody of their 10-year-old daughter, Hailie, The Detroit Free Press
reported. His court papers said they have a prenuptial agreement. Eminem, whose
real name is Marshall Mathers, married Kimberley in 1999, divorced her in 2001
and remarried her this year. He petitioned for divorce after 82 days.  ''The
Threepenny Opera'' at Studio 54 has extended a week. It will now close on June
25. Tickets: (212) 719-1300.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CENSORSHIP (91%); THEATER & DRAMA (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DRAMA
LITERATURE (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WRITERS
(90%); CLASSICAL MUSIC (89%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (88%); VISUAL & PERFORMING
ARTS (78%); THEATER (78%); THEATER COMPANIES (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); NOBEL PRIZES (76%); AWARDS & PRIZES (76%); ENTERTAINMENT
& ARTS AWARDS (72%); GRAND JURY (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (68%); MUSIC (62%);
INTERNET SOCIAL NETWORKING (60%) Theater; Censorship; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: MYSPACE INC (80%); AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (55%)

ORGANIZATION: Comedie Francaise

INDUSTRY: NAICS518210 DATA PROCESSING, HOSTING & RELATED SERVICES (80%); SIC7374
COMPUTER PROCESSING & DATA PREPARATION & PROCESSING SERVICES (80%); SIC7375
INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (55%)

PERSON: Marcel Bozonnet; Peter Handke; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (73%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA
(79%); FRANCE (73%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (52%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             852 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 7, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Heroes Of Darfur

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 763 words


For three grueling years, Eric Reeves has been fighting for his life, struggling
in a battle with leukemia that he may eventually lose. And in his spare time,
sometimes from his hospital bed, he has emerged as an improbable leader of a
citizens' army fighting to save hundreds of thousands of other lives in Darfur.

Pressure from that citizen army helped achieve a breakthrough on Friday: a
tentative peace deal between the Sudanese government and the biggest Darfur
rebel faction, brokered in part by U.S. officials. We should be skeptical that
this agreement will really end the bloodshed -- past cease-fires and promises
have not been honored -- but also rejoice in a glimpse of sun over the most
wretched place in the world today.

If the violence does diminish -- and that will take hard work in the months and
years ahead -- part of the credit will go to Mr. Reeves, a scholar of English
literature at Smith College who has used an arsenal of e-mail messages, phone
calls and Web pages to battle the Sudanese government and American indifference.
He was the first person I know to describe the horrors of Darfur as genocide,
and he financed his quixotic campaign by taking out a loan on his house.

Perhaps the most striking distinction in the history of genocide is not between
those who murder and those who don't, but between ''bystanders'' who avert their
eyes and ''upstanders'' who speak out. Professor Reeves has been a full-time
upstander on Sudan since 1999, back when the people being slaughtered there were
Christians in the south of the country. He noticed immediately in 2003 that
Sudan had diversified into butchering Muslims in Darfur, and his frantic blowing
of the whistle helped alert me and others. Visit his Web site, sudanreeves.org,
but be careful -- his fury may set your computer smoking.

I don't agree with every bit of Mr. Reeves's analysis, and sometimes I flinch at
his stridency. But there's no better excuse for stridency than genocide.

While Darfur has been incredibly depressing, the grass-roots movement in this
country to stop the genocide is immensely inspiring. (To join, go to Web sites
like www.savedarfur.org or www.genocideintervention.net.) The activist kids just
bowl me over: girls like Rachel Koretsky, a 13-year-old who organized a rally in
Philadelphia, distributed circulars and conducted a raffle to raise money for
Darfur as her bat mitzvah charity project. So far, Rachel has raised $14,000 for
Darfur.

Or kids like Tacey Smith, a 12-year-old in the farm town of Gaston, Ore. After
seeing the movie ''Hotel Rwanda,'' she formed a Sudan Club with a few friends
and has raised $400 for Darfur by selling eggs, washing cars and asking for
donations instead of birthday presents. Her best friend's Christmas present to
her was raising $50 for Darfur. Now Tacey is organizing a Darfur fair next
month.

President Bush has been more active lately on Darfur, and without the
administration's relentless pushing the peace deal on Friday would have been
impossible. But by and large, there has been a vacuum of leadership on Darfur
over the last few years, and ordinary Americans -- particularly young people --
have tried to fill it. I don't know whether to be sad or inspired that we can
turn for moral guidance to 12-year-olds.

Then there are the entertainers. Frankly, I think it's bizarre that we turn to
movie stars for guidance on international relations. But in this case, I bow low
to George Clooney, who had the guts to travel to the Darfur area last month, and
to Angelina Jolie, who has visited the Darfur area twice and is pushing for
action on Darfur more forcefully than almost anyone in Washington.

It gets weirder: ''CBS Evening News'' decided that genocide wasn't newsworthy,
devoting only two minutes to coverage of Darfur in all of 2005 -- but there's
excellent coverage on MTV's university network and in episodes of the TV show
''E.R.'' set in Darfur. And one of the best presentations of life in Darfur is
in an extraordinary video game developed with help from MTV and available free
at www.darfurisdying.com. In the game, you're a Darfuri, trying to survive as
Sudan's janjaweed militias hunt you down.

So that's how the response is unfolding to the first genocide of the 21st
century: a video game is one of the best guides to understanding the slaughter,
and our moral vacuum is filled by teenyboppers and movie stars.

Someday we will look back at this motley army of children and celebrities,
presided over by a man struggling with leukemia, and thank them for salvaging
our national honor.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (89%); FUNDRAISING (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (85%); LEUKEMIA
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); PEACE PROCESS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(73%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (68%); LITERATURE (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (63%);
RELIGION (63%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: GEORGE CLOONEY (60%); ANGELINA JOLIE (50%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W
(Pres) Bush; Eric (Prof) Reeves; George Clooney; Angelina Jolie

STATE: PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             858 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Montenegro's Future

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 246 words



To the Editor:

Re ''For Want of a War Criminal'' (editorial, May 5):

In the interest of clarity, readers should know that ''Serbia and Montenegro''
is a loose union of two separate republics.

On May 21, Montenegro, which I have represented in Washington for several years,
will hold a referendum on independence. The ruling coalition government and
other pro-independence forces hope that 55 percent or more of the voters will
support the referendum and thereby enable Montenegro to be recognized as a
sovereign, independent and internationally recognized country.

The union of ''Serbia and Montenegro'' is responsible only nominally for the
arrest and surrender of Ratko Mladic, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb
army, to the United Nations war crimes tribunal. In fact and practice, the onus
is on Serbia, and Serbia alone, and it is Serbia that must be held accountable.

Montenegro has neither the responsibility nor the power to bring General Mladic
to justice. Indeed, the tribunal's chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, has stated
that Montenegro is in compliance with the court.

Montenegro has distinguished itself over the course of several years by adopting
pro-American and pro-European Union policies on democratization and instituting
broad political and economic reforms.

Bob Dole
Washington, May 5, 2006

The writer, the former Senate majority leader and the 1996 Republican candidate
for president, is a special counsel with the law firm of Alston & Bird.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); REFERENDUMS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ELECTIONS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); VOTERS & VOTING
(76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); LAWYERS (75%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); WRITERS (73%); MAJOR US LAW FIRMS (73%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES
(70%); GENOCIDE (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); ECONOMIC POLICY (65%);
ECONOMIC NEWS (65%); EUROPEAN UNION (65%) Elections; Referendums; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: ALSTON & BIRD LLP (54%)

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS541110 OFFICES OF LAWYERS (54%); SIC8111 LEGAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: Bob Dole; Ratko (Gen) Mladic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (99%); MONTENEGRO (95%); UNITED STATES (94%);
SERBIA (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (66%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             859 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 13, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S., Citing State Secrets, Challenges Detainee Suit

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS; Souad Mekhennet contributed reporting from Germany for
this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: ALEXANDRIA, Va., May 12


Invoking the need to protect ''state secrets,'' the Justice Department urged a
federal judge on Friday to dismiss a lawsuit brought by a man whose experience
came to symbolize what some have called the unaccountability of a government
program that secretly ships terrorism suspects to overseas prisons.

Khaled el-Masri, a Kuwaiti-born German, had gone to Macedonia on vacation when
he was arrested there on Dec. 31, 2003, and flown to a prison in Afghanistan,
where he was held for five months before being released.

During his incarceration in Kabul, he has said, he was shackled, beaten and
injected with drugs. United States officials have said that his case was one of
mistaken identity; intelligence authorities may have confused him with an
operative of Al Qaeda with a similar name.

The officials said he was released in May 2004 on the direct orders of Secretary
of State Condoleezza Rice, then the national security adviser, after she learned
he had been mistakenly identified as a terrorism suspect.

Mr. Masri, who was not given any explanation or apology, filed a civil lawsuit
seeking damages from George R. Tenet, the director of the Central Intelligence
Agency at the time of his imprisonment, and the companies that were used to
transport him.

But R. Joseph Sher, an assistant United States attorney, told Judge T. S. Ellis
III on Friday that the C.I.A. was intervening in the case to invoke the
so-called state secrets privilege. As a result, Mr. Sher said, ''the case must
be dismissed at the outset.''

He said that Mr. Masri's claims ''cannot be confirmed or denied'' officially
without disclosing information that could harm national security and relations
with other countries.

He noted that Porter J. Goss, the C.I.A. director until last week, had submitted
both a public affidavit and a secret one detailing why the case would inevitably
disclose classified information if it went forward.

Ben Wizner, a staff lawyer at the American Civil Liberties Union who is
representing Mr. Masri, told Judge Ellis that he should not dismiss the lawsuit
on the basis of a ''legal fiction.'' Mr. Masri's ordeal was widely known and was
acknowledged by federal officials, albeit not in an on-the-record manner, Mr.
Wizner argued.

''The central fact that Khaled el-Masri was a victim of the rendition program,
and that the C.I.A. was responsible for it, is not a state secret, and, in fact,
is known to everyone in this courtroom and around the world,'' he said.

According to several press accounts, the United States government has engaged in
a program of rendition in which the C.I.A. has seized dozens of terrorism
suspects abroad and transferred them to friendly third countries where they may
be interrogated more freely.

Mr. Wizner argued that if the government were allowed to avoid Mr. Masri's
lawsuit by invoking the state secrets privilege, it could make the same claim if
it were confronted with a claim involving a clandestine murder of an American
citizen.

The state secrets privilege was generally recognized by the Supreme Court in a
1953 ruling and has mostly been used to prevent classified information from
being introduced in civil suits. Only recently has the government sought to use
it to stop trials altogether. Judge Ellis said he would issue a ruling shortly.

Mr. Sher, the prosecutor, said that despite several published reports in which
anonymous federal officials were quoted extensively acknowledging Mr. Masri's
ordeal, the United States government has never provided a formal confirmation.

Mr. Wizner said that no one from the government has offered even a private
apology to Mr. Masri. Mr. Masri, who was denied entry into the United States
this year, is expected to travel here next month.

In a recent interview with The New York Times at his lawyer's office in Ulm,
Germany, Mr. Masri said that he was insisting on a public apology from the
American government before he would consider withdrawing the lawsuit. Asked
about financial compensation, he did not respond directly but said, ''The most
important thing for me is to know why this happened and to get a public
apology.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM
(90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); JUDGES (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); CORRECTIONS
(78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); DAMAGES (73%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%); ARRESTS (72%) Terrorism; Suits and
Litigation; Mistaken Identity; Terrorism

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (57%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (90%); AL-QAEDA (56%); CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (73%) Justice Department

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (57%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (57%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (73%) Khaled El- Masri; Neil A Lewis

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); MACEDONIA, THE FORMER YUGOSLAV
REPUBLIC OF (93%)

REGION: Germany; Macedonia (Former Yugoslav Republic); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             871 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 19, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Federal Judge Dismisses Lawsuit By Man Held in Terror Program

BYLINE: By NEIL A. LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 510 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 18


A federal judge on Thursday dismissed a lawsuit brought by a man who says he was
an innocent victim of the United States government's program transferring
terrorism suspects secretly to other countries for detention and interrogation.

Judge T. S. Ellis 3d ruled in favor of the Bush administration, which had argued
that the ''state secrets'' privilege provided an absolute bar to the lawsuit
against a former C.I.A. director and transportation companies. Judge Ellis said
the suit's going forward, even if the government denied the contentions, would
risk an exposure of state secrets.

The case involves Khaled el-Masri, a Kuwaiti-born German, who was arrested on
Dec. 31, 2003, in Macedonia, where he had gone for a vacation. From there, he
was flown to a prison in Kabul, Afghanistan, where he was held for five months
before being released. During his incarceration in Kabul, he has said, he was
shackled, beaten and injected with drugs.

United States officials have acknowledged the principal elements of Mr. Masri's
account, saying intelligence authorities may have confused him with an operative
of Al Qaeda with a similar name. The officials also said he was released in May
2004 on the direct orders of Condoleezza Rice, then the national security
adviser, after she learned he had been mistakenly identified as a terrorism
suspect.

Judge Ellis said Mr. Masri's claim involved the clandestine program of
transferring terrorism suspects known as ''extraordinary rendition'' and ''the
means and methods the foreign intelligence service of this and other countries
used to carry out the program.''

Citing an affidavit by Porter J. Goss, who will leave as director of the Central
Intelligence Agency next week, Judge Ellis added, ''Any admission or denial of
these allegations by defendants in this case would reveal the means and methods
employed pursuant to this clandestine program and such a revelation would
present a grave risk of injury to national security.''

Mr. Masri's lawyers from the American Civil Liberties Union had argued that
there were no state secrets to protect as his story has been widely reported and
officials had even acknowledged the existence of the rendition program. But
Judge Ellis said there was an important distinction between ''a general
admission the program exists and the admission or denial of the specific facts
at issue in this case.''

Ben Wizner, an A.C.L.U. lawyer for Mr. Masri, said, ''The idea that the court
must close its eyes and ears to common sense and protect the nation from
disclosure of information that the whole world knows is absurd.'' He said an
appeal would be considered.

Judge Ellis said Mr. Masri's interests in having his rights vindicated in court
must yield to ''the national interest in preserving state secrets.'' But he
noted that if Mr. Masri's account were true, he ''suffered injuries as a result
of our country's mistake and deserves a remedy.'' He said only the legislative
or executive branches could provide such a remedy, presumably in the form of
compensation or apology.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (94%); LITIGATION (93%); JUDGES (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
ESPIONAGE (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); LAWYERS
(78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); VERDICTS (78%);
PRISONS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (72%); AL-QAEDA (72%);
ARRESTS (72%) Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Decisions and Verdicts; Terrorism

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (57%)

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%)

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (57%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (57%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (57%)

PERSON: CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%) T S 3d (Judge) Ellis; Khaled El- Masri; George W
(Pres) Bush; Neil A Lewis

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%)

LOAD-DATE: May 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             874 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 21, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

''The Terror''

SECTION: Section 7; Column 3; Book Review Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 278 words


To the Editor:

I must register a protest concerning David Gilmour's review of my book, ''The
Terror'' (May 7). In it he casually assimilates my analysis of the September
Massacres of 1792 to an entirely unnecessary, and insulting, association with
belittling the Holocaust, and a diminution of the impact of 9/11 on America. If
I may be allowed to quote myself in my own defense, these are some of my
concluding remarks on the topic in the book:

After discussing the fact that many potential victims were spared by the
''tribunals'' set up in the prisons, I note that: ''In all the horror of
massacre, it is perhaps here that we find the greatest apparent
incomprehensibility. . . . It is easy to come to terms with the idea of
irrational carnage carried out by sadistic mobs: such acts fit neatly into the
concept of a radically 'different,' almost subhuman crowd, safely distanced from
the self-image of the observer. Far less comfortable is the realization that
bloody murder could be committed by upright citizens in the name of their
country's freedom.''

I am trying here, as an unprejudiced observer will note, to retrieve the
Massacres for understanding. I should have thought it clear that I do not use
words like ''horror'' and ''bloody murder'' about acts of which I approve, or
the significance of which I wish to diminish in any way. I had hoped it was
possible to write about these events at a distance of more than 200 years
without being forced to defend myself against charges of unreasonable sympathy.
It would appear, however, that the French Revolution remains capable of stirring
ire, even across the wide Atlantic.

David Andress

Portsmouth, England

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LITERATURE (73%);
HOLOCAUST (72%) Books and Literature

PERSON: David Andress; David Gilmour

CITY: PORTSMOUTH, ENGLAND (50%)

COUNTRY: ENGLAND (50%)

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             878 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turks and Armenians

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 170 words



To the Editor:

It is our position that unlike the Holocaust, the Armenian allegations of
genocide have never been historically or legally substantiated (editorial, May
16). Genocide is a crime defined by international law. As such, it must be
proved beyond a reasonable doubt, not by, as you suggest, a ''preponderance of
serious scholarship.''

To expect Turkey to acquiesce to such a severe accusation with regard to its own
history while its allies keep regurgitating this sensitive issue for political
ends is simply not rational, nor is it fair.

History should be left to historians, and with that understanding, Turkey
proposed the establishment of a joint historical commission with Armenia to
research this issue last year, to no avail so far. If the evidence is really
there, why not accept this offer?

It is only through such a common dialogue that a process of reconciliation can
begin. This may ultimately lead to closure for Armenians and Turks alike.

Nabi Sensoy
Ambassador of Turkey
Washington, May 17, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HISTORY (90%); EVIDENCE (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HOLOCAUST (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) Armenians; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Sabi (Amb) Sensoy

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (94%)

REGION: Turkey

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             880 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 43 words


An article on Thursday about testimony at Saddam Hussein's trial by Tariq Aziz,
once Mr. Hussein's principal international envoy, referred incorrectly to the
Chaldean Christian religion Mr. Aziz practices. It is a rite of the Roman
Catholic church, not a sect.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (83%)
Correction Stories; United States Armament and Defense; United States
International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%) Tariq Aziz; Saddam Hussein; Abid Hamid Mahmud

COUNTRY: IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Dujail (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             882 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 27, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Don't Become Them

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 768 words


When I started in newspapers, I shied away from police brutality stories,
letting other reporters cover them.

I knew there were cops who had no right to be cops. But I also knew, because my
dad was a detective, the sort of blistering pressure men and women in uniform
were under as they made snap life-and-death decisions. I'd cringed at the 60's
refrain that the military and the police were ''pigs.''

After my dad killed a robber in self-defense -- the man had tried to shoot him
point-blank in the face, but that chamber of the gun was empty -- he told a
police psychologist that he could not swallow or eat because he felt as though
he had fish bones in his throat.

So I felt sickened to hear about the marines who allegedly snapped in Haditha,
Iraq, and wantonly killed two dozen civilians -- including two families full of
women and children, among them a 3-year-old girl. Nine-year-old Eman Waleed told
Time that she'd watched the marines go in to execute her father as he read the
Koran, and then shoot her grandfather and grandmother, still in their
nightclothes. Other members of her family, including her mother, were shot dead;
she said that she and her younger brother had been wounded but survived because
they were shielded by adults who died.

It's a My Lai acid flashback. The force that sacked Saddam to stop him from
killing innocents is now accused of killing innocents. Under pressure from the
president to restore law, but making little progress, marines from Camp
Pendleton, many deployed in Iraq for the third time, reportedly resorted to
lawlessness themselves.

The investigation indicates that members of the Third Battalion, First Marines,
lost it after one of their men was killed by a roadside bomb, going on a
vengeful killing spree over about five hours, shooting five men who had been
riding in a taxi and mowing down the residents of two nearby houses.

They blew off the Geneva Conventions, following the lead of the president's
lawyer.

It was inevitable. Marines are trained to take the hill and destroy the enemy.
It is not their forte to be policemen while battling a ghostly foe, suicide
bombers, ever more ingenious explosive devices, insurgents embedded among
civilians, and rifle blasts fired from behind closed doors and minarets. They
don't know who the enemy is. Is it a pregnant woman? A child? An Iraqi
policeman? They don't know how to win, or what a win would entail.

Gen. Michael Hagee, the Marine Corps commandant, who has flown to Iraq to talk
to his troops about ''core values'' in the wake of Haditha and a second incident
being investigated, noted that the effect of this combat ''can be numbing.''

A new A&E documentary chronicles the searing story of the marines of Lima
Company, 184 Ohio reservists who won 59 Purple Hearts, 23 posthumously. Sgt. Guy
Zierk recounts kicking in a door after an insurgent attack. Enraged over the
death of his pals, he says he nearly killed two women and a 16-year-old boy. ''I
am so close, so close to shooting, but I don't.'' he says. ''It would make me no
better than the people we're trying to fight.''

Retired Maj. Gen. John Batiste, one of those who called for Donald Rumsfeld's
resignation, told Chris Matthews that blame for Haditha and Abu Ghraib lay with
''the incredible strain bad decisions and bad judgment is putting on our
incredible military.''

While it was nice to hear President Bush admit he had made mistakes, he was
talking mostly about mistakes of tone. Saying he wanted Osama bin Laden ''dead
or alive'' would have been O.K. if he had acted on it, rather than letting Osama
go at Tora Bora and diverting the Army to Iraq.

At his news conference with a tired-looking Tony Blair, Mr. Bush seemed
chastened by Iraq, at least. But he continued to have the same hallucination
about how to get out: turning things over to the Iraqi security forces after
achieving total victory over insurgents and terrorists.

Stories in The Times this week show that Iraqi security forces are so
infiltrated by Shiite militias, Sunni militias, death squads and officers with
ties to insurgents that the idea of entrusting anything to them is ludicrous.

By ignoring predictions of an insurgency and refusing to do homework before
charging into Iraq on trumped-up pretenses, W. left our troops undermanned,
inadequately armored and psychologically unprepared.

It was maddening to see the prime minister of Britain -- of all places --
express surprise at the difficulty of imposing a democracy on a country that has
had a complex and ferocious tribal culture since the Gardens of Babylon were
still hanging.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); BOMBINGS
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (76%); LAW OF WAR (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (76%); HOMICIDE
(76%); FAMILY (76%); TERRORISM (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); SELF DEFENSE (70%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (67%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (64%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (62%); GENOCIDE (60%);
QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (51%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) United States Armament
and Defense; United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Maureen Dowd; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             884 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Window Opens On City Tactics Among Muslims

BYLINE: By WILLIAM K. RASHBAUM; Al Baker contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front; Pg. 29

LENGTH: 1672 words


On an unusually warm day in December 2003, three dozen men filed into the
Islamic Society of Bay Ridge on Fifth Avenue in Brooklyn, kneeling on the
moss-green carpet for the midday prayer.

To anyone watching, the service itself would have appeared unremarkable. But
several police reports, when taken together with testimony at the recent federal
trial of a Pakistani immigrant in the plot to bomb the Herald Square subway
station, revealed something extraordinary about the gathering: Among the
kneeling men were at least three who were working undercover for the New York
Police Department.

The intense level of scrutiny in the mosque that day was, by all accounts,
exceptional. But it nonetheless suggests the depth of the Police Intelligence
Division's clandestine programs, developed since the Sept. 11 attack, to
infiltrate mosques and Muslim gatherings around New York City to try to prevent
another terrorist strike.

Several of the police reports, which were disclosed during the trial, and the
testimony of several witnesses also revealed much about the department's latest
tactics and about these programs that were kept secret for several years.

The defendant's lawyers and civil liberties groups have criticized the use of
informers and an undercover officer at the mosque, contending that the
department violated limits placed on the division by a court's 1985 consent
decree, which restricted its investigation of political and religious groups.
But the department rejects that claim, saying that the procedures were lawful
and necessary.

After Sept. 11, intelligence and law enforcement agencies were criticized for
failing to recruit Muslims who could move within circles where they could gather
information to learn about terrorist threats. ''Now it's five years after 9/11,
and nothing has blown up, and people are saying 'Why do they have the gall to
attempt to penetrate?' '' said one law enforcement official who has worked
closely with the department and the F.B.I.

The outcome of the terror trial in United States District Court in Brooklyn, the
first since 2001 that was based on an investigation by the Police Intelligence
Division rather than by the F.B.I., has been hailed by police officials as a
victory and a vindication. The defendant, Shahawar Matin Siraj, 24, was
convicted on Wednesday of conspiring to bomb the subway station. Some of his
conversations leading up to the plot occurred in the Islamic bookstore where Mr.
Siraj had worked, next door to the Bay Ridge mosque.

Two witnesses at the trial -- a 50-year-old paid police informer code-named
Woody and a young undercover officer -- were in the mosque that December day. At
that point, the bombing plot had not been hatched, and Mr. Siraj was not yet
under investigation. The two men, and another informer who was in the mosque
that day for unknown reasons and who played no role in the trial, were not even
aware of one another at the time.

Details of the clandestine programs have emerged in large measure through their
accounts, in their testimony in recent weeks and to a lesser degree in the
police reports.

One section of the Intelligence Division, the Terrorist Interdiction Unit, is
devoted to using informers as ''listening posts'' in Muslim communities. The
detectives in the unit cultivate the informers, place them in various
communities, oversee their work and collect and compile the information that
they generate.

Despite the Police Department's broad publicity campaign to highlight its
counterterrorism efforts since 9/11, the unit has seldom if ever been mentioned
in news accounts.

The police would provide no details about the unit and how it operates beyond
what came out at the trial. So its scope, the guidelines under which it works
and its successes and failures, beyond Mr. Siraj's conviction, could not be
immediately determined.

But one paid informer alone -- the man who testified against Mr. Siraj --
attended 575 prayer services at the Bay Ridge mosque and another mosque in
Staten Island over 13 months. He provided information almost daily, sometimes
twice a day, to his detective handler, who prepared more than 350 reports based
largely on the visits to the mosques and the Islamic bookstore.

Documents referring to numbered cases -- M3 and M24 -- that appear to be focused
on mosques suggest that there could be as many as two dozen such investigations,
but it could not be learned whether any others bore fruit.

Another section, the Special Services Unit, oversaw the undercover Muslim
detective, who moved into the Bay Ridge neighborhood in late 2002 to investigate
terrorism and other crimes.

The detective was one of the three men at the mosque on that day in December
2003. He testified that while he occasionally saw one of the other men, the paid
informer, Osama Eldawoody, in the area around the mosque and the bookstore and
greeted him with a handshake, he never knew that Mr. Eldawoody was working for
the police until after Mr. Siraj's arrest on Aug. 27, 2004.

The detective came from Bangladesh when he was 7 and was recruited from the
Police Academy to work undercover among Muslims when he was 23. He testified
under a pseudonym because prosecutors said he was still involved in other
undercover investigations.

He testified that his instructions were ''to be a member of the community,''
hang out with the young men there, and collect information. He was to focus, he
said, partly on the Bay Ridge mosque, which he visited on his first day. He
spent time in the bookstore, and with Mr. Siraj, after the young man made
violent statements about suicide bombings in Israel and praised Osama bin Laden.

At the trial, Mr. Siraj's lawyers said he was entrapped by Mr. Eldawoody,
contending that the older man cajoled and inflamed him to lure him into the
conspiracy. They argued that because the informer told Mr. Siraj that he was
part of a terrorist group that did not exist and that it would supply the
explosives, no real danger existed.

Moreover, they suggested throughout the trial that the department's tactics were
improper -- in particular, sending informers and the undercover detective into
mosques to cast a wide net in search of radical Islamists. But jurors later said
they examined and rejected the entrapment defense. Mr. Siraj now faces a maximum
sentence of life in prison.

On Friday, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said that the verdict
''validates so much of what we've done to protect the city.''

Some critics, however, suggest that by sending people undercover into mosques
and neighborhoods with a broad mandate to collect intelligence, the police are
sweeping up information that has nothing to do with terrorism or crime.

''The Police Department's indiscriminate monitoring of Muslim communities
assures that most of its surveillance will be of lawful activity,'' said
Christopher Dunn, the associate legal director of the New York Civil Liberties
Union. ''This contrasts sharply with traditional law enforcement work, which
typically and rightly focuses on unlawful activity. You don't see the F.B.I.
hanging out in churches and bookstores in Little Italy hoping to run into the
mob, yet that's what the N.Y.P.D. is doing in Muslim communities in its search
for Muslim extremists.''

Mr. Siraj's lawyer, Martin R. Stolar, who had said that he intended to put the
department's tactics on trial, made much the same argument in defense of his
client -- an argument, police officials noted, that carried little weight with
the jury. He contended that the department had ''presumptively violated'' the
1985 consent decree governing the Intelligence Division. Mr. Stolar was one of
the lawyers who brought the civil lawsuit in 1971 that led to the decree
limiting the department's investigations of political and religious activity.
But the judge at this trial, Nina Gershon, waved off his arguments.

Paul J. Browne, the chief spokesman for the department, said it employed the
informer and the undercover officer to follow up on leads of suspected terrorist
activities, as it does when it deploys undercover narcotics detectives. ''In
both instances, placement is dictated by the reported activity, not the
community, ethnicity or religion,'' he said.

One counterterrorism official said the Intelligence Division operated under the
close supervision of two lawyers, both former federal prosecutors, who work to
ensure that everything is done according to the most stringent interpretations
of the decree. During much of the Herald Square investigation, one was assigned
to the city's Law Department and the other to the police deputy commissioner for
legal matters, S. Andrew Schaffer, who himself attended much of the trial.

Mr. Stolar also sought to highlight what he suggested were lapses in police
procedure.

For example, during Mr. Stolar's cross-examination of Mr. Eldawoody's handler,
Detective Stephen Andrews of the Terrorist Interdiction Unit, he asked about
problems the informer had using a small digital device to secretly record
conversations with Mr. Siraj. Detective Andrews acknowledged that he was unable
to instruct Mr. Eldawoody because he himself had not been trained to use the
device. As a result, for six weeks, the informer was unable to make any
recordings.

Mr. Browne dismissed the criticism as uninformed, saying the department had
thwarted a bombing plot. ''That's the reality, despite the defense's
understandable but ultimately failed attempt to identify purported weaknesses in
police methods and procedures,'' he said.

During the trial, a senior police official acknowledged that mosques had at one
time been a focus of the department's efforts, but he said that investigators
had significantly broadened their scope since then.

''We don't investigate mosques, we investigate people,'' the official said.
''We're not in every mosque -- that's not where we need to be. That's Intel 101.
We're in the graduate program. The bad guys aren't hanging around the water
cooler after Friday prayers anymore.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TESTIMONY (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (89%); TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
WITNESSES (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); POLICE FORCES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); BOMBINGS
(76%); CONSPIRACY (76%); LAWYERS (73%); CONSENT DECREES & ORDERS (65%)
Terrorism; Islam; Informers; Mosques

PERSON: William K Rashbaum; Al Baker; Shahawar Matin Siraj

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             885 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Justice Dept. Seeks to Block Suits on Spying

BYLINE: By The Associated Press

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 188 words


The Bush administration has asked federal judges in New York and Michigan to
dismiss two lawsuits filed over the National Security Agency's domestic
eavesdropping program, saying litigating them would jeopardize state secrets.

In papers filed late Friday, Justice Department lawyers said it would be
impossible to defend the program's legality without disclosing classified
information that could aid terrorists.

John D. Negroponte, the director of national intelligence, invoked the state
secrets privilege, writing that disclosure would cause ''exceptionally grave
damage'' to national security. The administration laid out some of its
supporting arguments in classified memos, filed under seal.

The motion, widely anticipated, involves two cases challenging an N.S.A. program
that allows investigators to eavesdrop on Americans who communicate by phone or
e-mail with people outside the country suspected of terrorist ties.

In New York, the Center for Constitutional Rights has asked a judge to stop the
program, calling it an abuse of presidential power. The American Civil Liberties
Union filed a similar suit in Detroit.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); JUDGES
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); WIRETAPPING (88%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (67%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Privacy; Suits and Litigation; Electronic
Mail; Telephones and Telecommunications

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (92%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(83%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (83%) Center for Constitutional Rights;
American Civil Liberties Union; National Security Agency

PERSON: JOHN NEGROPONTE (58%) George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); MICHIGAN, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             887 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 28, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Slow War On Human Trafficking

BYLINE: By JULIA C. MEAD

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1839 words


FOR at least three years, the United States Department of Justice has identified
Long Island as one of 21 regions across the country where trafficking in human
beings -- abducting or coercing people, usually illegal immigrants, into a kind
of indentured servitude -- is rampant. In 2005, the Justice Department awarded
more than $1 million in grant money to combat the problem in Nassau and Suffolk.

But more than a year after the Long Island Anti-Human Trafficking Task Force was
organized, not one trafficker operating on Long Island has been arrested, and
just one victim, a Chinese woman forced to work in a Wantagh brothel that was
disguised as a massage parlor, has been freed from traffickers.

Officials of the task force offered a variety of explanations for what they
acknowledged were scant results on Long Island. Trafficking investigations are
complex and time-consuming, they said, and they depend on testimony from victims
who are terrified of the police. That the New York criminal code includes no
statute specifically aimed at human trafficking further complicates their
efforts, they said.

So the task force has spent the last year training police officers, sharing
intelligence and fine-tuning mechanisms for amassing evidence, the officials
said. ''I do expect that there are big cases coming soon,'' said Demetri M.
Jones, an assistant United States attorney and the chairwoman of the task force.

In addition to the Justice Department, the task force includes three other
federal agencies -- the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Immigration and
Customs Enforcement division of the Homeland Security Department, and the Labor
Department -- and the State Department of Labor, the Nassau and Suffolk police
departments and district attorney's offices, and two private organizations, Safe
Horizon and Catholic Charities.

Each of the county police departments got $360,000 from the federal government
last year for training. Catholic Charities, which helps victims gain legal
residency and find jobs and housing, and Safe Horizon, a New York City-based
national organization that trains nongovernmental agencies to assist victims,
received grants totaling about $400,000 for their efforts.

Just how big is the problem they are trying to combat? Florrie Burke, a senior
director at Safe Horizon, responded to the question with a deep sigh. ''We don't
know for sure,'' she said. ''And that's true anywhere.''

Ms. Burke said Long Island is a natural location for human trafficking because
of its proximity to New York City, where a number of cases have been documented,
and to the airports and seaports where immigrants arrive.

''But it's all supposition, and that's what all locations are, until you find a
real case,'' she said.

Safe Horizon did find one case on Long Island, but it was in 2001, long before
the task force was formed. The group's tip to federal authorities eventually led
to the arrests in June 2004 of Mariluz Zavala and her husband, Jose Ibanez, who
pleaded guilty last winter to federal crimes including conspiring to obtain
forced labor. They are now in prison.

Prosecutors said the couple charged would-be immigrants up to $13,000 each to be
smuggled into the country from Peru using phony tourist visas, and then forced
them to live in cramped, squalid conditions in houses in Coram, Brentwood and
Amityville and to hand over their passports and almost all their earnings, under
the threat of being turned in to immigration officials.

Despite the precedent of that case and the rapid growth of Long Island's
Hispanic immigrant population, county police officials said their efforts are
concentrated mostly on massage-parlor brothels run by and employing Asians.
Nassau has raided two dozen in the past year; Suffolk has raided eight.

''We're cleaning up the community,'' said Capt. Steven Skrynecki, the Nassau
police representative on the task force. ''And while we're doing that, a
secondary motive is to look for and rescue the victim.''

As a result of those raids, police officials contend that a majority of human
trafficking victims on Long Island are young Asian women who are forced to live
in unhealthy conditions, work long hours and surrender all or most of their
earnings.

By their very nature, they cannot be counted with any accuracy. But private
groups estimate that as many as several hundred people may be laboring under
duress or in captivity in Nassau and Suffolk, working in restaurants and
sweatshops, on farms, as house cleaners or as prostitutes.

The one victim that the task force has rescued is a 37-year-old woman from
China, where the government generally penalizes couples who have more than one
child. The woman, who asked to be identified only by her nickname, Tracy,
because she fears retaliation, said she fled China in May 2000, leaving behind
her husband and son, after government officials forced her to abort her second
child and undergo sterilization.

''I had nowhere else to go,'' she said in an interview, aided by a police
interpreter.

Her family agreed to pay $12,000 to a so-called snakehead -- a human smuggler --
to bring her to America, she said, and she spent the next five years working 12
hours a day, 6 days a week in Chinese restaurants for $250 a week to repay the
money.

After developing back and leg problems from the long work hours, she said, she
met a woman in Flushing who came from her native region in China who told her
about easier, better-paid work in massage parlors.

When she reported for work at a Wantagh parlor in February 2005, she said, the
owner ordered her to complete every massage with a sexual act. When Tracy
refused, she said, the woman threatened to have her deported. ''I was afraid,''
Tracy said. ''I couldn't go back to China.''

She was arrested for prostitution twice in the next four months, but was
initially too afraid of deportation to tell the police her story. It took her
lawyer, a detective and a prosecutor -- all promising her that she could remain
in the country -- to change her mind.

''My lawyer said this is a free country, and if I tell the truth, nothing bad
will happen,'' she said. ''She said, 'We're all here to help you.' ''

Tracy now has temporary legal residency and is trying to help the police
persuade other women to come forward. ''I tell them: 'Go to the authorities.
They will help you. I don't want you to go through what I went through, living a
life of being scared every day. And I want you to stand up for yourself,' '' she
said through the interpreter.

Still, the owner of the Wantagh massage parlor has never been arrested. ''That
was early on in our quest to infiltrate these groups,'' Captain Skrynecki said
of the case. ''We've now gotten better at moving up the chain. But
unfortunately, even though we have moved up a few notches, we haven't had a
cooperating victim since then.''

He and other task force members said that in addition to language and cultural
barriers, a mutual lack of trust stood in the way, as it does for many of the 32
federally sponsored task forces around the country.

Victims tend to be suspicious of all officials because of the rampant official
corruption and brutality in the countries many of them come from, Ms. Burke of
Safe Horizon said. And those victims who may nonetheless be willing to talk
often meet with skepticism from American police.

''The victim frequently starts out as a defendant, so their credibility is an
issue,'' Captain Skrynecki said. ''They could just be making it up to get out
from under a criminal charge. So we need to go a little deeper and corroborate
the story.''

Ms. Burke said that putting a woman in handcuffs and interrogating her at a
police station was hardly conducive to assuaging her fears of captors or of the
police.

''We're not quite where we need to be on Long Island yet,'' she said.

Moreover, she said, more attention needs to be paid to non-Asian victims. But
growing hostility toward immigrants, particularly in Suffolk and particularly
aimed at Hispanics, is a major stumbling block.

''You have government officials trying to please constituents, and law
enforcement being leaned on also,'' Ms. Burke said. ''And then it's hard for
people to wrap their heads around the idea that these people they think are
criminals and want to deport are actually victims of a horrible trafficking
scheme.''

She said that although massage-parlor brothels full of young Asian women stand
out as obvious targets on Long Island, she has encouraged the police to also
investigate restaurants, farms, sweatshops, topless bars and domestic-service
agencies.

''Targeting one population is not a great idea,'' she said. ''We have to look at
the work situations, rather than an ethnic population.''

Task force members said they were starting to look at topless bars with dancers
from Eastern Europe and Russia, but those generally involve organized crime, a
far tougher nut to crack than a small-time trafficking ring.

''It's a difficult proposition all around,'' said Detective Lt. Edward Reilly,
commander of the Suffolk police force's kidnap investigations team.

That is why his department is also trying to gather evidence against the
exploiters of Hispanic day laborers, and is recruiting social service
organizations to help find victims.

Lieutenant Reilly said Suffolk officers thought they were close to winning over
another Chinese woman who was beaten by her employer at a Centereach massage
parlor, but she balked at cooperating with them and is now in federal custody,
awaiting deportation. ''The important thing is that she's no longer in the hands
of traffickers,'' he said.

Most successful human trafficking cases, including the one involving Ms. Zavala
and Mr. Ibanez, are prosecuted under a set of federal laws that were renewed
last year, providing stiff penalties for traffickers.

New York State lacks any similar legal tool, so state prosecutions must use laws
against kidnapping, robbery, coercion or unlawful imprisonment, all of which
require a victim's cooperation and testimony, said Joseph Brogan, a Nassau
prosecutor on the task force.

Mr. Brogan said his office has been confronted with several cases in the past
few months where none of the existing statutes fit the offense and no victim
would testify.

''We're dealing with interstate and international boundaries in some cases,'' he
said. ''The real challenge is gathering sufficient evidence.''

The State Legislature is considering a bill that would directly address human
trafficking. Jane Manning, a lawyer and program officer with Equality Now, a
human rights advocacy group that favors the bill, said it would define sex and
labor trafficking as crimes under state law, set stiff penalties and provide for
restitution and assistance for victims.

''Until you have something on the books that names this as a crime,'' Ms.
Manning said, ''honestly, some police officers who come in contact with a
trafficking situation may not even recognize that's what they're looking at.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN TRAFFICKING (93%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(91%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%);
LABOR TRAFFICKING (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
POLICE FORCES (88%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (86%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(86%); LAWYERS (78%); BORDER CONTROL (78%); REFUGEES (77%); GRANTS & GIFTS
(77%); CHARITIES (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); WOMEN (75%); PROSTITUTION
(74%); CRIMINAL LAW (72%); ARRESTS (70%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (69%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (66%); RELIGION (63%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (63%) Labor;
Immigration and Refugees; Illegal Immigrants; Prostitution

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (93%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(54%)

PERSON: Julia C Mead

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Long Island (NY)

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             889 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Found in Translation: King's 'Dream' Plays in Beijing

BYLINE: By HOWARD W. FRENCH

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Beijing Journal; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: BEIJING


For months now, Caitrin McKiernan has gone from place to place in this city to
ask Chinese people an unlikely question: What does the life of the Rev. Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. mean to you?

The questions don't end there, either. In most of these gatherings, she gets far
more specific, burrowing into the history and tactics of the American civil
rights movement.

''Who knows what the Birmingham bus boycott was?'' she asked a group of
university students in May. ''What is a sit-in?'' ''What's the meaning of
separate but equal?'' At the level of language, every one of those terms
presents a formidable challenge, even to a woman who has spent years in this
country and speaks fluent Chinese.

But language is not the half of it. How can one translate Dr. King's actions
into the realm of ideas for an audience in a city notably hostile to protests?
How does one convey to Chinese people the meaning of the life of a man who died
fighting for civil rights nearly 40 years ago?

The answers may have begun to emerge since the production at the National
Theater on Sunday of the play ''Passages of Martin Luther King Jr.'' by the
noted King scholar Clayborne Carson and based on the life and words of the
American civil rights leader. Ms. McKiernan, who studied under Mr. Carson at
Stanford and is the play's producer, was prepared for any kind of audience
response, from deeply moved to completely stumped and anything in between.

But the responses of Ms. McKiernan's discussion groups and the reactions of her
cast suggested that Dr. King's message would hit home here, that Chinese viewers
would see parallels to divisions in their own society. That prospect poses a
thorny problem for the government, which, on one hand, has endorsed Dr. King's
work as a blow for the class struggle and against American imperialism, but on
the other insists that racism and discrimination are purely problems of decadent
Western societies.

The government, however, gave the production its imprimatur, and permission to
play at the prestigious theater.

A distinct possibility was that the universality of Dr. King's message and the
causes he fought for would completely escape Chinese viewers.

But the reactions Ms. McKiernan has heard so far suggest otherwise, and give her
reason to hope that her dream of building a bridge between the societies by
talking about peaceful struggle and universal rights has some hold on reality.

During one recent discussion at a Beijing university, after viewing excerpts
from the PBS documentary ''Eyes on the Prize,'' students explored their feelings
on the discrimination they discern between migrant workers and more affluent
residents of the country's eastern cities. Others spoke about the inferior
position of women in their society or of being treated badly during visits
overseas or the predominance of American power in the world.

''The significance of Martin Luther King for me is that we have to have the
courage to stand up for our legitimate benefits,'' said a Chinese student who
identified himself as Paul.

Ms. McKiernan has avoided lecturing her audiences, or even steering the
discussions. ''I don't want this to be about what happened in the U.S. in some
past year,'' she said. ''I want this to be about what discrimination is, and how
it relates to your life.''

The talks have usually begun with an explanation of how Dr. King's life came to
mean so much to her, a Californian who first came to this city at 16 as an
exchange student and had to struggle to overcome cultural differences with her
host family. Then she studied Dr. King in college, and she has had him on her
mind ever since.

''I realized that King was this great bridge between the United States and
China,'' Ms. McKiernan said. ''China is an emerging superpower, and the U.S. is
the superpower, and King is someone that both sides believe in, and can be the
starting point for a dialogue about how we wish the world to be.''

Then she sighed, and said, ''But it's the hardest thing I've ever done.''

The challenges have come from every direction: persuading the National Theater
to accept the production, recruiting professional actors and production people,
enlisting gospel singers from the United States to join the performance, doing
endless and mostly fruitless fund-raising.

The American Embassy provided a modest grant, as did Stanford. But the
multinational corporations that abound in Beijing proved skittish, even more
than the government.

Beijing's unexpected stake in Dr. King's legacy is twofold, involving both past
and present. The country's slogan for the 2008 summer Olympics is ''One World,
One Dream,'' which officials say brings to mind Dr. King's ''I Have a Dream''
speech. That address has been famous here since Mao Zedong hailed it in August
1963, and it is still taught in schools.

In such matters context is everything, and for Mao, Dr. King was first and
foremost a symbol of ''the sharpening of class struggle and national struggle
within the United States.'' In a speech some people here still recall today, Mao
called on ''enlightened persons of all colors in the world, white, black, yellow
and brown, to unite to oppose the racial discrimination practiced by U.S.
imperialism.''

Then, as now, Chinese people were ill prepared to discuss their country's
internal problems, a subject about which they were not educated, nor did Mao
link Dr. King's struggles to the problems of China's ethnic minorities or, for
that matter, human rights or inequality.

But to listen to the participants in Ms. McKiernan's discussion groups, or the
actors in her production, that is what many people confronted with Dr. King's
words today readily do.

''In today's China it would seem that discriminatory actions are not so
common,'' said Yan Shikui, the narrator for the production. ''But in fact, it is
very serious. We talk about the difference between urban and rural citizens, the
gap between the strong and the weak. All of these are very deep notions buried
in people's minds, which cannot be solved by using violence. They have to be
addressed through ideas.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 2, 2006



CORRECTION: The Beijing Journal article on Tuesday, about an American scholar's
production of the play ''Passages of Martin Luther King Jr.'' in Beijing,
included a quotation that misidentified the Alabama city where a bus boycott
helped to usher in the civil rights movement. It was Montgomery, not Birmingham.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Ms. McKiernan, too, has a dream.
 Caitrin McKiernan, far right, prepped Wang Hui, who played Martin Luther King
in a play at the National Theater in Beijing, before a rehearsal. (Photographs
by Chang W. Lee/The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CIVIL RIGHTS (92%); THEATER (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (76%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (73%);
THEATER & DRAMA (71%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (69%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (66%); RACE & RACISM (66%); MIGRANT WORKERS (50%) Theater  ; Blacks;
Civil Rights

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (93%) Caitrin McKiernan; Martin Luther Jr
(1929-68) King; Clayborne Carson; Howard W French; Mao Zedong (1893-1976)

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (93%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (95%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: China; Beijing (China); China

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             890 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 30, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Should Intervene

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 137 words



To the Editor:

I was taken aback by the May 17 letter from Shashi Tharoor, United Nations under
secretary general for communications and public information (''U.N. Is Best Hope
to End Darfur Killing'').

When he says that the parties to the conflict in Darfur, especially the
government of Sudan, need to be persuaded ''to agree to a robust United Nations
peacekeeping force'' to take over from the African Union troops, he contradicts
a basic mandate of the United Nations.

If the United Nations cannot interfere in the affairs of a country to stem the
tide of genocide without the permission of the offending country, it is
worthless as a peacekeeping force.

How many more victims of this genocide need to be murdered before the United
Nations acts responsibly?

(Rabbi) H. David Teitelbaum
Redwood City, Calif., May 17, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AFRICAN UNION (57%) United Nations

PERSON: H David (Rabbi) Teitelbaum; Shashi Tharoor

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (69%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (69%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); AFRICA (79%); UNITED STATES (69%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             891 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Magistrate Rules That Government Must Reveal Monitoring

BYLINE: By NINA BERNSTEIN

SECTION: Section B; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 515 words


A federal magistrate in Brooklyn yesterday insisted that government lawyers
defending former Attorney General John Ashcroft and other top officials in a
lawsuit brought by former immigrant detainees cannot dodge the plaintiffs'
persistent and unwelcome question: Are members of the United States trial team
and likely witnesses -- including Mr. Ashcroft and Robert S. Mueller III, the
F.B.I. director -- aware of any secret government monitoring of communications
between the plaintiffs and their lawyers?

''Plaintiffs' effort to learn whether their conversations with their attorneys
were monitored by the government is not a mere fishing expedition based on
unfounded speculation,'' the magistrate, Judge Steven M. Gold, wrote in an
11-page decision. The order rejected the government's request that he reconsider
a similar order that he made orally on March 7.

He noted that ''the government's electronic surveillance of individuals
suspected of links to terrorism has received widespread publicity and has even
been acknowledged by the president of the United States.'' And he cited findings
by the inspector general that on more than 40 occasions, staff members of the
Metropolitan Detention Center secretly video-recorded visits between lawyers and
Muslim immigrants swept up and detained there after the Sept. 11 attacks, and
later deported after being cleared of links to terrorism.

Stephen E. Handler, a Justice Department lawyer, had argued that confirming or
denying such monitoring in one case and not another could ''tend to reveal
classified information.''

But Judge Gold rejected the government's main argument for silence. ''Any claim
that sensitive secrets would be revealed by the government's disclosure of
whether conversations between plaintiffs and their counsel in this case were
monitored is hard to fathom,'' he wrote.

A possible compromise negotiated over weeks of correspondence fell apart
recently. The compromise would have allowed government witnesses to sign a
statement affirming that one of four possibilities was true -- including, at
minimum, that if they were aware of electronic surveillance of lawyer-client
conversations, they had not used the substance to influence the conduct of the
case. But the government wanted to reserve the right to interview witnesses who
refused to sign.

''As plaintiffs' counsel have repeatedly argued,'' Judge Gold said, ''they seek
discovery here not only to help prepare their case, but also to ensure that the
defendants have not gained a tactical advantage by invading the attorney-client
privilege, and to attain some degree of comfort that they and their clients may
communicate without the chilling specter of government eavesdropping.''

Bill Goodman, the legal director of the Center for Constitutional Rights, which
brought the first class-action lawsuit by the detainees, said of the decision,
''This is the first crack in the granite wall that this government has been
interposing on the N.S.A. wiretapping program.''

A spokesman for the Justice Department could not be reached for comment last
night.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (95%); MAGISTRATES (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); TERRORISM (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (90%); SURVEILLANCE
TECHNOLOGY (89%); PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%);
ESPIONAGE (89%); WITNESSES (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CLASS ACTIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ATTORNEY CLIENT PRIVILEGE (78%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION
CENTERS (78%); JUDGES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); WIRETAPPING (73%); REFUGEES (73%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); RELIGION (71%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%) Terrorism; Suits and Litigation; Decisions and Verdicts;
Immigration and Refugees; Islam; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and
Methods; Attorney-Client Privilege

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%)

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (90%) Nina Bernstein; Steven M (Judge) Gold; John
Ashcroft

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: New York City

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             894 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Armenian Genocide

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 18

LENGTH: 179 words



To the Editor:

Although Turkey's ambassador to the United States asserts arguably that
''history should be left to historians'' (letter, May 24), the Turkish
government makes history a precondition for normalizing interstate relations
with Armenia.

Turkey needs first of all to reconcile with its own history, and it must remove
all taboos and stop persecution of Turkish authors who dare address the 1915
events.

Turkish scholars will then be able to examine the rich historical record,
including the 1919 Turkish military tribunal that passed a death sentence
against the perpetrators of the Armenian genocide.

It is the Turkish state's denialist policy that forces a growing number of
nations to intervene and express their position on the subject.

Historical and legal experts, including Raphael Lemkin, who invented the term
genocide, and the International Association of Genocide Scholars, have long
recognized that the 1915 events fit the definition of the 1948 Genocide
Convention in all its aspects.

Tatoul Markarian
Ambassador of Armenia
Washington, May 27, 2006

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); HISTORY (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HUMANITIES &
SOCIAL SCIENCE (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (74%); WRITERS (73%); PUBLIC
POLICY (72%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (68%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (67%); MILITARY COURTS
(54%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Freedom of Speech and Expression

PERSON: Tatoul Markarian

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%); ARMENIA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             898 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Teaching Remedial Decency

BYLINE: By MAUREEN DOWD

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 755 words


Before the war, America railed against the Iraqi leader for slaughtering
innocent Iraqis. Now the Iraqi leader is railing against America for
slaughtering innocent Iraqis.

Iraq is blustering about sending away American troops to make life better for
Iraqis, after American troops were sent in to make life better for Iraqis.

With fury swirling over the Haditha massacre and the shooting on Wednesday of
two women, one of whom might have been pregnant and on the way to a hospital,
Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki laced into the American military, accusing
it of regular attacks on civilians that were ''completely unacceptable'' and
pledging his own inquiry on Haditha.

''They crush them with their vehicles and kill them just on suspicion,'' he
said, adding that some in the military ''do not respect the Iraqi people,'' and
that assaults on unarmed civilians will help determine how long American troops
are welcome in Iraq.

Bold talk from a tenuous government dependent on U.S. forces to prop it up
during a sectarian bloodfest.

It's a bitter irony. And not even a terribly illuminating irony, since Saddam
truly had a regime of butchery and the American military is not in the business
of atrocity, even if an undeniable atrocity was committed and even if the war
has become something of an atrocity.

''It's one of those things where we have become the enemy,'' John Murtha said
ruefully on CNN.

American troops are under spectacular emotional pressure. They go out every day,
not knowing Arabic, not understanding the culture, not knowing who the
insurgents are, not knowing when they can go home or which of their buddies will
be blown up before their eyes by an unseen enemy.

The troops were not trained for a counterinsurgency, because Bush hawks ignored
the intelligence reports that predicted an insurgency and civil war. These kids
were turned into sitting ducks because the neocon con to sell the war needed a
gauzy prediction of Iraqi gratitude and a quick exit.

It is admirable that the Marine commanders want to morally sensitize the troops
while they are in such a hostile environment, but it also seems a bit absurd,
sending them to summer school in ''core values.''

There's no way to teach someone not to shoot an unarmed woman or child. If
somebody doesn't already know why they shouldn't murder a baby, it's not clear
that a refresher course will help.

The problem with brushing up on core values is that if you don't know them by a
certain point you can't learn them. You can't teach remedial decency, any more
than you can teach remedial ethics to White House officials who vindictively
leak information about critics of the war after vowing not to leak.

As Norman Schwarzkopf said, in a quote that is part of the military's slide show
on core warrior values: ''The truth of the matter is that you always know the
right thing to do. The hard part is doing it.''

From Reverend Dimmesdale to Bill Bennett to President Bush, people who
righteously preach values and aspire to be moral exemplars often get bitten in
the end.

The world is now looking askance at American values, even though W. ran on a
platform of restoring values to the Oval Office and was propelled to victory by
''values voters.''

Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld engineered the invasion of Iraq in part to
revive what they saw as lost American values. They wanted to stiffen the
squishiness about using force left over from Vietnam and the moral ambivalence
left over from the do-what-feels-good 60's.

In their worry about a spineless America, they made America all spine -- overly
vertebrate. They started thinking with their spine.

They wanted everyone to be afraid of us, and now nobody's afraid. Certainly not
the nutty president of Iran, whom the administration is forced to kowtow to, now
that the American military is not a fearsome force in potentia, but a depleted,
demoralized and disparaged force trapped in Iraq trying to police a civil war.

The invasion that was supposed to help terrorism has made it worse. The invasion
that was supposed to make America more feared and beloved has made us more
hated. The invasion that was supposed to banish post-Vietnam syndrome has
revived it.

The virtuecrats of the right thought they would demonstrate American virtue to
the world as they imposed American democracy. But now, with murder charges
expected against some marines, and a cover-up investigation under way, the
values president is running a war that requires a refresher course on values. A
bitter irony.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ARMED FORCES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); SHOOTINGS (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); GENOCIDE
(74%); ETHICS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (62%);
MURDER (56%) United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (73%); JOHN P MURTHA (56%) Maureen
Dowd; Saddam Hussein; Nuri Kamal Al- (Prime Min) Maliki

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             899 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk; Corrections; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 71 words


A front-page article and headline yesterday about the criticism of the American
military by Prime Minister Nuri Kamal al-Maliki of Iraq in the wake of outrage
over reports that American marines killed 24 civilians in the town of Haditha
last year included an incorrect translation of his comments. Mr. Maliki said
that violence by American troops against civilians had become a ''regular
occurrence'' -- not a ''daily phenomenon.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Correction

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT
(86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); PRIME
MINISTERS (85%); ARMED FORCES (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (83%) Correction Stories;
United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (94%) Nuri Kamal Al- (Prime Min) Maliki

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             900 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

National Briefing  Mid-Atlantic: Maryland: Abu Ghraib Sentence

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 57 words


A military jury at Fort Meade sentenced an Army dog handler to 90 days of hard
labor but no prison time for using his animal to threaten a prisoner at Abu
Ghraib in Iraq. The handler, Sgt. Santos A. Cardona, was reduced in rank to
specialist, with a corresponding pay cut of nearly $480 a month, and ordered to
forfeit $600 a month for one year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JAIL SENTENCING (90%); DOGS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); ARMIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(88%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); WAR CRIMES (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAGES & SALARIES (85%) Fort Meade
(Md)  ; Sentences (Criminal); Dogs; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Santos (Sgt) Cardona

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (90%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (93%); UNITED STATES (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             902 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 3, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: Broadcaster Sentenced In Genocide

BYLINE: REUTERS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 109 words


A United Nations court trying the masterminds of Rwanda's 1994 genocide handed a
six-year sentence to a former director of a radio station whose broadcasts were
said to have encouraged the killings. The director, Joseph Serugendo, was on the
board of Radio Television Libre des Mille Collines and the national committee of
the Interahamwe militia. The International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda said he
had pleaded guilty to ''direct and public incitement to commit genocide and
persecution as a crime against humanity.'' The station encouraged the killing of
''cockroaches,'' as Tutsis were called during the genocide, in which 800,000
people were killed.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (92%); SENTENCING (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (88%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (87%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (87%) Radio; Sentences (Criminal); War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (57%) United Nations

PERSON: Joseph Serugendo

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Rwanda

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             905 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Hard Look at Haditha

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 738 words


The apparent cold-blooded killing last November of 24 Iraqi civilians by United
States marines at Haditha will be hard to dispose of with another Washington
damage control operation. The Iraqi government has made clear that it will not
sit still for one, and neither should the American people. This affair cannot
simply be dismissed as the spontaneous cruelty of a few bad men.

This is the nightmare that everyone worried about when the Iraq invasion took
place. Critics of the war predicted that American troops would become an
occupying force, unable to distinguish between innocent civilians and murderous
insurgents, propelled down the same path that led the British to disaster in
Northern Ireland and American troops to grief in Vietnam. The Bush
administration understood the dangers too, but dismissed them out of its deep,
unwarranted confidence that friendly Iraqis would quickly be able to take
control of their own government and impose order on their own people.

Now that we have reached the one place we most wanted to avoid, it will not do
to focus blame narrowly on the Marine unit suspected of carrying out these
killings and ignore the administration officials, from President Bush on down,
who made the chances of this sort of disaster so much greater by deliberately
blurring the rules governing the conduct of American soldiers in the field. The
inquiry also needs to critically examine the behavior of top commanders
responsible for ensuring lawful and professional conduct and of midlevel
officers who apparently covered up the Haditha incident for months until
journalists' inquiries forced a more honest review.

So far, nothing in President Bush's repeated statements on the issue offers any
real assurance that the White House and the Pentagon will not once again try to
protect the most senior military and political ranks from proper accountability.
This is the pattern that this administration has repeatedly followed in the past
-- in the torture scandal at Abu Ghraib, in the beating deaths of prisoners at
Bagram air base in Afghanistan and in the serial abuses of justice and
constitutional principle at Guantanamo Bay.

These damage control operations have done a great job of shielding the
reputations of top military commanders and high-ranking Pentagon officials. But
it has been at the expense of things that are far more precious: America's
international reputation and the honor of the United States military. The
overwhelming majority of American troops in Iraq are dedicated military
professionals, doing their best to behave correctly under extraordinarily
difficult circumstances. Their good name requires a serious inquiry, not another
deflection of blame to the lowest-ranking troops on the scene.

What we now know about the events last Nov. 19 in Haditha, a town in Anbar
Province in western Iraq, the violent epicenter of the Sunni Arab insurgency,
essentially boils down to this: A roadside bomb struck a Humvee traveling in the
vicinity, killing one of the marines on board, and sometime later 24 Iraqi
civilians were gunned down, many in their homes. The victims included women,
children and grandparents. We know this not through the original Marine Corps
report on the incident, which claimed that all the Iraqi deaths resulted from
the bomb and an exchange of gunfire with insurgents. We know it because
reporters from Time magazine began challenging inconsistencies between
eyewitness Iraqi accounts and the Marine Corps version.

We still do not know how high up the Marine Corps chain of command the original
cover-up went, nor do we know how the president, the defense secretary and other
top officials responded when they first learned of the false reporting.
Americans need to be told what steps are now being taken, besides remedial
ethics training, to make sure that such crimes against civilians and such
deliberate falsifications of the record do not recur.

It should not surprise anyone that this war -- launched on the basis of false
intelligence analysis, managed by a Pentagon exempted from normal standards of
command responsibility and still far from achieving minimally acceptable results
-- is increasingly unpopular with the American people. At the very least, the
public is now entitled to straight answers on what went wrong at Haditha and
who, besides those at the bottom of the chain of command, will be required to
take responsibility for it.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HOMICIDE (78%);
DISMISSALS (76%); RANKINGS (76%); TORTURE (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%);
GENOCIDE (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); IRAQ WAR (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%) Editorials; United States Armament and Defense; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED STATES MARINE CORPS (84%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (69%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); AFGHANISTAN
(79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); VIET NAM (79%); CUBA (67%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             906 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Invoking Secrets Privilege Becomes a More Popular Legal Tactic by U.S.

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 32

LENGTH: 1315 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


Facing a wave of litigation challenging its eavesdropping at home and its
handling of terror suspects abroad, the Bush administration is increasingly
turning to a legal tactic that swiftly torpedoes most lawsuits: the state
secrets privilege.

In recent weeks alone, officials have used the privilege to win the dismissal of
a lawsuit filed by a German man who was abducted and held in Afghanistan for
five months and to ask the courts to throw out three legal challenges to the
National Security Agency's domestic surveillance program.

But civil liberties groups and some scholars say the privilege claim, in which
the government says any discussion of a lawsuit's accusations would endanger
national security, has short-circuited judicial scrutiny and public debate of
some central controversies of the post-9/11 era.

The privilege has been asserted by the Justice Department more frequently under
President Bush than under any of his predecessors -- in 19 cases, the same
number as during the entire eight-year presidency of Ronald Reagan, the previous
record holder, according to a count by William G. Weaver, a political scientist
at the University of Texas at El Paso.

While the privilege, defined by a 1953 Supreme Court ruling, was once used to
shield sensitive documents or witnesses from disclosure, it is now often used to
try to snuff out lawsuits at their inception, Mr. Weaver and other legal
specialists say.

''This is a very powerful weapon for the executive branch,'' said Mr. Weaver,
who has a law degree and is a co-author of one of the few scholarly articles
examining the privilege. ''Once it's asserted, in almost every instance it stops
the case cold.''

Robert M. Chesney, a law professor at Wake Forest University who is studying the
recent use of the privilege, said the administration's legal strategy ''raises
profound legal and policy questions that will be the subject of intense debate
for the foreseeable future.''

Some members of Congress also have doubts about the way the privilege has been
used. A bill approved by the House Government Reform Committee would limit its
use in blocking whistle-blowers' lawsuits.

''If the very people you're suing are the ones who get to use the state secrets
privilege, it's a stacked deck,'' said Representative Christopher Shays,
Republican of Connecticut, who proposed the measure and has campaigned against
excessive government secrecy.

Yet courts have almost always deferred to the secrecy claims; Mr. Weaver said he
believed that the last unsuccessful assertion of the privilege was in 1993.
Steven Aftergood, an expert on government secrecy at the Federation of American
Scientists, said, ''It's a sign of how potent the national security mantra has
become.''

Under Mr. Bush, the secrets privilege has been used to block a lawsuit by a
translator at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Sibel Edmonds, who was fired
after accusing colleagues of security breaches; to stop a discrimination lawsuit
filed by Jeffrey Sterling, a Farsi-speaking, African-American officer at the
Central Intelligence Agency; and to derail a patent claim involving a coupler
for fiber-optic cable, evidently to guard technical details of government
eavesdropping.

Such cases can make for oddities. Mark S. Zaid, who has represented Ms. Edmonds,
Mr. Sterling and other clients in privilege cases, said he had seen his legal
briefs classified by the government and had been barred from contacting a client
because his phone line was not secure.

''In most state secrets cases, the plaintiffs' lawyers don't know what the
alleged secrets are,'' Mr. Zaid said.

More recently the privilege has been wielded against lawsuits challenging
broader policies, including the three lawsuits attacking the National Security
Agency's eavesdropping program -- one against AT&T by the Electronic Frontier
Foundation in San Francisco and two against the federal government by the
American Civil Liberties Union in Michigan and the Center for Constitutional
Rights in New York.

In a filing in the New York case, John D. Negroponte, the director of national
intelligence, wrote that allowing the case to proceed would ''cause
exceptionally grave damage to the national security of the United States''
because it ''would enable adversaries of the United States to avoid detection.''
Mr. Negroponte said he was providing more detail in classified filings.

Those cases are still pending. Two lawsuits challenging the government's
practice of rendition, in which terror suspects are seized and delivered to
detention centers overseas, were dismissed after the government raised the
secrets privilege.

One plaintiff, Maher Arar, a Syrian-born Canadian, was detained while changing
planes in New York and was taken to Syria, where he has said he was held in a
tiny cell and beaten with electrical cables. The other, Khaled el-Masri, a
German of Kuwaiti origin, was seized in Macedonia and taken to Afghanistan,
where he has said he was beaten and injected with drugs before being released in
Albania.

The United States never made public any evidence linking either man to
terrorism, and both cases are widely viewed as mistakes. Mr. Arar's lawsuit was
dismissed in February on separate but similar grounds from the secrets
privilege, a decision he is appealing. A federal judge in Virginia dismissed Mr.
Masri's lawsuit on May 18, accepting the government's secrets claim.

One frustration of the plaintiffs in such cases is that so much information
about the ostensible state secrets is already public. Mr. Arar's case has been
examined in months of public hearings by a Canadian government commission, and
Mr. Masri's story has been confirmed by American and German officials and blamed
on a mix-up of similar names. The N.S.A. program has been described and defended
in numerous public statements by Mr. Bush and other top officials and in a
42-page Justice Department legal analysis.

In the A.C.L.U. lawsuit charging that the security agency's eavesdropping is
illegal, Ann Beeson, the group's associate legal director, acknowledged that
some facts might need to remain secret. ''But you don't need those facts to hear
this case,'' she said. ''All the facts needed to try this case are already
public.''

Brian Roehrkasse, a Justice Department spokesman, said he could not discuss any
specific case. But he said the state secrets privilege ''is well-established in
federal law and has been asserted many times in our nation's history to protect
our nation's secrets.''

Other defenders of the administration's increasing use of the privilege say it
merely reflects proliferating lawsuits.

In all of the N.S.A. cases, for instance, ''it's the same secret they're trying
to protect,'' said H. Bryan Cunningham, a Denver lawyer who served as a legal
adviser to the National Security Council under Mr. Bush. Mr. Cunningham said
that under well-established precedent, judges must defer to the executive branch
in deciding what secrets must be protected.

But critics of the use of the privilege point out that officials sometimes
exaggerate the sensitivities at risk. In fact, documents from the 1953 case that
defined the modern privilege, United States v. Reynolds, have been declassified
in recent years and suggest that Air Force officials misled the court.

An accident report on a B-29 bomber crash in 1948 was withheld because the Air
Force said it included technical details about sensitive intelligence equipment
and missions, but it turned out to contain no such information, said Wilson M.
Brown III, a lawyer in Philadelphia who represented survivors of those who died
in the crash in recent litigation.

''The facts the Supreme Court was relying on in Reynolds were false,'' Mr. Brown
said in an interview. ''It shows that if the government is not truthful,
plaintiffs will lose and there's very little chance to straighten it out.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The government has used the state secrets privilege against,
clockwise from top left, a whistle-blower suit by Sibel Edmonds, a translator
who was fired by the F.B.I.
a discrimination suit by Jeffrey Sterling, a former C.I.A. officer
and two rendition suits by Khaled el-Masri of Germany and Maher Arar of Canada.
All four cases were dismissed. (Photo by Ruedinger Baessler/European Pressphoto
Agency)
(Photo by Ian Austen for The New York Times)
(Photo by Susana Raab/Aurora)
 (Photo by Linda Spillers/Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LITIGATION (94%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS
(90%); TERRORISM (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%);
WHISTLEBLOWERS (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); WIRETAPPING
(78%); WITNESSES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (77%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (75%); LEGISLATION (74%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (72%); APPROVALS
(72%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (71%); WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(66%) Terrorism; Wiretapping and Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods;
Privacy; Suits and Litigation; Law and Legislation  ; Surveillance of Citizens
by Government; Whistle-Blowers; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (83%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(59%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (56%); UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS (55%) National
Security Agency

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (79%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); CHRISTOPHER SHAYS (58%) Scott
Shane; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: EL PASO, TX, USA (55%)

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); GERMANY (90%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             908 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Spanish Judge Calls for Closing U.S. Prison at Guantanamo

BYLINE: By ELAINE SCIOLINO

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 891 words

DATELINE: FLORENCE, Italy


Invoking Spain's history of dictatorship and terror, Baltasar Garzon, the
country's most prominent investigative magistrate, has called on the United
States to immediately close the detention center at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.

''A model like Guantanamo is an insult to countries that respect laws,'' Judge
Garzon said in an interview during a counterterrorism conference in Florence in
late May. ''It delegitimizes us. It is a place that needs to disappear
immediately.''

As the war in Iraq drags on, criticism in Europe of the Bush administration's
prison for terrorist suspects as well as its secret transport of terrorist
suspects to third countries has steadily mounted. The criticism reflects both
concern among Europeans that the United States has abandoned its core values and
a widespread anti-Americanism among Europe's Muslim population.

In a speech last month, Britain's attorney general, Lord Goldsmith, called on
the United States to close Guantanamo, saying, ''The historic tradition of the
U.S. as a beacon of freedom, liberty and justice deserves the removal of this
symbol.''

Judge Garzon, speaking out on the issue for the first time, went further. ''I
have as much interest as you do in wanting the problem of terrorism to be
resolved,'' he said, recalling the deadly train bombings in Madrid in 2004.
''But if we continue along these lines, we are on the road to committing crimes
against humanity. And it will move from the people who perpetrated the crimes to
the people who authorized them.''

The Bush administration argues that such practices as the indefinite detention
of prisoners without charge at Guantanamo and the secret transfer, or rendition,
of suspects for interrogation by other governments are justified under laws of
armed conflict.

Judge Garzon, who has spent nearly two decades investigating and building
criminal cases against terrorist networks in Spain, underscored his point by
citing his own country's dark past. Only in the last few years has Spain begun
to confront the terror of the 1936 army uprising and civil war that brought Gen.
Francisco Franco to power and ushered in four decades of dictatorship.

''In Spain, we also practiced torture and the forced disappearance of people,''
he said. ''When the temptation came, we succumbed to it.''

Even under democratic rule in the 1980's, Judge Garzon said, a clandestine war
was carried out against the Basque separatist group ETA -- many suggest by
security forces -- which included ill treatment and torture of prisoners,
kidnappings and killings.

He also recalled the far more distant history of his country. ''I come from the
country of the Inquisition, when people were told, 'If you cooperate, we'll cut
your head off, and if you don't, we'll burn you alive,' '' he said. ''We had to
learn from experience that torture, and mistreatment and degradation, do not
work as investigation techniques.''

Judge Garzon's frustrations with the United States' approach to prosecuting
terrorism was shared by some of his European counterparts at the conference. So
was the sense that such frustrations come from sad national experience.

''We in Italy knew fascism for many years,'' said Armando Spataro, Italy's
best-known investigating magistrate, in an interview. ''We know it's a great
mistake to fight terrorism in this way, the way of Guantanamo, the way of
renditions. It's extremely damaging to all our efforts to integrate our Muslim
communities who see these practices as unjust.''

Judge Spataro has opened a criminal case in Milan against 22 people allegedly
linked to the Central Intelligence Agency who have been charged with the
abduction of a Muslim cleric from a Milan street in 2003 as part of a
counterterrorist rendition operation. Last month the Milan judge announced that
he intended to try them in absentia this year.

In remarks made during the conference itself, sponsored by New York University
law school's Center on Law and Security, Judge Garzon cited his own experience
with what he called the failure of the Guantanamo system. The United States held
Hamed Abderrahman Ahmed, a Spanish citizen who had trained at a Qaeda camp in
Afghanistan, there for two years before granting Judge Garzon's request to
extradite him to Spain. He was eventually sentenced to six years in prison for
membership in a terrorist group -- but not with the help of any evidence built
at Guantanamo.

''Everything obtained from there was useless because it went against the
rules,'' Judge Garzon said.

A second suspect returned to Spain last year is in custody awaiting trial. The
judge said he had received no response regarding two other suspects sought by
Spain.

Judge Garzon agreed that his remarks at the off-the-record conference could be
cited for quotation.

He also faulted the United States for withholding information on the fate of
Mustafa Setmarian Nasar. Mr. Nasar, an important jihad theorist also known as
Abu Musab al-Suri, is wanted in connection with the Madrid terrorist train
attacks in March 2003.

News reports since late last year have cited unidentified American and Pakistani
officials as saying that Mr. Nasar was seized in Pakistan and turned over to
American authorities.

''I don't know where he is,'' Judge Garzon said. ''Nobody knows where he is. Can
you tell me how this helps the struggle against terrorism?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 10, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Sunday about criticism of the United States detention
center in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, by Baltasar Garzon, Spain's most prominent
investigative magistrate, during an antiterrorism conference, misstated the year
of the Madrid train bombing at one point. It was March 2004, not 2003.

GRAPHIC: Photo: Judge Baltasar Garzon said Spain learned that torture doesn't
work. (Photo by Paul Hanna/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); HISTORY (90%); PRISONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MAGISTRATES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); TORTURE (89%);
BASQUE HOMELAND & FREEDOM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%);
ARMIES (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); IRAQ WAR (75%); BOMBINGS (73%);
INTERVIEWS (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); NAVIES
(70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (68%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(65%); MILITARY BASES (65%) Prisoners of War; Torture; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Guantanamo Bay
Naval Base (Cuba); Terrorism; Shutdowns (Institutional)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

PERSON: Elaine Sciolino; Baltasar (Judge) Garzon

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SPAIN (98%); EUROPE (93%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAQ
(92%); CUBA (91%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Spain; Iraq; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             910 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Border Patrol Draws Increased Scrutiny as President Proposes an Expanded Role

BYLINE: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 34

LENGTH: 1642 words

DATELINE: PHOENIX, June 2


With a proposed major expansion, the Border Patrol may soon overtake the F.B.I.
as the largest federal law enforcement agency. But the stepped-up mission comes
as the Border Patrol wrestles with recruitment and training difficulties, and
several agents face accusations of misconduct.

In response to concerns, the inspector general's office of the Homeland Security
Department, which oversees the Border Patrol, said it would audit the agency's
recruitment, hiring and training practices to determine if it can handle the
rapid expansion. A spokeswoman, Tamara Faulkner, said the review could begin
this month.

David V. Aguilar, the chief of the Border Patrol, told Congress last week that
the extraordinary growth was vital to national security, particularly as the
authorities seek to clamp down on illegal crossings along the Mexican border.
The agency has swelled to more than 11,000 agents from 4,000 15 years ago, with
6,000 more proposed by President Bush by 2008 as a cornerstone of his
immigration overhaul.

''The nexus between our post-Sept. 11 mission and our traditional role is
clear,'' Chief Aguilar said. ''Terrorists and violent criminals may exploit
smuggling routes used by migrants to enter the United States illegally and do us
harm.''

But as the Border Patrol seeks more agents, its training academy in Artesia,
N.M., needs expansion, and some watchdog groups question its ability to prepare
so many new agents in so little time. As a temporary measure, thousands of
National Guard troops will soon be dispatched here in Arizona and elsewhere
along the 2,000-mile border to assist with logistics and support work.

''This is not something where you can snap your fingers and have thousands go on
the job,'' said Deborah W. Meyers, an analyst at the nonpartisan Migration
Policy Institute. ''It is a demanding job, and training is important and
intense.''

Big buildups in border security in the 1990's coincided with a rash of
embarrassing disclosures about wayward agents and questions about how well the
agency screened recruits. Those concerns have surfaced again as several agents
have been accused of misconduct and immigrant smuggling, including one agent
from Mexico who was hired in 2002 even though he is not a United States citizen,
as is required.

In January, the Mexican agent, Oscar Antonio Ortiz, who had falsely claimed
citizenship on his job application, pleaded guilty to charges of immigrant
smuggling and other crimes and is awaiting sentencing. Mr. Ortiz, 28, had told
recruiters he had used cocaine in the past, and investigators later discovered
that he had previously been arrested, though not prosecuted, on suspicion of
smuggling after immigration officers at San Ysidro, Calif., detained him with
two illegal immigrants in his car.

In March, two Border Patrol supervising agents in California, Mario Alvarez, 44,
and Scott McClaren, 43, were also charged with smuggling. The agents had helped
set up an antismuggling program with the Mexican authorities. They have pleaded
not guilty and are awaiting trial in San Diego.

In recent years, several agents have also been convicted of assaulting border
crossers and other abuses. Advocates for immigrants have long accused the agency
of too often stopping people, particularly Latinos, without proper justification
and of giving little public accounting of any results of abuse accusations.

''It seems like they just hired Border Patrol agents from Ohio and brought them
down here and put them in our communities,'' said Fernando Garcia, director of
the Border Network for Human Rights, a group based in El Paso that monitors law
enforcement at the border in Texas and New Mexico.

Todd Fraser, a spokesman for the Border Patrol, said a relatively few rogue
agents had drawn more attention than the vast majority of honorable ones,
including several who had won praise inside and outside the agency for efforts
to rescue immigrants stranded in the desert.

Mr. Fraser said much of the concern about agent misconduct was outdated and
overblown. Agents, he said, go through increasingly extensive preparation for
jobs that often involve great risks, including the threat of confrontation with
armed smugglers.

''Border Patrol agents go through a long and intensive training program that
makes them among the most highly trained and professional officers out there,''
he said.

Some critics have also expressed greater confidence in the agency.
Representative Xavier Becerra, a California Democrat who in the early 1990's
called for a federal commission to oversee the agency because of its many
problems, said it had made great strides in raising standards and curtailing
questionable tactics.

''I certainly think over the years we are seeing border enforcement become more
professional,'' Mr. Becerra said. ''They have done a lot to get in line with
professional standards.''

The Border Patrol has over the years had trouble keeping agents and hiring
enough to compensate for the losses. The agents' union blames entry-level pay,
which is $35,000 to $40,000, depending on experience, generally lower than many
local and state law enforcement agencies.

The work, too, is demanding and calls for solitary patrols in the dead of night
in forbidding terrain, often arresting the same people over and over again. In
all, the agents are responsible for 6,000 miles of land border with Mexico and
Canada and 2,000 miles of coastline around Florida and Puerto Rico.

''It is mind-numbingly boring to sit in one spot 10 hours a day and watch people
stream by and be told your job is not to chase them but call the guy behind
you,'' said T. J. Bonner, president of the National Border Patrol Council, the
agents' union, referring to a common tactic of stationing agents and vehicles as
a deterrent to smugglers. ''The problem is there often is no guy behind you,
because we are short-staffed.''

A large number of agents left shortly after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks to
take better-paying jobs in the newly expanded air marshal service. Many have
since returned to their old posts, however, and the patrol reports attrition has
fallen to about 6 percent, after spiking to nearly 20 percent post-9/11.

To help meet recruitment goals, the agency has begun an advertising campaign
that emphasizes the potential excitement of the job; has raised the maximum
starting age to 40 from 37, to attract more military veterans fresh from their
service; and has shortened the 20-week training course for recruits who have a
command of Spanish, which all agents are required to know.

The large unknown, Mr. Bonner and others said, is whether Congress will provide
the money in coming years to hire agents and whether the agency can bring in
enough quality recruits to meet Mr. Bush's goals.

Although Congressional legislation authorized 2,000 more agents this year, the
final budget wrangling left money for only 1,500. ''It's going to be tough, and
it's going to be a challenge, but we are confident we will be able to do it,''
said Maria Valencia, an agency spokeswoman. ''But the money is the key part in
all of this.''

The Border Patrol traces its roots to a Texas Ranger named Jeff Milton, one of
the last of the Old West gunslingers who gained fame as one of the men who
helped hunt down Geronimo and patrolled the relatively newly drawn Mexican
border in the 1880's with horse and pistol. A 1948 biography of him is subtitled
''A Good Man With a Gun.''

Its agents, some still riding horseback among the tumbleweeds, rely on an
arsenal of guns and high-power weapons that surely would have awed Milton, as
well as tools he could never have imagined: pilotless aerial drones, all-terrain
vehicles, infrared night scopes, embedded motion sensors. These days, the job
still attracts applicants with a bit of cowboy in them, people who enjoy the
outdoors and do not mind the often rough-and-tumble borderlands.

Devin Harshbarger, 25, is in his first two months on the job at the Casa Grande
station 50 miles southeast of here, some 700 miles from his hometown, Cheyenne,
Wyo.

''After 9/11, I wanted to do my part to help keep terrorists out,'' Agent
Harshbarger said, adding that he was also drawn to working outdoors.

The job also attracts people motivated by the immigration debate.

Adolfo Diaz, 30, an Air Force veteran who is another new recruit, said he got
tired of illegal immigrants crossing his family ranch near the Arizona-Mexico
border.

''Individuals have come to the house, and they have threatened neighbors and
families,'' Agent Diaz said. He described his first arrest, of some 25 people
hiking across the desert, as scary because he and the two other agents were
outnumbered.

But there is debate whether the new agents can significantly ebb the flow of
people crossing the Mexican border, a never-ending stream that another new
recruit, Christine Trevino, called ''really crazy.''

Last year, with 11,106 agents, the Border Patrol arrested 1.2 million people on
charges of illegally crossing into the United States; in 1995, with 4,876
agents, it arrested 1.3 million. Arrests peaked in 2000, with 1.6 million made
by 9,078 agents, and have swung up and down since even as the ranks of agents
has swelled. The Border Patrol estimates that 98 percent of the arrests each
year are made on the Mexico border and says a majority of the people detained
are Mexicans who are returned to their country, usually within hours.

The data, and the mix of political, economic and social factors that contribute
to illegal immigration, make it difficult to explain the erratic nature of
apprehensions and undermine ''the widely accepted assumption that border
security will be automatically improved by the hiring of more agents,'' found an
analysis by the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse, a research group
connected to Syracuse University.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the Border Patrol station in Casa Grande, Ariz., agents line
up illegal immigrants who are about to be deported back to Mexico. (Photographs
by Monica Almeida/The New York Times)Chart: ''An Expanding Force''Border Patrol
agents, at end of fiscal years.*Graph tracks border patrol agents from
1999-2008. (2006-2008 include proposed and projected figures)*2008 figure is for
end of calendar year.(Source by U.S. Customs and Border Protection)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (91%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (91%); TERRORISM (90%); BORDER CONTROL (90%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); EMPLOYEE TRAINING (90%); SMUGGLING (89%); ALIEN
SMUGGLING (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW (89%); MISCONDUCT (77%);
EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (77%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (76%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); SENTENCING (73%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); VIOLENT CRIME
(73%); ARRESTS (72%); GUILTY PLEAS (71%); COCAINE (66%); CITIZENSHIP (50%)
Immigration and Refugees; Illegal Immigrants; Terrorism; Hiring and Promotion;
Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: US CUSTOMS & BORDER PROTECTION (92%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (83%) Homeland Security
Department; Border Patrol (US)

PERSON: Randal C Archibold; George W (Pres) Bush

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); NEW MEXICO, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: MEXICO (94%); UNITED STATES (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             911 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Your Baby or Your Beat

BYLINE: By Donna Lieberman.

Donna Lieberman is the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.

SECTION: Section 14LI; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk; Pg. 15

LENGTH: 850 words


TWENTY years ago, Suffolk County settled a class-action lawsuit that had charged
the Suffolk County Police Department with rampant discrimination against
African-Americans, Hispanics and women. At that time very few women were on the
force. To settle the case, the county agreed to abandon employment practices
that kept women from serving as police officers.

We'd like to think that problems like these have been solved. But it turns out
that Suffolk's Police Department is still not so kind to the women in its ranks.

This week, six Suffolk County police officers, all women, will take the Suffolk
County Police Department to trial in another discrimination case, with the New
York Civil Liberties Union and the American Civil Liberties Union as their
counsel. Their suit charges that the department discriminates against women who
are pregnant. In 2003, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission corroborated
their complaint, finding that each of the plaintiffs had experienced
discrimination at the hands of Suffolk County.

Women on the force, the county says, are entitled to the same rights as men. But
if they want to remain on patrol during the course of their pregnancies, they
face special risks. The county requires all officers to wear bulletproof vests
and gun belts while on patrol but acknowledges that it doesn't provide vests or
gun belts that properly fit during pregnancy, exposing officers to greater
danger when they're pregnant than at any other time in their career.

The county also refuses to guarantee officers who become pregnant a fair chance
at alternatives to full patrol -- like desk jobs or other light duty work -- for
the several months they might reasonably be expected to need it.

For years, light duty was the sinecure of men -- some of whom needed light duty
assignments, and many of whom just didn't. Commanders decided at their
discretion who received such jobs. When a pattern of abuse came to light about
five years ago, the county only made matters worse: instead of eliminating the
favoritism and weeding out the abuse, the county eliminated light duty
assignments except for officers injured on the job. As a result, pregnant
officers with legitimate temporary health needs were compelled to choose: work
in physically demanding positions without adequate protective gear, or go on
leave.

Take the case of Kelly Mennella, the Sixth Precinct's officer of the month in
April 2000. Months later, when Officer Mennella became pregnant, her requests
for light duty were denied. Officer Mennella was forced to use her sick and
vacation days and went without pay for part of the time after her child was
born.

Officer Mennella had company. Five other plaintiffs in the Suffolk County suit
-- including Sandra Lochren, a 13-year veteran of the department, who was forced
out on leave in her third month of pregnancy after requesting a desk job -- are
among the many women whom the Suffolk County Police Department has made go on
leave, during months when they were willing and able to work, by subjecting them
to this discriminatory policy.

Facing a trial date, the county scrambled to change its policies to make them
less discriminatory in December. But the county still didn't get it right. Light
duty is now available for non-job-related conditions in some circumstances, but
it's still entirely up to the supervisor. And it's available for three months
only.

Sandra Lochren and Kelly Mennella are not reassured. They know that many of
their colleagues need to go on light duty before the third trimester of
pregnancy. They think it's unfair that pregnant officers should have to go out
on patrol without protective gear that fits, in violation of department
requirements. And they remember too well that this is the Suffolk County Police
Department. Despite the court order from 20 years ago, the old-boy network is
still alive and well.

Yes, there are more women on the force, but the highest positions remain filled
by men. More important, no procedure is yet in place to ensure that whatever
light duty assignments are available will be distributed fairly. And too many
women on the force have too many stories about being denied light duty when they
were pregnant. Indeed, many Suffolk County officers have told us that they
conceal their pregnancies for fear that they will be denied a desk job.

Recently, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission reported a 31 percent
increase in the number of pregnancy discrimination claims it has received since
1992. With more than 70 million American women working today and three-quarters
of them having children, many women are still having to choose between their
jobs and families.

Nature's not that complicated. The prime employment years for police officers
overlap with the prime years for child bearing. If Suffolk County is going to be
an equal opportunity employer for women, it's going to have to offer meaningful
opportunities to continue working during pregnancy, and a light duty policy that
makes sense. Women should not have to choose between a career in law enforcement
and a family.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (91%); LITIGATION (91%); POLICE FORCES (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CLASS ACTIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%);
WOMEN'S HEALTH (78%); GENDER EQUALITY (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); HISPANIC
AMERICANS (78%); WOMEN (78%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (78%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (77%); EMPLOYMENT (77%); OCCUPATIONAL ILLNESS &
INJURY (72%); VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR (71%); OBSTETRICS & GYNECOLOGY (68%); SICK
LEAVE (65%) Police; Pregnancy and Obstetrics; Discrimination; Women; Suits and
Litigation; Bulletproof Clothing

ORGANIZATION: US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (56%); AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION (56%)

PERSON: Donna Lieberman

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: Suffolk County (NY)

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             912 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Getting Used To War As Hell

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1497 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq


THE story, as told by Iraqi survivors, is as bleak as any to emerge from the
American war in Iraq.

If the survivors' accounts are borne out by American military inquiries now
under way and, in time, by courts-martial, then what happened in the early
morning of Nov. 19, 2005, in the desert city of Haditha could prove, like the
1968 My Lai massacre in Vietnam, a baleful marker in the long and painful
American story here.

According to the Haditha survivors, a small number of marines shot 24 civilians,
in cold blood after a roadside bomb exploded as their platoon left their
isolated base in the city, killing a 20-year-old lance corporal. Some accounts
given to Western news organizations by survivors and by those familiar with the
military investigations say that the killings extended over several hours, and
involved several family homes next to the site of the bombing. The victims
included women and children. Many were said to have died by gunshots to the head
and torso.

Investigators are also probing whether the Marine chain of command engaged in a
cover-up, beginning with a statement shortly after the episode claiming that 15
civilians were killed in the original blast, and that the others who died were
insurgents caught up in a firefight afterward. There appears to have been no
significant challenge to that account within the military until Time magazine
published the first survivors' accounts in March.

Whatever emerges from the military investigations, the narrative of the Marines'
experiences in Iraq will have a central place for the brutalities associated
with Haditha. Last summer, in two separate attacks over three days, Taliban-like
insurgents operating from bases at mosques in the city killed 20 Marine
reservists, including an enlisted man who was shown disemboweled on rebel videos
that were sold afterward in Haditha's central market.

Like other Marine battles, from Tripoli to Iwo Jima to Khe Sanh, the story of
their battles in Iraq will center on themes of extraordinary hardship, endurance
and loss, as well as a remorselessness in combat, that offer a context, though
hardly any exoneration, for what survivors allege happened that November day.

They also offer a counterpoint to another theme at play here, one also learned
with great bitterness in Vietnam: the hard cost to military intentions of
killing innocent bystanders in a counterinsurgency. That is a lesson the Marines
know well and accept as an institution. But in recent months in Iraq it has been
recited largely by Army generals, and the distinction has begun to cause
resentments between the two services as the Haditha investigations begin.

Privately, some marines say the killings at Haditha may have grown out of
pressures that bore down from the moment in March 2004 when a Marine
expeditionary force assumed responsibility for Anbar province, with Haditha and
its 90,000 residents emerging as one of its most persistent trouble spots.
Marine commanders vowed to use a tougher approach than the Army's 82nd Airborne
Division, which was responsible for Anbar for the first year after the overthrow
of Saddam Hussein, by showing ''both the palm frond and the hammer.''

They soon proved it with the crushing tactics they used, in an aborted offensive
in April and then decisively in November, when they regained control of Falluja,
an insurgent stronghold. In that eight-day battle, a Marine-led force of about
10,000 Americans destroyed much of the city, including, according to the city's
compensation commissioner, about 36,000 of its 50,000 homes.

Just how tough a fight the Marines have had can be seen in casualty statistics
-- from 30 to 40 percent of the nearly 2,500 American troops killed and 17,000
wounded, from a force that has never been more than 25 percent of the total.

For the Marines, it is a familiar story, echoing their disproportionately large
share of the 58,000 American troops who died in Vietnam. They have drawn, in
Anbar, responsibility for what is clearly the toughest patch assigned to
American troops in Iraq.

With barely 1.3 million residents on nearly a third of Iraq's territory, Anbar
is one of the most sparsely populated of Iraq's 18 provinces. But in the
insurgency, it has been ground zero, a place where the harsh desert terrain,
summer temperatures that hover near 130 degrees, and the proud and stubborn
character of its Sunni Arab people have combined to give the Americans the
fiercest resistance they have met anywhere.

Anbar abuts Saudi Arabia, Jordan and Syria, and that border of more than 600
miles has been, especially in Syria's case, the principal conduit for volunteers
from elsewhere in the Arab world who have been at the core of the insurgency's
Islamic militant wing and the perpetrators of many of the suicide bombings and
beheadings. Nor is that all. Although Saddam Hussein was from the neighboring
province, Salahuddin, the unshakable bastion of the Sunni minority rule he
represented was always Anbar.

In a band of often violent cities strung out along the Euphrates River, tribal
sheiks and fundamentalist imams have cast themselves as the vanguard of the
Sunni Arab world. That has made the Anbar Sunnis the most fervent opponents of
the American plan to bring democracy to Iraq, and with it, inescapably, Shiite
majority rule.

To this combustible mix, the Marines have brought their own ethos of
uncompromising toughness on the battlefield, captured in the corps' maxim, ''No
better friend, no worse enemy,'' a common refrain whenever Marine commanders
prepare their troops for battle in Anbar.

Together, these two cultures, the Anbaris and the Marines, have combined to
produce a catalogue of brutal confrontations.

But it is not the only clash of cultures figuring in the crisis over the Haditha
killings. There are also the differing cultures of the Army and Marines. It was
the Army's second-highest ranking officer in Iraq, Lt. Gen. Peter W. Chiarelli,
with operational control of all 135,000 American troops here under the overall
command of another Army commander, Gen. George W. Casey Jr., who triggered the
military's broad investigation into the events at Haditha. This came after an
initial probe by an Army colonel revealed discrepancies in Marine accounts of
the killings.

Though it seems unlikely to have played any role in General Chiarelli's decision
to order the criminal inquiry, given the seriousness of the Haditha allegations
and his legal obligations, the general has gained a reputation as an outspoken
advocate of what was known in Vietnam as the ''hearts and minds'' approach to
fighting the war. Like other terms that hark back to Vietnam, that has fallen
out of favor among American commanders here. They prefer to talk about
''kinetic'' and ''non-kinetic'' forms of defeating the insurgency.

In this context, ''kinetic'' refers to the kill-and-capture warfare that has
been the Marines' traditional way of battle, and ''non-kinetic'' to the efforts
that Generals Chiarelli and Casey have stressed -- to reach out to local
leaders, help build civic institutions, rebuild infrastructure and provide jobs,
undermining the insurgency's appeal.

General Casey tells American units that it is the military's non-kinetic
activity that will win the war, as much as or more than the kinetic. But it is
not a gospel that has found much favor -- nor, Marine commanders might say, much
relevance -- in the fight-to-the-death crucible of Anbar.

Reporters who have spent time embedded with the Marines return, almost
invariably, with a strong sense of the comradeship that binds the units and an
admiration for the discipline and fitness drilled into the fighting men, and,
not least, for the lengths the corps is prepared to go to get reporters to the
battlefront and to protect them while they're there.

But the harsh Marine battle tactics make an impact, too. Reporters' experiences
with the Marines, even more than with the Army, show they resort quickly to
using heavy artillery or laser-guided bombs when rooting out insurgents who have
taken refuge among civilians, with inevitable results.

Among the Marines, there is a tendency, an eagerness even, to see themselves as
the stepchild of the American military effort, sent into much of the hardest
fighting, undermanned for the task, equipped with Vietnam-era helicopters and
amphibious armored vehicles that make lumbering targets in the desert -- then
criticized by Army commanders, sometimes severely, for a lack of proportionality
in the way they fight.

Something of this sense was suggested when a senior Army commander involved in
planning the Falluja offensive -- and convinced of its necessity -- visited the
city afterward alongside Marine commanders. He expressed shock at the
destruction, along with concern at the reaction of 200,000 residents whom the
Americans had urged to flee beforehand. ''My God,'' the Army commander said,
''what are the folks who live here going to say when they see this?''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: The Battle -- In Falluja in 2004, left, citizens invited to a
mosque for food were checked for gunpowder and arrested. In Haditha last
November, bodies of civilians reportedly killed by marines lay in a morgue.
(Photo by Lucian Read/ World Picture Network)
 (Photo by Marco Di Lauro/Getty Images)(pg. 4)Drawing (Drawing by Nathan
Fox)(pg. 1)Map of Iraq highlighting Haditha. (pg. 4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); IRAQ WAR
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); ARMIES (78%); VIETNAM WAR
(78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES (77%); IMPROVISED
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
SHOOTINGS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); CHILDREN (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); MILITARY COURTS (72%); RELIGION (50%) United States Armament
and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations

PERSON: John F Burns

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); VIET NAM (90%)

REGION: Iraq; Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             913 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 4, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Trafficking in Women

SECTION: Section 4; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 188 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Hidden in Brothels, Slavery by Another Name,'' by Bob Herbert (column, June
1):

It's time for the New York State Legislature to take a bold step and to pass
legislation that will protect women and girls from the heinous crime of
trafficking.

In 2000 it was estimated that some 50,000 women and girls were brought into the
United States each year for the purpose of commercial sexual exploitation; many
are recruited under false pretenses and are kept in slavery-like conditions.

Escaping poverty is a driving force behind why women and girls are so easily
coerced. This problem is reported to be escalating worldwide, especially in
developing countries where poverty is endemic. And the United States is a major
source of the trafficking demand.

As poverty escalates, so does the number of victims. If we are to continue to
believe that we live in a progressive state, the New York Legislature must take
the initiative to show women and girls that they really do care about their
lives.

Marcia A. Pappas
Albany, June 1, 2006

The writer is president of the National Organization for Women-New York State
Inc.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WOMEN (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%);
PROSTITUTION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CHILD ABUSE (76%); SEX OFFENSES (75%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); LEGISLATION (57%); DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES (53%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%) Prostitution

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (55%)

PERSON: Marcia Pappas

CITY: ALBANY, NY, USA (57%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York State

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             914 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 5, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Report Details Stormy Relationship Between Milosevic and Court-Appointed Medical
Team

BYLINE: By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL; Marlise Simons contributed reporting from Paris
for this article.; International Herald Tribune

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 835 words


As the family of Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader, and the United
Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague spar over whether his death in prison
on March 11 was avoidable, medical information released on May 31 provided new
details about his death, his ailments and his stormy relationship with his
court-appointed doctors.

The Milosevic family contends that his medical treatment in detention was
inadequate. The court, in an internal review released last week, concluded that
its doctors had delivered ''proper care'' and that Mr. Milosevic was an
uncooperative patient.

But the new information suggests that there were a number of times when either
Mr. Milosevic or the court could have done things differently, possibly altering
the course of his illness.

Much of the court's report documents a turbulent, distrustful relationship
between Mr. Milosevic and the detention center's officials, which almost
certainly affected his care.

He sometimes refused to take pills, or took doses that had been dictated by
doctors consulted by telephone, the report says. Visitors sometimes brought
unapproved medicines and alcohol into his cell.

The report says he secretly took rifampicin, a tuberculosis drug that would have
blunted the effect of medicine he took for high blood pressure. Rifampicin was
found in a blood test in January. Mr. Milosevic denied taking it and said that
someone was trying to kill him.

On the last day of Mr. Milosevic's life, prison guards who unlocked his cell
initially decided not to examine him when he failed to move or respond to their
greeting. It was only after an hour that that they decided to inspect him more
closely and discovered that he had no pulse, the report said, raising a question
of whether he could have been revived.

The court and Mr. Milosevic spent the months before his death wrangling over
where he should get a cardiac work-up, with the result that it never occurred.
He refused hospitalization for important cardiac testing at least once and
possibly on other occasions.

''If he had been in a monitored setting on March 11, he certainly wouldn't have
died,'' said Patrick Barriott, a French doctor and longtime friend of Mr.
Milosevic.

Twice in his last six months, Mr. Milosevic petitioned the court to be sent for
urgent treatment in Moscow -- he refused to be treated in a NATO country. The
last petition was on March 2.

Noting that the tests could be performed in the Netherlands, the court rejected
the first petition. An appeal was pending when he died.

In its internal review, the court, the International War Crimes Tribunal, said,
''In these circumstances it cannot be concluded that there was a failure to
provide proper care.''

Still, the report acknowledged that some of the detention center's systems for
monitoring Mr. Milosevic's health had been inadequate. It cited opinions from
prominent doctors that additional tests and procedures should have been
performed.

April 5, a Russian cardiac surgeon, Leo Bokeria, wrote to the court that Mr.
Milosevic ''could have been treated easily at any place of the world'' with a
minimally invasive procedure in which a tube is used to open an artery.

On the other hand, Rene Tavernier, a cardiologist from Belgium who reviewed the
case for the court, concluded, ''There is no test that if carried out would have
helped detect or prevent the cause of death.''

In either case, it is clear from the documents that Mr. Milosevic was a
sometimes difficult patient who defied doctors' orders.

Zdravko Mijailovic, who treated Mr. Milosevic at the military hospital in
Belgrade in 2001, said, as quoted by the May 31 report, that important studies
had never been completed, because of the patient's ''lack of motivation.''

From studies conducted around that time, Mr. Milosevic was known to have serious
high blood pressure and a thickened heart wall -- the result of years of
hypertension.

All doctors who have reviewed his case have agreed that Mr. Milosevic was at
high risk for stroke, heart attack or fatal heart rhythm problems. But little is
known about the progression of Mr. Milosevic's heart disease during his time in
the detention center. His lawyer, Zdenko Tomanovic, said after the study was
released May 31 that Mr. Milosevic had frequently consulted Russian doctors by
phone. ''He did not want medical treatment in a country that was a member of
NATO,'' Mr. Tomanovic said.

Doctors disagree about whether further tests would have changed anything.

An independent autopsy by the Dutch government showed that one of Mr.
Milosevic's main coronary arteries was 50 percent narrowed -- not generally
enough to cause a heart attack in itself. At the same time, he had a severely
thickened heart, with an unusual structure called a myocardial bridge, where a
coronary artery plunges into the heart's muscle rather than lying on its
surface.

There is disagreement over the significance and proper treatment of myocardial
bridges, according to the medical literature.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DISEASES & DISORDERS
(90%); ANTIBIOTICS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%);
PETITIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS
(78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS &
PROCEDURES (77%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%);
GENOCIDE (73%); TUBERCULOSIS (71%); HYPERTENSION (67%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Elisabeth Rosenthal; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS
(88%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             918 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 7, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Indonesian Scolds U.S. on Terrorism Fight

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 866 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, June 6


Indonesia's defense minister warned the Bush administration on Tuesday that its
approach to fighting terrorism was perceived as overbearing, and that the United
States needed to be sensitive to local concerns.

''It's best that you leave the main responsibility of antiterrorist measures to
the local government in question, and not be too overly insistent about
immediate results arising from your perception about terrorists,'' the minister,
Juwono Sudarsono, told reporters as Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld stood
nearby.

''It's important to us because, as the world's largest Muslim country, we are
very aware of the perception, or misperception, that the United States is
overbearing and overpresent and overwhelming in every sector of life in many
nations and cultures,'' he added.

Mr. Rumsfeld arrived here Tuesday to help build the United States' newly
restored ties with the Indonesian military. American military aid was gradually
phased out after Indonesian security forces fired on civilians who were
protesting Indonesian rule in East Timor in 1991.

In rebuilding ties with the Indonesian military, the Bush administration has
said it is not only solidifying relations with an ally in its campaign against
terrorist groups, but also reinforcing the importance of respecting human
rights.

''The U.S. has established fully normal relations, with military-to-military
relations with Indonesia,'' said Mr. Rumsfeld, who met with President Susilo
Bambang Yudhoyono; Widodo Adi Sutjipto, a senior minister for security issues;
and Mr. Sudarsono.

Some American lawmakers complain, however, that Indonesian officials who were
linked to the abuses in East Timor have not been held accountable.

On Tuesday, it was the Indonesians who were free with their advice. One
important lesson, Mr. Sudarsono said, was that the United States needed to be
attuned to local concerns. Then the minister took the unusual step of repeating
the counsel he had given Mr. Rumsfeld in a room packed with Indonesian and
Western journalists.

''So I was telling the secretary just recently, just two minutes ago, that your
powerful economy and your powerful military does lend to misperception and a
sense of threat by many groups right across the world, not just in Indonesia,''
Mr. Sudarsono said.

Mr. Sudarsono's remarks prompted a quick reply by Mr. Rumsfeld, who insisted he
had been sensitive to other nations' concerns from the start. ''I have never
indicated to any country that they should do something that they were
uncomfortable doing,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.

The discussion over political perceptions had affected deliberations over one of
the Bush administration's major efforts: the Proliferation Security Initiative,
which calls for an international arrangement that would enable the United States
and its allies to search cargo ships suspected of transporting biological,
chemical and nuclear arms, as well as the missiles to deliver them.

The aim of the initiative, announced in 2003, is to keep unconventional weapons
and their components out of the hands of terrorist groups and so-called rogue
states. But the Indonesian government has been wary, perhaps because it wants to
reinforce its claims over nearby waterways, or because it is concerned about
public opinion regarding efforts to collaborate with the Bush administration.

Indonesia's Foreign Ministry bluntly rejected the initiative as a threat to
Indonesian sovereignty when Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice raised it in a
March visit here.

Mr. Sudarsono was somewhat more supportive. In his closed-door meeting with Mr.
Rumsfeld, he indicated that the proposal would be studied, and suggested that
Indonesia would be willing to carry out some of the activities that are called
for under the plan.

Yet at the news conference, Mr. Sudarsono gave a starker assessment, suggesting
that the plan might be carried out only if it was limited in scope. ''Perhaps we
can agree on a limited framework of cooperation on an ad hoc basis.,'' he said.

Those comments caught Mr. Rumsfeld's team by surprise. It was not immediately
clear whether Mr. Sudarsono was trying to balance domestic political
considerations with his efforts to work with the Americans, or if there was a
more fundamental difference between the sides.

''Some Indonesian analysts view the United States as focused on the 'search and
destroy' aspect of the war against terror, and feel that the United States has
not focused sufficient attention to winning the 'hearts and minds' aspect of the
struggle,'' according to a study by the Congressional Research Service.

In resuming American military assistance, the initial emphasis is to improve the
Indonesian military's mobility, by providing spare parts for C-130 aircraft and
helping to upgrade naval patrol vessels. The Indonesians have also indicated
that they are submitting requests for parts for the F-16 warplanes in their
arsenal.

A senior American military official said the Pentagon wanted to improve the
ability of the Indonesian military to carry out disaster relief operations, to
conduct joint operations with the United States, and to secure the Strait of
Malacca and other waterways.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The Indonesian defense minister, Juwono Sudarsono, and Defense
Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld yesterday. (Photo by Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS
(73%); WRITERS (71%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: SUSILO BAMBANG YUDHOYONO (59%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (59%)

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             921 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 8, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

8-Year Sentence For Businessman Who Smuggled Arms to Liberia

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 497 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 7


A Dutch businessman was sentenced Wednesday to eight years in prison for
breaking a United Nations arms embargo and smuggling weapons for the former
Liberian president, Charles Taylor, during the country's civil war.

Guus Kouwenhoven, 63, who was a business partner of Mr. Taylor's, sold Liberian
timber on the world market and took back weapons and ammunition aboard his
companies' ships from 2001 to 2003, judges at the district court in The Hague
said.

The court said Mr. Kouwenhoven had knowingly broken international law and helped
to destabilize the region. Mr. Taylor, who is facing trial on war crimes
charges, organized and financed a decade of conflicts across West Africa that
left more than 300,000 people dead. A decision has not been made on the trial's
location.

The prosecution of Mr. Kouwenhoven for his wartime role in Africa was one of the
first cases of its kind, lawyers said. Some called it a warning for others.

''I applaud this because financiers and companies working in the shadows of
African wars are now on notice that they may be held accountable,'' said David
Crane, the former chief prosecutor of the United Nations-backed tribunal dealing
with war crimes in Sierra Leone, where Mr. Taylor is being held.

In its verdict, the Dutch court acquitted Mr. Kouwenhoven on charges of war
crimes and crimes against humanity. Prosecutors had asked for a 20-year prison
sentence and a fine of about $570,000 because, they argued, Mr. Kouwenhoven had
ordered workers from his two timber companies to fight in militias run by Mr.
Taylor. He provided these fighters with weapons and vehicles and therefore
shared in the guilt of the atrocities they committed against civilians, the
prosecution said.

The judges said not enough evidence had been provided to prove that Mr.
Kouwenhoven had known about, and could be linked to, atrocities by his
companies' militias. The prosecution is planning to appeal.

Mr. Crane, who wrote the indictment against Mr. Taylor, said his office had
assisted the Dutch prosecutors. He contended that there was ''clear evidence''
of close association between Mr. Taylor and Mr. Kouwenhoven, involving financing
and the supply of weapons and fighters.

In their ruling on Wednesday, the judges said Mr. Kouwenhoven's assistance to
Mr. Taylor was ''crucial,'' and suggested his motivations were not political,
but rather ''guided purely by financial interests.''

Prosecutors said Mr. Kouwenhoven practiced his timber-for-weapons trade by
getting large concessions of valuable Liberian hardwood, selling it on the
international market and using his companies' ships to bring back machine guns,
rocket-propelled grenades and other war supplies, delivering them secretly at
night to a Liberian port.

Mr. Kouwenhoven is the second Dutch businessman to be convicted recently in The
Netherlands for war profiteering. In December, a Dutch court sentenced Frans van
Anraat to 15 years in prison for selling chemicals to Saddam Hussein.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (91%); SMUGGLING (91%); WAR CRIMES
(91%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); ARMS TRADE (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL FINES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ARMS
EMBARGOES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); TIMBER TRACT OPERATIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%);
INDICTMENTS (76%); LAWYERS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (73%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (72%); ACQUITTAL (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(70%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (70%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: DAVID W CRANE (57%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (97%); NETHERLANDS (92%); AFRICA (92%); SIERRA LEONE (79%);
WESTERN AFRICA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             922 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 9, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A.F.L.-C.I.O. Files a Trade Complaint Against China's Labor Practices

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section C; Column 1; Business/Financial Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 8


The A.F.L.-C.I.O. filed a trade complaint on Thursday asking President Bush to
penalize China, asserting that it violates workers' rights by suppressing
strikes, barring independent unions and letting factories ignore laws on minimum
wages and child labor.

The complaint says that repression of workers' rights has enabled Chinese
companies to push down labor costs by at least 47 percent, undercutting American
companies and causing the loss of more than 400,000 factory jobs in the United
States.

''The Chinese work force is so large and its labor repression is so severe that
it is dragging down standards for the entire world economy,'' the
A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s secretary- treasurer, Richard Trumka, said. ''The fact is that
China is violating international trade law, and our nation is doing nothing
about it.''

With Mr. Bush on the defensive and the Congressional campaign heating up, the
A.F.L.-C.I.O. hopes that its petition will get candidates to focus on China, the
soaring trade deficit and the loss of manufacturing jobs.

G. Hamilton Loeb, a Washington lawyer who often represents the Chinese
government and industry, said the complaint seemed largely political: ''They're
teeing it up, figuring that it will give them an issue they can use in the
midterm House campaigns. An issue like this might have a swing effect in a very
close race.''

The federation filed a similar complaint two years ago, but Mr. Bush quickly
rejected it, with administration officials saying they would use persuasion and
cooperation, rather than confrontation, to deal with labor violations in China.

At a news conference, A.F.L.-C.I.O. officials said on Thursday that they might
have a better chance persuading the administration to approve trade penalties
this time because several members of Congress are backing the complaint and
because the annual trade deficit with China has soared more than 50 percent in
two years, to $202 billion in 2005.

Representative Christopher Smith, Republican of New Jersey, said he was
supporting the petition because China has arrested and imprisoned those who
oppose unjust labor practices.

''There is no recourse for millions of Chinese laborers trapped in poor working
conditions,'' Mr. Smith said. ''Despite the administration's efforts to
encourage the Chinese to comply with international labor standards, the Chinese
government continues to ignore worker rights.''

Stephen Norton, a spokesman for the United States trade representative, said the
government was studying the complaint. He said it was too early to speculate on
the outcome.

''In general, the administration believes that a strong and growing relationship
with China, driven by mutual interests, is the best way to encourage economic,
social and political reform in China,'' Mr. Norton said. ''We hope that our
continued engagement will be the best way to address the concerns we have with
labor rights and working conditions in China.''

He said that the Labor Department had provided its expertise to the Chinese
authorities, helping to reduce worker deaths.

The administration has 45 days to respond to the petition, which was filed under
Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974.

But there is some debate about the scope of that legislation. Union leaders say
that the act authorizes the federal government to assess trade penalties against
countries that violate internationally recognized labor rights, like the right
to form unions and the bans on using child labor and forced labor.

Some trade lawyers argue, however, that the World Trade Organization will not
allow the United States to punish countries that violate labor rights.

The A.F.L.-C.I.O's complaint cites numerous cases in which Chinese authorities
have suppressed efforts to form unions independent of the official
government-backed organizations. The complaint also says that Chinese
authorities regularly fail to enforce minimum wage and safety laws, noting that
26,700 Chinese workers died last year from industrial injuries and illnesses.

''This petition carefully documents what most Americans already know, but the
Bush administration has yet to confront: that China persistently and
systematically denies even the most basic rights to its people,'' said another
Congressional supporter of the complaint, Benjamin L. Cardin of Maryland, the
senior Democrat on the Trade Subcommittee of the House Ways and Means Committee.

Thea Lee, an A.F.L.-C.I.O. economist, said the group's concern was not that
China had low wages, but that it repressed worker rights. If the Chinese
government enforced workers' rights, the complaint argues, the country's overall
manufacturing costs would rise sharply.

While some labor groups argue that low-wage countries have an unfair advantage
in trading, Gary Clyde Hufbauer, a senior fellow at the Institute for
International Economics, said wealthy nations benefit from trading with poor
nations.

''The U.S. gains on the consumption side when we are able to import stuff from
China cheaper than we can make it,'' Mr. Hufbauer said. ''Then American
companies have to compete against those companies, and they are driven to higher
levels of productivity. It boosts productivity in the United States.''

At the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s news conference, George Bornes asserted that Chinese
competition had caused him to be laid off after 38 years working at Wheatland
Tube's steel pipe factory in Sharon, Pa., He said China's pipe exports to the
United States had soared to 300,000 tons a year, from 9,000 a few years ago.

As a result, he said, Wheatland has idled the plant and laid off 300 workers.
Mr. Bornes said he was tired of seeing Wheatland jobs ''threatened by China's
violations of fair trade and our own government's failure to enforce our trade
laws.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAYOFFS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES
(90%); MINIMUM WAGE (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); FACTORY WORKERS (90%);
WAGES & SALARIES (90%); EMPLOYMENT (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (88%); LABOR FORCE
(78%); LABOR UNIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%);
GOODS & SERVICES TRADE BALANCE (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CHILD LABOR
(78%); PETITIONS (78%); MINIMUM WAGE LAWS (77%); MANUFACTURING OUTPUT (77%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%); ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
(76%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (73%); APPROVALS (64%); ARRESTS (50%) Labor; Strikes;
Organized Labor; Factories and Industrial Plants; Wages and Salaries; Minimum
Wage; Child Labor; Unfair Labor Practices; Labor; Layoffs and Job Reductions;
Fines (Penalties); International Trade and World Market

ORGANIZATION: AFL-CIO (94%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); CHRIS SMITH (58%) George W (Pres) Bush; Steven
Greenhouse

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%)

REGION: China

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             926 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 10, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Report On Serb's Suicide Finds No Fault

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 139 words


The United Nations war crimes tribunal confirmed that the death of Milan Babic,
a former Croation Serb leader who had testified against Slobodan Milosevic, was
a suicide. Mr. Babic, who was found dead in his cell in March, killed himself by
putting a plastic bag over his head and hanging himself with his belt, the court
concluded in a report. It exonerated the staff at the detention center, saying
there had been no indication that Mr. Babic was at risk of suicide. He was
serving a 13-year sentence for war crimes after a plea deal with prosecutors,
who then called on him to testify against fellow Serbs. That had made him
increasingly uncomfortable, the inquiry found. The court also released a short
note he had left for his wife. ''Find peace for yourself and don't mourn me,''
it said. ''I need peace.''    MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); SUICIDE (91%); DEATHS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); SENTENCING (73%); GENOCIDE
(73%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (68%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Suicides and Suicide Attempts

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Milan Babic; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: June 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             929 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Surges as U.S. Shifts Some Tasks to NATO

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1851 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, June 10


A large springtime offensive by Taliban fighters has turned into the strongest
show of force by the insurgents since American forces chased the Taliban from
power in late 2001, and Afghan and foreign officials and local villagers blame a
lack of United States-led coalition forces on the ground for the resurgence.

American forces are handing over operations in southern Afghanistan to a NATO
force of mainly Canadian, British and Dutch troops, and militants have taken
advantage of the transition to swarm into rural areas.

Coalition and Afghan forces now clash daily with large groups of Taliban
fighters across five provinces of southern Afghanistan. In their boldest push,
the Taliban fought battles in a district just less than 20 miles outside the
southern city of Kandahar in late May, forcing hundreds of people to abandon
their villages for refuge in the city and in other towns as coalition forces
resorted to aerial bombardment.

The Taliban are running checkpoints on secondary roads and seizing control of
remote district centers for a night or two before melting away again. In the
most blatant symbol of their dominance of rural areas, the Taliban have even
conducted trials under Islamic law, or Shariah, outside official Afghan courts,
and recently carried out at least one public execution.

''The situation is really, in the last four years, the most unstable and
insecure I have seen,'' said Talatbek Masadykov, who is in charge of the United
Nations assistance mission in Kandahar.

But he said accounts of just how bad the security situation was differed,
particularly after a surge of fighting just west of Kandahar in recent weeks.

''From different tribal people we are hearing that the Taliban are regrouping,''
he said, ''and from government officials that security is improving.''

One international security official in Kandahar, who has several years of
experience in Afghanistan and asked not to be named because of the nature of his
information, said members of American and Canadian Special Forces units had told
him that they were ''not winning against the Taliban.''

''If the central government does not act and coalition forces do not increase, I
think it will be impossible to say what will happen,'' he said.

This week, clashes have occurred in Oruzgan, Zabul and Helmand Provinces, with
the coalition and Afghan Army forces reporting successful missions in which they
killed several dozen Taliban fighters. But Afghans in the Char Chine district of
Oruzgan Province said that coalition forces had shelled civilians as they were
packing up to leave their nearby village, Pir Jawati.

Eleven people were killed, including an old woman and four children, said
Mirwais, a shopkeeper in Char Chine who goes by one name and was contacted by
telephone. Two suicide bombs this week in Kandahar and Khost killed at least
four civilians and a roadside bomb killed three men in a government convoy south
of Kabul, the capital, on Saturday.

Officials in the American-led coalition say the Taliban suffered a severe blow
when American warplanes bombed the village of Tolokan, not far from Kandahar, on
May 21, as part of a four-pronged operation by Afghan and coalition forces over
several days.

The bombing killed at least 35 civilians, and immediately afterward much anger
was directed at the 25,000 American forces still in Afghanistan, prompting
President Hamid Karzai to visit the site.

But local residents say the public mood quickly shifted against the Taliban, as
the Tolokan bombing drove home the risk to villagers who, whether because of
coercion or cooperation, allow the insurgents into their homes. It also
underscored the heavy civilian toll the fighting was taking.

Many Afghans said they simply wanted one side, any side, to bring security.

Southern Afghanistan is the birthplace of the Taliban movement and has remained
a stronghold as the Taliban have staged a steady comeback since their fall from
power in December 2001.

For several years, they could only field a few hundred men in scattered groups
in mountainous areas. Now the Taliban claims to have 12,000 fighters, while
coalition estimates add up to perhaps half of that.

Even though several hundred insurgents may have been killed in fighting this
year, the Taliban are recruiting ever greater numbers of local people, the
officials said.

Many Afghans interviewed expressed frustration that the American-led coalition,
which showed such strength in 2001, was now failing to stem the resurgent
Taliban and that as a consequence people were dying.

Col. Ian Hope, the Canadian commander of coalition forces in Kandahar Province,
acknowledged that his forces had been spread too thin over the past two months
to stem the sudden surge in Taliban fighters. But he said that should change
with the addition of more Afghan forces and now that British and Dutch forces
were getting into place. ''It will not occur again,'' he said. ''It's dangerous
for people to lose confidence in us.''

NATO has deployed a 9,700-member force in Afghanistan that will grow to 16,000,
with 6,000 deployed in southern Afghanistan, one of the most restive regions.
While NATO is deploying troops, the United States will reduce its force by about
3,000 and keep 20,000 in the country under a separate American chain of command.
The American forces will keep responsibility for the volatile eastern region
that abuts some of the most lawless areas in Pakistan.

Even though the Tolokan bombing may have hurt the insurgents, local residents
say, the Taliban presence remains strong, and villagers dread the prospect of
more violence. They complain they are caught in the middle of fighting that pits
the Taliban against the government and their foreign allies.

Hajji Agha Lalai, a tribal elder and provincial councilor from the Panjwai
district in Kandahar Province, gathered elders in his house several weeks ago to
discuss what to do about the intensifying conflict. At a meeting that was held a
day after the Tolokan bombing, he said, the death toll finally drove home a
consensus: the Taliban must go.

''Everyone swore that we would cooperate with each other and not let the Taliban
fight in our district,'' he said. ''We are not going to pick up guns and fight
the Taliban; we are going to go with bare hands, and come out of our houses and
tell them: 'You have to kill us first before you can attack the government and
the coalition from here.' ''

A month ago, 200 to 300 Taliban were moving freely in the Panjwai district and
the adjoining district, Zhare, the governor of Kandahar Province, Asadullah
Khaled, said in an interview.

After the Tolokan bombing, the coalition forces and government estimated that
the Taliban lost up to 80 men in new fighting and reported that the insurgents
had pulled out of the district. ''The situation in Panjwai has completely
changed,'' Mr. Khaled said.

Colonel Hope, who took part in the operation in Panjwai, said that the presence
of the Taliban was much reduced.

''We believe there are a number of small groups, numbering 10 or 5 men, who want
to stay and will change their tactics to I.E.D. attacks,'' he said, referring to
improvised explosive devices like roadside bombs. ''For this reason we need to
maintain our presence and security in these districts.''

Yet others, foreign and Afghan officials, were far more pessimistic in their
assessments and said urgent and strong action from the coalition and government
forces was needed to stem the Taliban advance.

The United Nations agencies in Kandahar reduced their international staff to 25
from 36 because of the security situation, and those staff members not withdrawn
from the area were gathering at night in two central guesthouses for safety,
said Mr. Masadykov, the head of the assistance mission.

The government lost control of the Chora district in Oruzgan Province to the
Taliban for several days at the end of May, until American and Afghan forces
mounted an airborne assault to take it back.

In neighboring Helmand Province travelers have reported that the Taliban are
running a series of checkpoints north of the main highway up to the towns of
Sangin and Kajaki.

At least 200 families have fled their homes in the Panjwai district and taken
refuge with relatives in the district center, while more have come to Kandahar,
said a tribal elder, Muhammad Alam Agha.

A former mujahadeen commander and landowner in Panjwai, who asked not to be
named for fear of reprisals from the Taliban, said, ''We told the government for
months that the situation was bad, that the Taliban were coming and killing
people and that it would get difficult if they became too numerous.''

He and many other villagers abandoned their farms and brought their families to
Kandahar. ''The Taliban could get into the city, if the government is still
sleeping,'' he said. He added that he had seen members of the Taliban walking
around in Kandahar. ''I don't think the government can turn it around now,'' he
said.

The Canadian commander of forces in southern Afghanistan, Brig. Gen. David
Fraser, is firmly optimistic. ''The Taliban have this great ability to blend
into the villages and towns,'' he said in an interview at his headquarters at
the Kandahar air base. ''But they are not the superstars people make them out to
be. They are capable fighters but defeatable.''

Yet Afghans reported that security had become so bad that people said they did
not care which side won, as long as someone took control and ended the fighting.

''We are going mad now,'' said Lala Jan, 19, a farmer from Deh Rawud in Oruzgan
Province, one of the most strife-torn areas and a Taliban stronghold. ''From one
side we have the government and Americans, and on the other side the Taliban.
When the Taliban come in, they enter without asking, and it's the same with the
Americans. We cannot tolerate any of them.''

Even more evident is the growing public dissatisfaction with the government,
especially with the rampant corruption and venality of local officials, which
has played into the hands of the Taliban, who are remembered for running a
relatively corruption-free government.

Some people have turned to the Taliban to settle local disputes, in particular
in parts of Helmand where they dominate, said the director of the Afghan
Independent Human Rights Commission in Kandahar, Abdul Qadar Noorzai.

The United Nations special rapporteur for independence of the judiciary, Leandro
Despouy, condemned the public execution of a man accused of a crime, Badshah
Khan, after a trial by a Taliban court in the remote mountainous province of
Daikundi last month.

There is often no government presence in such remote areas, and the Taliban seem
to be influencing those tribal leaders who usually decide local matters. ''It is
entirely unacceptable for a nonstate entity, such as the Taliban, to exercise a
state function by trying and punishing an alleged criminal,'' Mr. Despouy said
in a statement. ''The return to the practice of making a public spectacle of the
execution harks back to the worst excesses of the old regime.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: American soldiers clashed with Taliban fighters in a village
about 90 miles northeast of Kandahar on Friday. (Photos by Tyler Hicks/The New
York Times)
 Hajji Agha Lalai, an Afghan tribal leader, opposes the Taliban. (Photo by Kate
Brooks/Polaris, for The New York Times)(pg. 24)Map of Afghanistan highlighting
the Panjwai district: The Taliban have suffered heavy losses in the Panjwai
district. (pg. 24)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALIBAN (95%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); TERRORISM
(78%); ARMIES (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(76%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); ARMED FORCES (76%); RURAL COMMUNITIES
(75%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (71%); RELIGION (66%) United
States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS (54%)
Taliban; North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: Carlotta Gall

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (95%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); KHOST, AFGHANISTAN
(79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (98%); CANADA (93%); NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kandahar (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             939 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 14, 2006 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Cleric Linked to 2002 Bali Nightclub Bombings Is Released

BYLINE: By RAYMOND BONNER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 779 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Wednesday, June 14


A radical Islamic cleric, whom the Bush administration has portrayed as an
important operative for Al Qaeda in Southeast Asia, walked out of prison on
Wednesday morning, after serving just over a year for criminal conspiracy.

American officials, who had long pressed Indonesia to prosecute the cleric, Abu
Bakar Bashir, expressed disappointment over the release, as did officials in
Australia, which lost 88 citizens in the bombings of two Bali nightclubs that
killed 202 people in October 2002.

The release is also sure to raise questions about Indonesia's commitment to
combating terrorism, even though the government has prosecuted and imposed harsh
sentences, including death, on many of the people involved in the major
terrorist attacks here in the last four years. Most of the military leaders of
Jemaah Islamiyah, Mr. Bashir's organization, have been arrested or killed.

A spokesman for the American Embassy in Jakarta said Tuesday that the United
States was ''deeply disappointed'' that Mr. Bashir, 67, had been sentenced to
only 30 months in prison after a court found him guilty of a ''sinister
conspiracy'' in connection with the bombings, but acquitted him of seven
terrorism charges, in March 2005. The judges said then that Mr. Bashir ''knew
the perpetrators,'' and that his words might have encouraged them.

''The possibility that a person responsible for such a terrible crime could go
free after a light sentence of 30 months is cause for concern,'' said the
spokesman, Max Kwak.

The actual time served was reduced to just over a year, because he was given
credit for previous time served and for good behavior.

Officials in the United States and Australia have contended that Mr. Bashir, the
spiritual leader of Jemaah Islamiyah, had a direct role in the bombings of the
Bali nightclubs in October 2002, and of the bombing of the Marriott Hotel in
Jakarta that killed 12 people in August 2003.

In a 2003 trial he was acquitted of terrorism charges, but convicted on a
passport violation. After serving that sentence, he was released, but not for
long, as the United States and Australia pressured Indonesia to file the new
charges. Legal observers here said the case against Mr. Bashir was weak. The
strongest evidence linking him to the Bali terrorist attacks was never heard by
the five-judge panel because of a decision by the Bush administration that the
Indonesian government would not be allowed to interview two senior Qaeda
operatives, Riudan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, and Omar al-Faruq. The
two men are in the hands of the C.I.A. at undisclosed locations.

Hambali, who was one of the few non-Arabs close to Osama bin Laden, told his
interrogators that he had been the link between Jemaah Islamiyah and Al Qaeda,
according to the report of the 9/11 Commission. Mr. Faruq told the C.I.A. that
Mr. Bashir had provided logistical and financial support for several terrorist
attacks.

It is not known under what conditions Hambali and Mr. Faruq made these
statements, and they were not admissible in the Indonesian court.

Mr. Bashir has steadfastly denied any involvement in terrorist activities, but
has been equally firm in his admiration for Mr. bin Laden, and in his loathing
of Jews and the United States.

Until Mr. Bashir made common cause with Al Qaeda sometime in the 1990's, the
primary goal of Jemaah Islamiyah was the establishment of an Islamic state in
Indonesia. Mr. Bashir is expected to return to proselytizing for that cause.

Jemaah Islamiyah has been severely weakened by the Indonesian police and
intelligence services, terrorism experts here say. Sidney Jones, an authority on
Jemaah Islamiyah and the director of the Jakarta office of the International
Crisis Group, an organization that studies violent conflicts, said that
releasing Mr. Bashir was not likely to increase the threat of terrorism.

''He's got adoring supporters, no question,'' she said. ''But while he will
probably be able to draw thousands of fans to lectures in favor of Islamic law
or against the U.S., those crowds should not be seen as all terrorists in the
making.''

Transfer of Suspects Condemned

  BRUSSELS, June 14 (Reuters) -- Amnesty International, citing accusations that
terrorism suspects have been seized by the Central Intelligence Agency and
transferred to countries that use torture, called Wednesday for European nations
to stop being ''partners in crime'' with the United States.

The human rights group urged European Union leaders, who are meeting in Brussels
this week, to say publicly that so-called rendition flights were
''unacceptable,'' and to make sure their airspace and airports were not used for
such flights.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 16, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Wednesday about the prison release of Abu Bakar
Bashir, a militant Islamic Indonesian cleric, referred incorrectly to a senior
Qaeda operative, Omar al-Faruq, who did not testify at Mr. Bashir's trials in
2003 and in early 2005 because the Bush administration would not allow
Indonesian authorities to interview him. Mr. Faruq was transferred from C.I.A.
custody to American military custody and then escaped from detention in Bagram,
Afghanistan, in July 2005. He is not in C.I.A. custody.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); AL-QAEDA (90%); SENTENCING (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
CONSPIRACY (90%); RELIGION (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (76%); JUDGES (75%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (73%); ACQUITTAL (72%); ARRESTS (72%); VERDICTS (72%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (71%); INTERVIEWS (68%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%) Terms not
available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (84%); JEMAAH ISLAMIYA (56%)

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (58%)

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (90%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); AUSTRALIA (94%); INDONESIA (94%); SOUTH-EASTERN
ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%)

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             942 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 15, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sudan: Prosecutor Documents Mass Killings

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 13

LENGTH: 111 words


Luis Moreno-Ocampo, the prosecutor for the International Criminal Court, charged
by the United Nations with investigating alleged crimes against humanity in the
Darfur region, said in a report to the Security Council that the court had
documented thousands of civilian deaths, hundreds of rapes and a ''significant
number'' of massacres that killed hundreds of people at once. ''There are
eyewitness accounts that the perpetrators made statements reinforcing the
targeted nature of the attacks, such as 'We will kill all the black,' '' his
report said. He said Sudan's national courts had shown little desire to
investigate possible crimes against humanity in Darfur.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (91%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (88%);
EYEWITNESSES (86%); TESTIMONY (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%) International Criminal Court; United Nations

COUNTRY: SUDAN (97%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: June 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             948 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 16, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Britain May Take Liberian Ex-Ruler

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 15


Britain said on Thursday that the former Liberian president, Charles Taylor,
might serve his sentence in a British prison if he is convicted at his
forthcoming war crimes trial.

The announcement paves the way for Mr. Taylor, who is being held in Sierra Leone
on charges related to his role in that country's bloody civil war, to face trial
in The Hague. The Netherlands has agreed to be host to the trial, but only on
the condition that Mr. Taylor would not serve his sentence there if convicted.
Other European countries have refused to allow Mr. Taylor to serve any sentence
within their borders, but Britain, the former colonial power in Sierra Leone and
a country that sent troops there in 2000 to help end the war, said it had
started the process, ''and we want to finish it,'' in the words of Lord
Triesman, the minister for Africa.

Margaret Beckett, the British foreign minister, said the decision to take in Mr.
Taylor, who has been charged with 11 counts of war crimes, crimes against
humanity and other violations, was evidence of Britain's ''commitment to
international justice.''

''I am delighted to be able to respond positively to the request of the United
Nations secretary general that, should he be convicted, Charles Taylor serve his
sentence in the U.K.,'' Mrs. Beckett said.

Mr. Taylor stands accused of financing the rebel force in Sierra Leone, the
Revolutionary United Front, by selling diamonds on its behalf and then supplying
it with arms. In a decade-long war that left 50,000 people dead and countless
others maimed and displaced, the rebels were notorious for raping civilians and
for using machetes to kill people and to hack off limbs and other body parts.

The trial is to be held in the International Criminal Court complex in The Hague
under the auspices of the United Nations-backed court established in Sierra
Leone to try people suspected of atrocities in the war, which lasted from 1991
to 2002.

Mr. Taylor, who was arrested in March 2006, is to be tried in The Hague because
of fears that trying him in West Africa, where he still has allies, would
further destabilize a region trying to recover from its wounds.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SENTENCING (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); ARRESTS
(72%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (70%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(70%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (69%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (55%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%); LONDON, ENGLAND (59%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); LIBERIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); UNITED KINGDOM
(93%); AFRICA (92%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             952 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  United Nations: Council Agrees To Shift Trial Of Liberia's
Ex-Leader

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 98 words


The Security Council unanimously voted to authorize the transfer of Charles
Taylor, the former Liberian warlord turned president, from Sierra Leone to the
International Criminal Court at The Hague to stand trial. He faces 11 counts of
war crimes and crimes against humanity in connection with Sierra Leone's civil
war, in which 50,000 people were killed and thousands more were maimed. The
Council action followed by a day a pledge by Britain to imprison him if he is
found guilty, a decision that met a Dutch demand that he not remain in the
Netherlands after his trial.   WARREN HOGE (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); POLITICS (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(84%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla
Warfare; Politics and Government

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations; International Criminal Court

PERSON: Warren Hoge; Charles G Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); LIBERIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             954 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 17, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

PENTAGON STUDY DESCRIBES ABUSE BY SPECIAL UNITS

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE MILITARY;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1152 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 16


United States Special Operations troops employed a set of harsh, unauthorized
interrogation techniques against detainees in Iraq during a four-month period in
early 2004, long after approval for their use was rescinded, according to a
Pentagon inquiry released Friday.

The investigation is the last of 12 major inquiries to be made public that focus
on allegations of detainee abuse by American personnel in Cuba, Afghanistan and
Iraq, and the first to focus on Special Operations troops, who operate with more
latitude than other military units. It detailed harsh treatment that continued
at isolated bases even after the abuses first surfaced at the Abu Ghraib prison.

Special Operations interrogators gave some detainees only bread or crackers and
water if they did not cooperate, according to the investigation, by Brig. Gen.
Richard P. Formica of the Army. One prisoner was fed only bread and water for 17
days. Other detainees were locked for as many as seven days in cells so small
that they could neither stand nor lie down, while interrogators played loud
music that disrupted their sleep.

The inquiry also determined that some detainees were stripped naked, drenched
with water and then interrogated in air-conditioned rooms or in cold weather.
General Formica said it appeared that members of the Navy Seals had used that
technique in the case of one detainee who died after questioning in Mosul in
2004, but he reported that he had no specific allegations that the use of the
technique was related to that death.

Despite the findings, General Formica recommended that none of the service
members be disciplined, saying what they did was wrong but not deliberate abuse.
He faulted ''inadequate policy guidance'' rather than ''personal failure'' for
the mistreatment, and cited the dangerous environment in which Special
Operations forces carried out their missions. He said that, from his
observations, none of the detainees seemed to be the worse for wear because of
the treatment. ''Seventeen days with only bread and water is too long,'' the
general concluded. But he added that the military command's surgeon general had
advised him ''it would take longer than 17 days to develop a protein or vitamin
deficiency from a diet of bread and water.''

General Formica's review focused on the Combined Joint Special Operations Task
Force-Arabian Peninsula, which included soldiers from the Army's Fifth and 10th
Special Forces Groups. It did not cover the actions in Iraq of more highly
classified Special Operations units, including Delta Force and some Navy Seal
groups, or other specialized units including Task Force 6-26, a subject of
extensive allegations of misconduct that were reported by The New York Times in
March. General Formica recommended eight changes, including more training for
Special Operations interrogators, minimum standards for detention conditions and
new policies regulating the use of indigenous forces who worked with those in
Special Operations. Pentagon officials said Friday that all eight had been
carried out.

General Formica said that the Special Operations forces mistakenly used 5 of 12
interrogation techniques between February and May 2004 that Lt. Gen. Ricardo S.
Sanchez, then the top commander in Iraq, had withdrawn in October 2003 because
military lawyers had found they were too harsh. ''It is regrettable,'' General
Formica said in an interview at the Pentagon with three reporters on Friday.
''But they were erroneously given the wrong policy.''

General Sanchez had approved the harsher techniques, like blaring loud music and
using military dogs to frighten Iraqi captives, in September 2003. But confusion
over use of the techniques became widespread, even after they were barred a
month later except when approved by General Sanchez. Many of the American
captors at the Abu Ghraib prison have also said they believed the techniques
were authorized, even without General Sanchez's approval.

The report made public on Friday was a heavily redacted copy of the 75-page
classified document that General Formica completed 20 months ago. Members of
Congress were briefed on it about a year ago. The Pentagon had refused requests
since then from The New York Times and other news organizations to provide a
declassified version of it. Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld had promised
that declassified versions of all major inquiries would be made public, but this
one was released in response to a Freedom of Information Act request by the
American Civil Liberties Union.

Senior Defense Department officials said General Formica's review was not
intended to be a wide-ranging evaluation of Special Operations' detention and
interrogation practices. General Formica conducted interviews regarding three
separate episodes of alleged detainee abuse involving Special Operations, some
of them referred from another Army inquiry by Maj. Gen. George R. Fay. General
Formica also reviewed the findings of seven other instances that had been
previously investigated.

General Formica said there was no physical or medical evidence to substantiate
allegations by several members of an Iraqi family that American interrogators at
Abu Ghraib in December 2003 had beaten and slapped them, and then sodomized them
with a water bottle. In addition, he said, the family members were known to be
insurgent sympathizers. In a second case, General Formica said two Iraqi
detainees at a safe house in April 2004 were fed only bread and water for 13 and
17 days, respectively. But he said allegations that a former Iraqi policeman and
an Iraqi-born Lebanese interpreter, both working with the Americans, had beaten
and kicked them were unsubstantiated.

General Formica found that in the third case at a Special Operations outpost,
near Tikrit, in April and May 2004, three detainees were held in cells 4 feet
high, 4 feet long and 20 inches wide, except to use the bathroom, to be washed
or to be interrogated. He concluded that two days in such confinement ''would be
reasonable; five to seven days would not.'' Two of the detainees were held for
seven days; one for two days, General Formica concluded.

Of the seven other previously investigated cases, General Formica concluded that
allegations in two were unfounded and that one did not involve Special
Operations, the report said. In two other cases, investigations were still
pending when General Formica completed his report in November 2004. A Pentagon
spokesman, Lt. Col. Mark Ballesteros, said Friday that those inquiries had been
completed, but that he would not comment on their findings.

General Formica said in the interview on Friday that he believed that the
Special Operations troops thought they were following authorized procedures, and
corrected them after he pointed out their error. ''I didn't find cruel and
malicious criminals that are out there looking for detainees to abuse,'' he
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS
(90%); ARMIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); NAVIES (89%); PRISONS (78%); MISCONDUCT
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); MALNUTRITION (76%); MILITARY BASES (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (74%); CORRECTIONS (74%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (73%); TERRORISM (65%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) United States Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Prisoners of War; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); US NAVY (55%)

PERSON: Eric Schmitt; Richard P (Brig Gen) Formica

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); CUBA (90%); GULF
STATES (58%)

REGION: Iraq; Guantanamo Bay Naval Base (Cuba); Afghanistan; Abu Ghraib (Iraq);
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             955 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Long Road Ahead in Iraq

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 693 words


Rather than engage in a serious debate about America's future course in Iraq,
President Bush and the Republican Congress have again opted for sound bites and
partisanship. Yet all the choreographed posturing and a one-week flurry of good
news cannot blot out the larger picture of dubious trends and dismal prospects.
Not only is the glass less than half full. The water level, viewed over months
rather than days, is not noticeably rising.

Take the police. It is meaningless to talk about Iraq's taking charge of its own
security when the police forces that patrol its cities and run its prisons are
rife with sectarian militias and death squads that would sooner wage a civil war
than prevent one.

While Mr. Bush holds out visions of Iraqi security forces standing up so that
Americans can stand down, Iraq's deputy justice minister more candidly told The
Washington Post last week that ''we cannot control the prisons; it's as simple
as that.'' He added that ''our jails are infiltrated by the militias from top to
bottom, from Basra to Baghdad.''

A new interior minister can change that only if backed by a new configuration of
political power, no longer subject to vetoes by parties like the Supreme Council
for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq that run some of the very militias that must
be curbed.

Consider also the level of sectarian violence, a clear indicator of whether Iraq
is moving toward national unity or sectarian conflict. In May 2003, there were
five recorded incidents of sectarian violence. In May 2004, there were 10. In
May 2005, there were 20. Last month there were 250. This is a very discouraging
trend, as is the predictable response: thousands of families fleeing their
homes.

Or look over the abysmal record of America's multibillion-dollar reconstruction
effort in Iraq, ground to a near halt by the lethal combination of military
insecurity, incompetent Pentagon management and rampant American and Iraqi
corruption. Electric power output has virtually flat-lined for two years.
Baghdad residents still have power for only five to eight hours a day. Oil
output, the key to Iraq's paying its bills, remains below depressed prewar
levels and not much higher than two years ago. Health clinics that were supposed
to build good will toward America are so badly over budget and behind schedule
that most may never be built.

Pretending things are better than they are will not make them so. America has
some very hard strategic choices pressing down on it in Iraq -- much more
complicated than whether to set an arbitrary target date for troop withdrawal.

Should Washington continue to tolerate the operations of Shiite militias and
death squads or should it use American military power to loosen their hold?
Should the United States resign itself to slow-motion ''ethnic cleansing'' in
some mixed areas or try to stop it by pouring more American troops into zones
around Baghdad and Basra where the threat seems most acute? Is it more urgent to
convince Iraq's Arab neighbors that they share a stake in Iraqi stability or to
scare them off by proclaiming that America's larger goal in Iraq is to ratchet
up the pressure for democratic change in a neighborhood almost universally ruled
by authoritarians?

A Congressional leadership doing its job would hold hearings on these critical
issues instead of setting partisan bear traps for November's election.

After a week in which the American military death toll in Iraq passed 2,500 and
in which an Iraqi official spoke of a possible amnesty offer to insurgents who
killed some of those Americans -- an offer we can safely predict Washington will
never allow -- the real tragedy of Iraq lies not just in the thousands of Iraqi
and American lives lost or the shame of Abu Ghraib or Haditha.

It lies even more in the continued lack of leadership and candor from the White
House. No upbeat presidential trip to Baghdad or flag-waving Congressional
resolution can long divert attention from the sorry reality. More than 130,000
American troops are now spending their fourth year mired in a dangerous and
ill-defined mission with no realistic plan for success and no end in sight.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%); VETO
(78%); POLICE FORCES (76%); RELIGION (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); WAR
CRIMES (74%); CIVIL WAR (74%); POLITICS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (71%);
CORRUPTION (70%); MILITARY WEAPONS (66%); OIL & GAS OUTPUT (64%); GENOCIDE
(60%); CLINICS & OUTPATIENT SERVICES (50%) Editorials; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Prisoners of War;
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

COMPANY: NASH HOLDINGS LLC (56%); GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (56%)

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%)

TICKER: GHC (NYSE) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS:
PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%); NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS
CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120
PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%) George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (96%)

REGION: Iraq; Abu Ghraib (Iraq); Haditha (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             958 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

Chechen Separatist Leader Reported Killed by Russians

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 692 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 17


Russian special forces killed the leader of Chechnya's separatists on Saturday,
officials said, reveling in a new blow to a rebel movement with a long history
of terrorist attacks that has recently appeared seriously weakened.

The leader, Abdul Khalim Saidullayev, died in a raid in a Chechen village in
which two Russian officers were also killed, the director of the Federal
Security Service, Nikolai P. Patrushev, said at an international security
conference, Russian news agencies reported.

Officials said they would conduct tests to confirm that the body was Mr.
Saidullayev's, but they displayed little doubt that they had succeeded in
finding and killing the movement's leader. Russian television channels showed
gruesome images of a body that appeared to be his, and a Web site linked to the
Chechen rebels confirmed his death and declared him a martyr.

''The terrorists have been virtually decapitated,'' Prime Minister Ramzan A.
Kadyrov, the leader of Chechnya's pro-Moscow government, told the Interfax news
agency in the regional capital, Grozny. ''They have sustained a severe blow, and
they are never going to recover from it.''

Mr. Saidullayev, who was believed to be in his 30's, was a little-known fighter,
religious figure and Islamic judge when he was appointed in March 2005 to
replace Aslan Maskhadov, the rebel leader and elected president of Chechnya
during its brief period of independence in the late 1990's.

Mr. Maskhadov, who led the separatists after Russian forces invaded the republic
in 1999 to reassert federal control for the second time, was killed that month
in a similar raid in the village of Tolstoy-Yurt, only 12 miles from Grozny.

Mr. Saidullayev led a movement that continues to wage a partisan war against
Russian forces in Chechnya and other largely Muslim republics in the Northern
Caucasus, but he remained a shadowy figure who was far less prominent than
Russia's most wanted man, Shamil Basayev.

Mr. Basayev, nominally the movement's second in command, has claimed
responsibility for the worst terrorist attacks in Russia, including the hostage
siege of a school in Beslan in 2004 that ended with the deaths of 331 people.

In remarks posted on a separatist Web site last week, Mr. Saidullayev offered to
negotiate peace but vowed to continue struggling for independence, a goal that
seems farther away than ever. He said that as long as Russian forces killed
women and children in Chechnya, he could not order a halt to attacks like that
at Beslan. ''Was it not this callous indifference to the killing of our children
that made Beslan and things that happened before it possible?'' he said, in
remarks published in a Bulgarian news weekly, Politika, as transcribed by the
BBC.

Mr. Saidullayev died in Argun, a village that is also close to Grozny and is
believed to have been his hometown. Officials provided few details of the raid,
but it appeared that some of his associates might have escaped, since Mr.
Patrushev said a hunt was under way.

The fact that he was able to enter a town under federal control underscored the
republic's instability, but officials portrayed his death as evidence of the
separatists' growing weakness and marginalization. The separatists move in small
groups and have not recently been able to attack in large numbers.

Mr. Kadyrov, in remarks shown on the Russian television station NTV, said Mr.
Saidullayev had been betrayed by an informer bought for the price of a dose of
heroin. Mr. Kadyrov said the rebel leader died even as he was planning new
attacks in Chechnya and possibly beyond.

Although Mr. Kadyrov and other pro-Moscow forces have asserted greater control
over the republic -- and have been accused of committing human-rights violations
in the process -- attacks recur with disturbing regularity, especially during
the spring and summer.

Mr. Basayev and another prominent rebel commander, Doku Umarov, remain at large.
This week the two men appeared in a video posted on a rebel Web site.

In it, Mr. Basayev taunted Mr. Kadyrov, claiming to have killed his father,
Akhmad, in a bombing in Grozny in 2004, and to have put a price on the son's
head.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (91%);
TERRORISM (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); APPOINTMENTS (72%); RELIGION
(70%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (69%) Terrorism

PERSON: Steven Lee Myers; Abdul Khalim Saidullayev; Shamil Basayev

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%)

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%); BULGARIA (58%)

REGION: Russia; Chechnya (Russia); Beslan (Russia)

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             960 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

4 Months Into Aid Cutoff, Gazans Barely Scrape By

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1406 words

DATELINE: JABALIYA CAMP, Gaza Strip, June 16


In the fourth month without salaries from the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority,
the Abu Rizek family scours greenhouses after the harvest, looking for potatoes
left in the ground.

Mariam al-Wahedi no longer receives her $21 a month from social services and is
living off the $200 she got last month by selling her last piece of jewelry, a
bracelet given to her 30 years ago. Khalid Muhammad, a policeman, moonlights in
a friend's shop, selling used cellphone batteries for $2.25, and says he now
yells at his wife and sometimes hits his children. Umm Jihad, with six children,
begs in the market.

Awni Shibrawi, a jeweler, admits that he is almost too bad-tempered to go to
work in his shop and sit all day doing nothing. Khadida Farajabah, a vegetable
seller, says she has granted nearly $2,000 in credit, digging out the list she
keeps inside her blouse, and cannot afford to give any more. Majid Nofad, a
butcher, says business is down 60 percent and he has stopped giving credit after
the total mounted to nearly $3,000.

More middle-aged men can be seen on the piers of Gaza, fishing with boys, to try
to catch some protein for dinner. Couples are postponing marriage. Muhammad
Kahloot, a colonel in the Palestinian police, is trying to decide whether he can
afford the $700 his son, Khaled, needs to finish his last semester at the
university, or whether to use the money for food and utilities.

When Colonel Kahloot uses his cellphone, he hangs up quickly, so his number
appears as a ''missed call'' and he is not charged, leaving it up to a friend to
phone him back.

Mr. Muhammad, 31, the moonlighting policeman, has four children. ''When my wife
goes to the grocery, the owner says, 'Where's the money?' And she says, 'Maybe
today, maybe tomorrow,' and this way we pass the time.'' Mr. Muhammad said the
family eats beans and local greens, which are about 20 cents a pound. ''Forget
about meat,'' he said, laughing. ''We don't know the chicken anymore. We hear in
the news about the fish.''

The ordinary Palestinians of Gaza are coping as best they can in a world without
salaries and very little money circulating, after the Western cutoff of aid to
the Palestinian Authority, which Hamas took over in March. The Authority employs
almost 40 percent of those with regular jobs in Gaza.

There is not a humanitarian crisis here yet, but one is building. No one knows
anyone who is starving, but nearly everyone dependent on government salaries is
eating less and less well, with a sharp reduction of chicken, meat and
vegetables in a diet that is now based on the cheapest ingredients -- beans,
potatoes, greens and bread.

The World Food Program, with 160,000 nonrefugee beneficiaries out of Gaza's
population of 1.4 million, sends its workers on house visits. They say people
are cutting down on the number of meals a day, and few are eating meat, eggs or
yogurt, said Kirstie Campbell, a spokesman, who estimates that half the
population of Gaza is not getting enough to eat.

At the same time, Dr. Ibrahim al-Habbash, the director of Gaza's largest
hospital, Al Shifa, said that the worst shortages of medicines have been
alleviated with increased donations from donors and Physicians for Human Rights/
Israel, an advocacy group, while the Karni crossing from Israel to Gaza has been
open more regularly in the last few weeks.

According to a new report issued this week by United Nations agencies here,
''the humanitarian situation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip has deteriorated
rapidly in 2006, a result of the fiscal crisis facing the Palestinian Authority
following the election of Hamas'' as well as continuing ''Israeli security and
access restrictions.'' The number of Palestinian families dropping below the
poverty level -- defined as $2.70 per person a day -- has increased by 9 percent
already, the report says.

On May 31, the United Nations increased its emergency appeal to donors for the
Palestinian territories for 2006 by 79 percent, from $215 million to $384
million, to deal with ''a deepening humanitarian crisis,'' said David Shearer,
the director of the local United Nations Office for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs. The money would go for emergency job creation, cash
assistance, food and medical supplies, he said, adding: ''That amount is not
what we think is necessary but what we think we can handle.''

Ms. Campbell says the World Food Program will increase its supplies by 25
percent and distribute more canned meat and canned fish. It will also allow
Palestinian Authority personnel, if they qualify as poor enough, to register for
benefits.

The second major employer in Gaza, after the Palestinian Authority, is the
United Nations Relief and Works Agency, which is responsible for registered
refugees -- some 70 percent of Gaza's population. The agency employs 9,100 Gaza
residents and continues to pay salaries. But while in the past it gave little
aid to refugees who worked for the Palestinian Authority, it is trying to serve
those now poor enough to need it.

Gina Benevento of the United Nations agency said that 14,500 Authority employees
are newly registered for aid in Gaza, and another 4,500 in the richer West Bank.
''In a few days, we expect the number in Gaza to reach 17,000, and we're
planning for 23,000,'' she said. Families in Gaza are large, with an average of
seven members.

The agency provides aid coupons for packages of flour, rice, sugar, powdered
whole milk, sunflower oil and lentils. Each package is worth about $18 per
person, per month, depending on the size of the family.

Unicef says it is tripling its appeal for the Palestinian territory to $22.7
million for this year, and says one in three newborns is ''at risk of dying in
the hospitals of Gaza'' because of a lack of medicines and essential drugs,
according to a spokesman, Damien Personnaz.

The United States and the European Union, the major donors of some $1 billion a
year in aid to the Palestinian Authority -- half its income -- say that Hamas is
a terrorist organization, and unless it agrees to recognize the right of Israel
to exist, forswear violence and accept previous Israeli-Palestinian agreements,
aid will largely stop.

The squeeze and the inability to pay salaries for the Authority's 165,000
workers has put Hamas under significant pressure, said government spokesman
Ghazi Hamad. ''This is a big challenge for us, and we're trying to solve it
through the president and political flexibility,'' he said. Then he conceded:
''It risks us as a government.''

The Palestinian leader, Mahmoud Abbas, is negotiating with Hamas on a unified
Palestinian political document, drafted by prisoners, that would implicitly
recognize Israel in its pre-1967 boundaries. Mr. Abbas told Hamas that ''if you
approve the political document, we can convince the West to pay and lift the
siege,'' Mr. Hamad said. ''There's some flexibility in the European Union, but
in the United States, I don't know.''

On Friday in Brussels, the European Union said it had drafted a temporary aid
mechanism to provide payments of $200 a month to the poorest in Gaza, ensure
fuel supplies and help keep health and social services going, all without
dealing with the Palestinian Authority. Washington, which had objected to paying
any salaries, says it will go along.

The Europeans hope to start the aid in July, with an initial European allocation
of about $125 million -- about the cost of one month's salary bill for the
Palestinian Authority. The Europeans also want Israel to stop withholding some
$50 million a month in taxes and duties it collects for the Palestinians.

But Palestinians say they have debts they may never be able to pay, and that the
new aid will not reach most of the Authority's workers.

Mr. Muhammad, the policeman, says he and his wife fight constantly now, usually
over something involving the children. ''I used to give them a half-shekel for
pocket money,'' he said, which is worth about a dime. ''Now they ask for money
and I hit them. How can I gave them this when we need the shekels for food?''

Asked how long he could go on like this, Mr. Muhammad paused. ''Maybe two
months, then all the fuel is gone,'' he said. ''Finally, I'll put the gun'' --
he reached below the counter to get his AK-47, which he stuck under his chin --
''and kill myself.'' He laughed again, but not very convincingly, and the mark
the muzzle made on his throat took a long time to fade.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Men in Gaza, some unemployed and others unpaid, fish to feed
their families. Those dependent on government salaries are eating less well now.
(Photo by George Azar for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FRUITS & VEGETABLES (90%); HAMAS (90%);
WAGES & SALARIES (89%); STARVATION (78%); MEN (78%); MARRIAGE (78%); MOBILE &
CELLULAR TELEPHONES (75%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (73%); TERRORISM (73%); FRUIT &
VEGETABLE STORES (73%); MEATS (72%); FOOD CHARITIES (69%); POULTRY (69%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (63%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (62%); MIDDLE AGED PERSONS
(52%) Shortages; Finances; Foreign Aid; Terrorism; Palestinians; Wages and
Salaries

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%) Hamas; Palestinian Authority

PERSON: Steven Erlanger

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (94%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Israel

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             961 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Smart Bombs, Smarter Intelligence

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk; THE WORLD; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 849 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


THE Pentagon has cast its struggle with terrorists, insurgents and extremists as
the ''long war.'' The designation is intended to suggest a decades-long test of
wills against a fanatical enemy that will likely continue well after the United
States reduces its forces in Iraq.

But the Pentagon's long war has been punctuated by short, though intense,
episodes in which American commanders have been forced to make snap decisions on
whether to bomb vital but fleeting targets.

The airstrike that turned Abu Musab al-Zarqawi's safe house into a pile of
rubble was the latest example of intelligence that was rapidly processed, turned
into targeting coordinates, approved for attack and communicated to an aircraft
equipped with precision-guided bombs. But it was hardly the only one, and as Mr.
Zarqawi's successor -- believed to be an Egyptian named Abu Ayyub al-Masri --
seeks to carry out his jihad against the Americans there will undoubtedly be
more.

The acronym-happy military, in fact, has already given the process a name:
T.S.T. or ''time-sensitive targeting.'' The question is how the United States
can replicate the extraordinary success it had with the strike on Mr. Zarqawi
and avoid the frustrating breakdowns from the early days of the war.

The issue is not technical capability. The critical limitation is intelligence.
''We can do the 'how,' '' said a senior Air Force officer, who insisted on
remaining anonymous because he was not authorized to speak on this issue. ''It
is getting the 'what' and 'where' that is the challenge.''

During the 1991 Persian Gulf war, the United States' ability to carry out
time-sensitive attacks was embryonic. Over the next decade or so, however, a new
generation of military technology entered the American arsenal. The military
acquired satellite-guided bombs, an important complement to laser-guided bombs,
which can be impaired by clouds or bad weather. It fielded Predator drones. It
also institutionalized the procedures at its command centers for rapidly
carrying out airstrikes.

''We train to it in exercises,'' said Charles R. Heflebower, a retired
lieutenant general, who served as the top Air Force commander in Korea. ''For
example, almost every Red Flag has a T.S.T. element to it,'' he added, referring
to the exercises carried out at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada.

Carrying out timely airstrikes to kill enemy commanders and destroy other vital
targets remains a complex undertaking against adversaries who, unlike Iraq, have
formidable air defenses.

That recognition, and the calculation that there may be some terrorist targets
that are beyond the immediate reach of American aircraft, had led the Pentagon
to propose the development of an ultimate T.S.T. system: submarine-launched
Trident II missiles that would be equipped with a non-nuclear warhead. The
Pentagon argues that the system would give it a global capability to take out a
target within an hour.

In the case of Iraq, the United States anticipated the need to carry out rapid
airstrikes.

The war, in fact, began with a frantic effort to attack a time-sensitive target:
a suspected underground bunker at the Dora Farms complex near Baghdad, where the
C.I.A. reported that Saddam Hussein was staying. F-117 fighters were dispatched
to bomb the site. Only after the fall of Baghdad did the American military learn
that the Iraqi leader had not been near Dora Farms and that there was no bunker
at the site.

The United States had no more luck several weeks later when a B-1 bomber dropped
four satellite-guided bombs at a suspected refuge for the Iraqi leader in the
Mansour district of Baghdad. Pentagon officials said it took no more than 45
minutes to carry out the strike from the time the first intelligence was
received that Mr. Hussein had entered the building.

As it happened, Mr. Hussein was not there, but 18 civilians were killed in the
attack, according to Human Rights Watch. That is precisely the sort of outcome
that breeds ill will among the Iraqis and makes it more difficult to obtain
useful intelligence about insurgents.

Considering the importance of timely intelligence, some Air Force officers have
argued that the service should spend more on aircraft equipped with electronic
surveillance and imaging capabilities and less on the aircraft needed to carry
out the strikes.

The American military's superior technology, rigorous training and command of
the skies give it the means to deliver pinpoint strikes with devastating effect.
Surveillance by aircraft and even satellites in space can be used to find new
targets. But there will always be a risk of error since commanders often cannot
wait for perfect intelligence if a strike is to be effective.

In the sort of counterinsurgency campaign the United States is conducting in
Iraq, however, obtaining reliable intelligence from operatives in the field,
enemy turncoats and ordinary Iraqis is vital. There is no high-tech fix for
Iraq. When it comes to delivering thunderbolts from on high, success will still
depend mightily on the intelligence gathered by the boots on the ground.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BOMBINGS (89%);
AIR FORCES (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); UNMANNED MILITARY AIRCRAFT (79%); DESERT
STORM (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (74%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); LASER WEAPONS (73%); MILITARY BASES (72%); LASERS (71%); MILITARY
SATELLITES (67%); WEATHER (66%) Bombs and Explosives; United States Armament and
Defense; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: JAMA'AT AL-TAWHID WAL-JIHAD (AL-QAIDA IN IRAQ) (56%)

PERSON: Michael R Gordon; Abu Musab Al- Zarqawi

STATE: NEVADA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); IRAQ (94%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%); GULF STATES (58%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             962 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Long Interrogation

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 42 words


Andrew Rice's ''The Long Interrogation'' (June 4) is a vivid reminder that some
of us have paid for our freedom in ways that are almost too terrifying to
believe. And that this freedom is worth protecting in any way possible.

Corey DuBrowa

Lake Oswego, Ore.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); REFUGEES (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); DEPORTATION (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Deportation; Immigration and Refugees

PERSON: corey dubrowa; Andrew Rice; Kelbessa Negewo

REGION: Ethiopia

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             963 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 18, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Long Interrogation

SECTION: Section 6; Column 3; Magazine; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 81 words


Assuming an immigrant has committed crimes against humanity in his or her native
country and extradition exposes this person to a significant risk of torture or
death, the humane course of action is clear: a trial based on international
justice with punishment to be served in the new home country or any country that
abides by international rules of law and is willing to accept the convicted
criminal. To return Kelbessa Negewo to Ethiopia would be criminal.

Jerry Frankel

Plano, Tex.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); DEPORTATION (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%);
IMMIGRATION (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%) Deportation; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Murders and Attempted Murders

PERSON: Jerry Frankel; Andrew Rice; Kelbessa Negewo

COUNTRY: ETHIOPIA (90%)

REGION: Ethiopia

LOAD-DATE: June 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             965 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 20, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Arab-Americans Sue U.S. Over Re-entry Procedures

BYLINE: By NEIL MacFARQUHAR

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 906 words


A group of Muslim and Arab-Americans, frustrated by what they say is the climate
of suspicion and fear that dogs their re-entry into the United States from trips
abroad, sued the Department of Homeland Security and the F.B.I. yesterday,
demanding that the courts protect their civil rights.

The seven main plaintiffs in the class action suit assert that both the United
States Congress and the federal government are ignoring the plight of innocent
Americans harassed repeatedly because of problems with the terrorist watch list.

The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Chicago by the American Civil
Liberties Union, contends that the courts alone can ensure that antiterrorism
policies do not repeatedly subject ordinary Americans to detention, questioning,
fingerprinting and the like.

''These are law-abiding citizens, and it is too extreme, too offensive,'' said
Harvey Grossman, the legal director for the A.C.L.U.'s Illinois branch, saying
that repeated complaints to Homeland Security as well as senators or congressmen
barely get a response. ''The court is the only forum where these people have a
chance to get a hearing.''

The lawsuit asserts that repeated border detentions and improper actions of
border guards violate the plaintiffs' constitutional protection against
unreasonable search and seizure and their right to travel.

Civil rights lawyers and government officials note that the courts have often
struck down efforts to limit the scope of searches or questioning by border
agents. But at least one other suit, a New York case involving five Muslim
Americans who were detained without explanation after returning from a religious
conference in Toronto, is proceeding.

''We will not let anybody into the country until we are sure they are not going
to do harm to our citizens and violate our laws; it is that simple,'' said Bill
Anthony, the senior public affairs spokesman for United States Customs and
Border Protection. He said Congress had given the agency broad authority to
conduct border searches. Mr. Grossman said most case law on border searches
hinged on criminal suspects, with extended detention and searches deemed
reasonable to catch drug smugglers. His plaintiffs are not outlaws and are
always re-admitted eventually -- the government could question them at home if
needed, he said.

He noted that Robert S. Mueller III, director of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation, testifying May 2 before the Senate Judiciary Committee, could not
guarantee that inaccuracies on the terrorist watch list would be corrected
within the next five years.

The watch list, maintained since 2003 by the Terrorist Screening Center of the
F.B.I., had more than 237,000 names in 2005, according to a Homeland Security
report. Some 12 agencies can add names, and only the originating agency can
remove a name.

Donna A. Bucella, the center's director, said that matches were made every day
from the list and that it was an important tool for local law enforcement
agencies. ''Obviously there have been a lot of people complaining about it, so
there must be ways the U.S. government could refine it and make it better,'' Ms.
Bucella said.

The Illinois lawsuit, expanding on one first filed a year ago, focuses on two
main issues. First, those whose names resemble ones on the watch list and who
find it virtually impossible to get off the list.

A June 2005 government review found that 42 percent of the calls to the
screening center from December 2003 to January 2005 showed that the wrong person
was being detained. Second, some people on the list are wrongly categorized as
dangerous, resulting in agitated, armed border agents swarming them, the suit
claims.

The customs agency says the number of passengers detained for additional checks
is relatively small -- roughly 2 percent.

The men suing compare their brusque treatment to that in a totalitarian state.

Niaz Anwar, 55, who fled Afghanistan 11 days after the Soviets occupied the
country in 1978 and eventually settled near Boston, said he has been detained
nine times since April 2004. In April at the Peace Bridge in Buffalo, he said, a
border agent asked him his opinion about the Iraqi war and his party
affiliation.

''I was thinking that I was in Moscow during Brezhnev's time,'' Mr. Anwar said.

Mr. Anthony denied that any such questions could have been asked, saying any
officer who did risked termination.

Dr. Elie Ramzy Khoury, a 68-year-old Christian who immigrated from Jerusalem in
1963 and has been an American since 1974, said he had been stopped seven times
since May 2002 and now avoided even family funerals abroad because he so dreaded
the return. When he complained to Homeland Security, he received a letter back
two years later explaining how he could board domestic flights, which is not the
issue.

''They never tell me what they are looking for nor what they want,'' Dr. Khoury
said. ''I've never done anything unlawful or irregular. I'm a practicing
physician and I've been criminalized.''

Critics believe the government has not recovered from the shock that the 19
hijackers in the Sept. 11 attacks were moving about freely and has constructed a
big, ineffective sieve to try to avoid a repeat.

But the erroneous detentions show intelligence gathering remains poor, Mr.
Grossman said. ''It is this endless collection of information without any kind
of focus, and they allow it to go on and on and on.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: July 1, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on June 20 about a lawsuit by Muslim and Arab-Americans
who were erroneously detained at United States border crossings misstated the
year of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan. It was 1979, not 1978.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ARAB AMERICANS (92%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(91%); LITIGATION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(90%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); MUSLIM AMERICANS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); BORDER CONTROL (89%); RELIGION (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SMUGGLING (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); CLASS ACTIONS
(77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); TESTIMONY (77%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM
(77%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (76%); FINGERPRINTING (74%); LAWYERS (74%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (72%); EXCISE &
CUSTOMS (65%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (61%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%)
Terrorism; Search and Seizure; Suits and Litigation; Discrimination;
Arab-Americans; Islam; Travel Restrictions

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (92%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (58%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (57%) Homeland Security
Department

PERSON: ROBERT MUELLER (79%) Neil Macfarquhar

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (79%)

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             969 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 21, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Former Liberian President in The Hague for Trial

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 594 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 20


Charles G. Taylor, the former president of Liberia and one of West Africa's most
feared men, arrived in handcuffs in the Netherlands on Tuesday, and was
immediately taken to the jail near The Hague where the former Serbian president,
Slobodan Milosevic, spent the last five years of his life.

Mr. Taylor, 58, will be tried in the Netherlands by a specially created outpost
of the Special Court for Sierra Leone, the United Nations-backed tribunal that
has indicted him on charges of crimes against humanity and war crimes.

The long list of atrocities attributed to Mr. Taylor, a former warlord, includes
running a rebel force that killed tens of thousands of civilians and hacked off
the limbs of countless others.

A descendant of the returned slaves who founded Liberia, Mr. Taylor became
notorious for his use and abuse of children who were pressed into his forces.
The children were often brainwashed or drugged into killing their own parents or
relatives, prosecutors have said.

Getting Mr. Taylor to The Hague has been a diplomatic headache ever since his
capture as he tried to leave Nigeria in March. The Sierra Leone government
requested that he be tried outside the country because, it argued, his followers
could destabilize the region once again, after more than a decade of war.

Mr. Taylor is accused of financing the rebel force in Sierra Leone.

He will now be tried in The Hague, in a new courtroom at the International
Criminal Court. The Dutch government, while agreeing to the trial on its soil,
had insisted that Mr. Taylor was not welcome until another nation had committed
to taking him into prison if he were convicted.

Britain, the former colonial power in Sierra Leone, whose troops helped end the
war there, announced Thursday that Mr. Taylor could serve any sentence he might
receive in Britain.

Mr. Taylor will be held in the wing of a Dutch prison, where both the United
Nations tribunal for Yugoslavia and the new International Criminal Court have
rented a cellblock. He will be tried by judges from the Sierra Leone court,
which was created by the United Nations and the local government to try people
responsible for atrocities since 1996. The court has nine people in custody.

It may take some months before Mr. Taylor begins his trial in The Hague. After
his arrest, he attended a brief hearing at the Sierra Leone court, where he
pleaded not guilty to all 11 charges he faces.

He also declared he was partly indigent, saying he could not pay for defense
lawyers. Peter Andersen, the Sierra Leone court spokesman, said Mr. Taylor would
be assigned a temporary counsel until the court has finished investigating his
financial situation.

Mr. Taylor was known for trading diamonds and tropical hardwood for weapons, and
is believed to have stolen millions of dollars from Liberia's coffers.

U.N. Lifts Liberian Timber Embargo
(The New York Times)

  UNITED NATIONS, June 20 -- The Security Council voted unanimously on Tuesday
to lift its embargo on Liberian timber exports, which had been used to finance
arms trafficking and enrich warlords during the presidency of Charles G. Taylor.

The action came in response to a request from Liberia's president, Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, who told the Council in May that Liberia needed the proceeds from the
logging and diamond industries to restore the country and establish basic
services.

The measure left the embargo on uncut diamonds in place for six more months,
until an internationally verifiable plan was in place to verify the origins of
the stones and prevent illicit profits.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles G. Taylor arrived yesterday in Rotterdam, the
Netherlands, before being brought to The Hague. (Photo by Toussaint
Kluiters/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); SENTENCING (77%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); INDICTMENTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); ARRESTS (75%);
LARCENY & THEFT (75%); CHILD ABUSE (74%); LAWYERS (72%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); DIAMOND MARKETS (50%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (54%)

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (95%); ROTTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (73%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); NETHERLANDS (96%); LIBERIA (96%); AFRICA (92%);
WESTERN AFRICA (92%); SERBIA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(79%); NIGERIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             970 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 880 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

3rd Lawyer for Hussein Seized and Shot to Death
Saddam Hussein's trial for crimes against humanity was struck by new violence
when a senior lawyer on his defense team was abducted, beaten and shot to death.
Two other Hussein lawyers were killed earlier.   A1

More than three years after it cast the votes setting the nation on the course
to war, the Senate began the first extended debate on whether to end it.

A12

The emerging Republican embrace of the war reflects the success of a White House
effort to bring a skittish party on board.   A1

An average of one civilian every day was killed by coalition forces in 2005 at
checkpoints, roadblocks or alongside convoys, according to the American
military's statistics.   A13

President Bush, in Vienna, issued an impassioned defense of his Iraq policy amid
pointed reminders of how far the United States has fallen in the eyes of many
Europeans.   A14

Airstrike Kills Another Gazan
A Palestinian woman was killed and 13 people were wounded in Gaza after two
Israeli missiles veered off target.   A3

Ukraine Nears Parliament Deal
Ukraine's quarrelling political parties announced an agreement to form a new
parliamentary coalition that would generally support the pro-Western policies of
President Viktor A. Yushchenko.   A3

Mexican Strike Expands
What started as a Mexican teachers' strike five weeks ago could affect the
presidential election on July 2.   A6

Iran to Delay Response on Plan
The Iranian president said it would take more than a month before Iran responded
to a proposal to resolve the dispute over its uranium-enrichment program.   A14

NATIONAL   A16-23

Detention Center Shootout Leaves 2 Dead in Florida
A federal agent was killed and a prison officer wounded in a shootout with a
guard about to be arrested in connection with a sex ring at a federal prison in
Florida. The guard also died in the gun battle.   A1

Renewal of Voting Act Canceled
House Republican leaders abruptly canceled a planned vote to renew the landmark
Voting Rights Act after a rebellion by lawmakers who say the civil rights
measure unfairly singles out Southern states and unnecessarily requires ballots
to be printed in foreign languages.   A23

Presbyterians Won't Divest
The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) voted to back off from a decision it made to
pursue divestment from companies that profit from Israel's continuing
involvement in the Palestinian territories.   A18

FEMA Suspends Evictions
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has suspended the eviction of 3,000
families who are living in government trailers in Mississippi.   A16

Drug Raids in Chicago
Hundreds of law enforcement officials carried out raids in a public housing
project in Chicago, taking aim at what they described as a sophisticated drug
ring that may be responsible for some of the 70 overdose deaths in the city and
its suburbs.   A16

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Condoms Block Harmful Virus
The consistent use of condoms protects against human papillomavirus, a cause of
warts and cervical and other female cancers, researchers report.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Pastor Defends Husband Charged in Wife's Suicide
A Sunday school teacher from Staten Island who killed herself in a plunge from a
cliff had talked to her husband about suicide, the family's pastor said. But the
husband, who is charged with assisting a suicide, took her comments as emotional
outbursts rather than literal warnings, the pastor said.   B1

A Small Group in the Middle
New York has a smaller share of middle-income families than any other major
metropolitan area in the nation, and like residents of most American cities and
suburbs, they live in a dwindling number of middle-income neighborhoods,
according to a new analysis of census figures.   B3

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-7

Argentina Wins With a Draw
Argentina won its group with a 0-0 draw against the Netherlands at the World
Cup. Argentina, the group winner on goal differential, will play Mexico in the
second round.   D6

ARTS   E1-12

Museum Plans Criticized
The Brooklyn Museum, which is trying to reinvent itself after years of declining
attendance, is planning a shakeup of its staff that has angered several curators
and drawn criticism from other museums.   E1

OBITUARIES   C16

Evelyn Dubrow
Organized labor's most prominent lobbyist at the time of its greatest power in
her four decades with the nation's largest apparel union, she was 95.   C16

BUSINESS DAY   C1-15

New Drugs for Diabetes
As diabetes rates reach epidemic levels worldwide, four new drugs are generating
optimism among doctors who specialize in treating the disease, as well as among
Wall Street analysts who view diabetes care as a huge and growing market.   A1

Stocks Show Broad Gains
Aided by strong earnings and an upbeat forecast from FedEx, stock markets rose
broadly, helping them recover much of the ground lost in the last two weeks.
C1

Oil Companies and Subsidies
Facing angry lawmakers, executives from three major oil companies indicated that
they might be willing to give up sizable taxpayer subsidies for drilling in the
Gulf of Mexico.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: The immigration road show; 9/11 memorial, version 2.0; courage in
Catalonia; addiction at City Hall.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E4
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); LAWYERS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); EVICTION (89%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); ELECTION
LAW (89%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (87%); CIVIL RIGHTS (85%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); ELECTIONS (76%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); POLITICS (76%); PUBLIC
POLICY (76%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%);
US PRESIDENTS (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); ARRESTS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT
(71%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (70%); US POLITICAL PARTIES (70%); PUBLIC HOUSING
(70%); DISASTER & EMERGENCY AGENCIES (69%); PRISONS (68%); FAMILY (68%);
CORRECTIONS WORKERS (67%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (66%); STRIKES (65%);
DIVESTITURES (64%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (64%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(56%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); VIKTOR YUSHCHENKO (53%)

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); SOUTHEAST USA (79%); MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); ISRAEL
(93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); UKRAINE (92%); IRAQ (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             974 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1073 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

U.S. Looks at Banking Data In Antiterror Program
A secret program initiated weeks after the Sept. 11 attacks has given
counterterrorism officials access to financial records involving thousands of
Americans, government and industry officials said.   A1

Senate Rejects Iraq Exit Plans


The Senate roundly rejected two Democratic proposals to begin pulling troops out
of Iraq.   A1

A day after a group of gunmen seized Iraqis from a factory, the police freed 17
of the hostages, but 34 remained unaccounted for, the Iraqi industry minister
said.   A8

Iran has stepped up its support for Shiite groups in Iraq and is providing the
weapons and training for them to attack American troops, the top American
military commander in Iraq said.   A8

A relative of one of the two American soldiers who may have been tortured to
death in Iraq said that military officials had told his family the men probably
died in a gunfight and their bodies were abused later.   A8

Mideast Leaders Meet in Jordan
The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, and Prime Minister Ehud Olmert of
Israel held informal and inconclusive talks over breakfast in Jordan, their
first meeting since Mr. Olmert became prime minister.   A3

Taliban Forces Kill 4 G.I.'s
Four American soldiers were killed and one was wounded in a battle with
insurgents suspected of being Taliban in the far northeastern region of
Afghanistan, the American military said.   A8

Ukraine May Review Gas Deal
Yulia V. Tymoshenko, who is poised to return as Ukraine's prime minister, vowed
to review a deal with Russia on natural gas imports.   A5

Poll Finds Muslim-Western Split
Non-Muslim Westerners and Muslims around the world have different views of world
events, and each group tends to view the other as violent and intolerant,
according to a new survey.   A3

NATIONAL   A16-24

Protection for Workers Claiming Discrimination
The Supreme Court substantially enhanced legal protection against retaliation
for employees who complain about discrimination or harassment on the job.   A22

Lethal Injections Challenged
Lawsuits challenging lethal injection as cruel and unusual have stalled
executions in some states and may prompt others to abandon them.   A1

Senate Report on Lobbyist
A bipartisan Senate report documented more than $5.3 million in payments to
Ralph Reed, left, the former director of the Christian Coalition and a leading
Republican Party strategist, from an influence-peddling operation run by the
corrupt lobbyist Jack Abramoff on behalf of Indian tribe casinos.   A22

Redacted Data Can Be Viewed
About eight pages of a 51-page government brief were electronically blacked out
to protect what prosecutors said was sensitive material concerning an
investigation into steroid use in baseball. But the passages can be viewed by
using a word-processing program.   A18

G.O.P. Schedules Hearings
House Republicans announced a series of summer hearings on immigration policy to
be held in California, Arizona and Texas and challenged the view that the
sessions were intended to delay new immigration legislation.   A22

Still Seeking Weapons in Iraq
Many Americans have an unshakable faith that unconventional weapons continue to
exist, despite the intelligence agencies' verdict that Saddam Hussein destroyed
them.   A20

Judge Detains 3 Florida Guards
A federal judge ordered three guards charged in a prison sex ring in Florida
held without bail but released two others until their August trial because he
did not consider them dangerous or likely to flee.   A16

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Dealer Admits Stealing Maps Worth Over $3 Million
A prominent map dealer who specialized in finding elusive treasures for rich
collectors admitted in federal court in New Haven that he had stolen 97 antique
maps worth more than $3 million from universities and libraries.   B1

Motion to Dismiss 9/11 Suit
A federal judge heard oral arguments on New York City's motion to dismiss a
lawsuit brought on behalf of more than 8,000 firefighters, police officers and
construction workers who say they were harmed by exposure to toxic substances
while working at ground zero.   B1

SPORTSFRIDAY   D1-6

Knicks Fire Larry Brown
Larry Brown was cast as a savior when he came home to coach the Knicks last
July. In the months that followed, he came to be viewed instead as an enigma, an
agitator, a failure and, finally, a pariah. By the time the Knicks fired Brown
-- just 331 days after hiring him -- the franchise's image had been transformed,
too: from merely dysfunctional to comically inept.   D1

U.S. Exits With a Whimper
Stung by a borderline penalty kick awarded late in the first half, the United
States exited from the World Cup with a 2-1 defeat to Ghana. Disputed
officiating aside, the United States did not prove that it deserved to advance
beyond group play. The familiar qualities of hard work and grit and
determination were present, but the proficiency of soccer was deeply lacking.
D1

OBITUARIES   B7

Louis B. Sohn
A professor of international law who helped draft parts of the United Nations
Charter in 1945 and was a leader in subsequent efforts to turn the U.N. into a
true world government, he was 92.   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Hedge Fund Investigated
One of the nation's most prominent hedge funds, Pequot Capital Management, is
under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission for possible
insider trading, according to government officials who have been briefed on the
case.   A1

Lord & Taylor Stays on Fifth
After fevered speculation that whoever bought Lord & Taylor would sell off its
flagship Manhattan building, the new owners said that the Fifth Avenue store
would continue to operate and that much of the chain would stay in place.   C1

Merck Loses Drug Patent
Merck's cholesterol-lowering drug, Zocor, loses its United States patent today
-- a blow to both Merck and to Pfizer, whose rival drug, Lipitor, is the most
popular cholesterol medicine. Now, insurers want to convince doctors that cheap
clones of Zocor will make full-priced Lipitor a luxury.   C1

House Curtails Estate Tax
The House voted to permanently abolish the estate tax on inherited wealth for
all but a sliver of the nation's wealthiest families. The vote sets the stage
for a decisive vote in the Senate next week.   C3

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: A look at Republican priorities; Human Rights Council; midnight at
Governor Pataki's.

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E35
TV Listings   E25
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); COUNTERTERRORISM (91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PRIME
MINISTERS (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); TALIBAN (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (87%); SUITS & CLAIMS (86%); DISCRIMINATION (86%);
LITIGATION (85%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); NATURAL GAS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(77%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (77%); PUBLIC POLICY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(77%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (77%); HOSTAGE TAKING (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%);
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (73%); STEROIDS
(72%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); RELIGION (70%); BASEBALL (69%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (68%); TORTURE (68%); ILLICIT STEROID USE (67%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS
(64%); OIL & GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS (64%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (62%); WORD PROCESSING SOFTWARE (50%); NATURAL GAS EXPORTS & IMPORTS
(50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: EHUD OLMERT (72%); MAHMOUD ABBAS (51%); YULIA TYMOSHENKO (51%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); JORDAN (92%); UKRAINE (92%);
AFGHANISTAN (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);
ISRAEL (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             977 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

For a Shiite, Defending Hussein is a Labor of Love

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Nada Bakri contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; THE SATURDAY PROFILE; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1099 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon


BY all rights, she should be seeking Saddam Hussein's head. But Bushra Khalil, a
swaggering lawyer from Beirut's predominantly Shiite south, is one of Mr.
Hussein's most strident defenders.

Ms. Khalil, the daughter of a prominent Lebanese Shiite family, is one of a team
of lawyers representing Mr. Hussein in the Iraqi tribunal prosecuting him and
others for crimes against humanity in cases that include the execution of 148
Shiites at the hands of Mr. Hussein's Sunni Arab henchmen.

The seeming contradiction has not been lost on many neighbors and friends, who
cannot believe Ms. Khalil is defending a man accused of ordering the killing not
only of the 148 for which he is currently on trial, but also of tens of
thousands of Iraqi Shiites during the 34 years of his rule, including possibly
some of her relatives.

But the move is emblematic of her style: heated, confrontational and eager for
the spotlight. For Ms. Khalil, defending Mr. Hussein is part of resisting what
she sees as American aggression, in a defense focused as much on politics as on
law.

''The occupation is of Iraq but the aggression is against the entire Arab
people,'' she says. ''If you look really deeply at the evidence, Saddam in fact
is not really guilty.''

Her clients are accused of killing residents of a Shiite town, Dujail, on the
northern fringe of Baghdad, after what Mr. Hussein and his associates call a
failed assassination attempt against him there. She hopes that being Shiite
herself will hamper the prosecution's case.

''They are trying to make the issue of Dujail a Sunni versus Shia issue,'' she
explained. ''But when someone like me, with my family history, defends Saddam,
it calls their whole assumption into question.''

MS. KHALIL boasts that she was among the first to join Mr. Hussein's legal team,
which she did days after he was captured in 2003. In the years since, she has
represented him in public and in private, seeking to discredit the legitimacy of
the tribunal and waging a heated battle in the court of Arab public opinion. She
gets no money for her time, she says, though Mr. Hussein's family in Amman
covers some of her expenses. She calls the case a labor of love.

She says she had a standard speech back when she took up his defense: ''This man
was a real leader. He launched the resistance, and refused to acquiesce.''

She adds now, ''In 2003, that was tough talk, but no one knew then that the
Iraqi resistance would get so strong.''

When she finally got the chance to speak in court in April, it did not take Ms.
Khalil long to butt heads with the chief judge, Raouf Abdel-Rahman. When the
prosecution played a video of Mr. Hussein ordering the arrest of townspeople
after the alleged assassination attempt, Ms. Khalil held up pictures of American
soldiers abusing Iraqi prisoners.

In a loud voice, she turned to Mr. Hussein and said, ''Look what they are doing
to your country.'' The judge promptly held her in contempt of court and ejected
her.

In May, she landed in the spotlight again when Judge Abdel-Rahman cited her for
speaking out of turn, ordering guards to forcibly eject her from court. Ms.
Khalil pulled off her judicial robe and threw it on the floor, pushing guards
who were grabbing at her hands. She has been banned from the court ever since.

''Part of what we do will provoke the judge,'' she admitted coyly. ''But his job
is not to get provoked.''

Friends and family fear for Ms. Khalil's safety as she continues defending Mr.
Hussein. On Wednesday, one of Mr. Hussein's senior attorneys, Khamis al-Obeidi,
was kidnapped from his home and killed, apparently by a Shiite militia. He was
the third of Mr. Hussein's attorneys to be killed since the trial began in
October.

''I am not afraid,'' Ms. Khalil said. ''I know there are threats but I will not
be afraid of them.''

THE walls of Ms. Khalil's suburban Beirut apartment tell of some of the
permutations of her life. Glamorous photographs, enlarged to poster size,
provide a reminder of her go-go days as a Beirut socialite in the 1980's.
Campaign posters, relics of several unsuccessful runs for a seat in Lebanon's
Parliament, show her in a more mature phase -- but still swaggering.

Then there is the stark juxtaposition of a photograph of her grandfather, the
most senior Shiite judge in Lebanon in his day, sitting with several other
prominent Shiites, and a framed medallion given to her by a Baathist Iraqi
women's group.

Ms. Khalil has longstanding ties to Iraq, and made numerous trips to Baghdad in
the 1990's, during which she curried favor with senior government figures and
received awards from Baathist organizations. She has been accused in the Arab
news media of receiving money from Mr. Hussein and of having had a close
relationship with his son Uday, who was killed by United States forces in July
2003. She says she met him only a few times and in public.

Defending Mr. Hussein, though, was the last thing anyone in Juwaya, her home
village in southern Lebanon, would have expected, friends say.

Ms. Khalil is related to some well-known Iraqi Shiite leaders, some of whom were
regular guests in the family home when she grew up. Her family still grieves for
distant relatives felled by Saddam Hussein.

She says she wrote a letter to the Hezbollah leader, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, and
other Shiite leaders in Lebanon, arguing the merits of her work. The main reason
to defend Saddam, she insisted, is because America is prosecuting him.

''If Imam Ali were alive today, would he have remained neutral?'' she says she
wrote, referring to the cousin and son-in-law of the prophet Muhammad, a central
figure for Shiites. ''If not, where would he have stood? With Bush or with
Saddam Hussein?''

Hezbollah officials who were asked about the letter said they had no
recollection of it.

Members of her family contacted for this article refused comment, insisting the
issue was a private matter. But some residents of Juwaya said she was no longer
welcome there.

''Her decision to join his defense team upset a lot of people here,'' said a
local shop owner who knows her family and gave his name as only Abu Qassem.
''She is not welcome here and she knows that. All the Khalil family hates her
now and she is aware of this fact.''

Others dismiss her campaign as a play for the spotlight.

''She went all the way to Iraq in search of fame and attention, not Saddam or
the Arab cause,'' said Abbas Klait, 57, a Juwaya shop owner who said he was a
classmate of her sister. ''That has left her on bad terms with the townspeople
and she rarely comes here anymore.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CATEGORY: Law

PERSON: Bushra Khalil

GRAPHIC: Photo: BUSHRA KHALIL (Photo by Tamara Abdul Hadi for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Biography

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); LAWYERS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); GENOCIDE
(76%); HOMICIDE (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); JUDGES (73%); ASSASSINATION (51%)
Shiite Muslims; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sunni Muslims;
Islam

SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Hassan M Fattah; Bushra Khalil; Saddam Hussein

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (90%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); LEBANON (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Lebanon

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             978 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bank Data, Terror and The Times

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Editorial Desk; Pg. 14

LENGTH: 859 words



To the Editor:

Re ''Bank Data Sifted in Secret by U.S. to Block Terror'' (front page, June 23):

The question is, What's more important, the Central Intelligence Agency's
ability to track terrorist financing, or the ''public interest'' in these
activities?

Before deciding, one must consider that the C.I.A.'s strategy to ''follow the
money'' has resulted in the exposure of several terrorist activities, and The
New York Times's decision to print this article will likely decrease the
effectiveness of the program.

To be fair, any operation delving into private transactions (with or without
legal warrants) may violate civil liberties if it isn't managed properly and/or
doesn't receive appropriate oversight.

I'm far more interested in eliminating terrorist threats to our security than
learning about the details of C.I.A. operations, and trust the courts and
Congress to opine on the legality of such operations.

Although The Times had the constitutional right to print the article, it also
had a responsibility to more carefully assess the effect such disclosures would
have on national security, and not base a decision to print solely on the
public's interest.

Salvatore J. Bommarito
New York, June 23, 2006

To the Editor:

Thank you, New York Times. Thank you for publishing the Pentagon Papers, for
your Watergate coverage, for your courage in shining a light into dark and
secret places and revealing the frequently unpleasant truths.

A paragraph in your article about the Bush administration's poking about in
Americans' bank records says much: the programs ''reflect attempts to break down
longstanding legal or institutional barriers to the government's access to
private information about Americans.''

How much of a stretch is it for the Internal Revenue Service to be enlisted to
subject Americans to audits because of contributions to groups it considers
hostile to the administration? Amnesty International? MoveOn.org? The American
Civil Liberties Union?

Beatrice Williams-Rude
New York, June 23, 2006

To the Editor:

I am disappointed by your decision to publish the article.

Newspapers do have a duty to reveal possible abuses of power in the government,
but they must weigh that duty with the obligation to avoid jeopardizing national
security.

In this case, the Swift program, which relies on data from the Society for
Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication, seems to be legal, and the
article itself reveals that there are several checks on the searches. Even so,
publishing the article would be excusable if not for the fact that it now makes
the program, which has been a success, worthless.

When the National Security Agency's phone monitoring was revealed, the program
could still continue, but in this case, terrorists now know to avoid Swift, and
will certainly do so.

I appreciate the difficulty of deciding whether to publish an article, but in
this case, The Times made the wrong choice.

Coleman Glenn
Bryn Athyn, Pa., June 23, 2006

To the Editor:

I write as a United States citizen who is working abroad.

Regardless of which side of the political spectrum one is on, there has been an
undeniable, fundamental and significant shift in the center of gravity regarding
longstanding and long-treasured privacy-versus-security norms.

The revelation of large-scale secret sifting of bank transactions is the latest
example and most likely not the last.

Right or wrong, the fact that so many of these programs have been carried out in
secret, without sufficient Congressional or judicial oversight, means that the
slow but steady erosion of constitutional principles of privacy and protection
against unlawful search and seizure is taking place without any broad debate.

If President Bush truly appreciated his sworn duty to uphold the Constitution to
the same degree as his obligation to protect American citizens, he would respect
the checks and balances in our system of three branches of government, as
opposed to trampling on them.

Leonard Novick
Amsterdam, June 23, 2006

To the Editor:

The Times blows the cover on a classified program used successfully to catch
terrorists, and its executive editor justifies this by saying the existence of
the program is ''a matter of public interest.''

Isn't the point that the public's right to know must be balanced against
protecting the public at a time of war?

I'd rather know that the bad guys were being caught than having my ''interest''
in this story satisfied over this morning's cup of coffee.

I think that your decision to publish this information was irresponsible, and
puts us all at greater risk.

John A. Maher
Summit, N.J., June 23, 2006

To the Editor:

Your decision to print this article is disturbing to me. Timing is the issue
with me.

We have troops in the field fighting every day. We have just recently seen the
brutality of the enemy.

The time to consider which programs are successful or not is after the troops
come home, which in this case means a free Afghanistan and Iraq.

Please consider the timing of your articles in matters of national security when
troops are still on the ground.

Terri Wagner
Elberta, Ala., June 23, 2006


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by Thomas Fuchs)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); ESPIONAGE (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); LETTERS
& COMMENTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (78%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); TAXES & TAXATION (77%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(72%); WIRETAPPING (71%); TELECOMMUNICATIONS (67%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%)
Terrorism; Banks and Banking; Computers and the Internet; Wiretapping and Other
Eavesdropping Devices and Methods; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%) New York Times; Central
Intelligence Agency; Swift (Society for World Interbank Financial
Telecommunication)

PERSON: Salvatore J Bommarito; Coleman Glenn; John A Maher; Terri Wagner; George
W (Pres) Bush; Leonard Novick; Beatrice Williams-Rude

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             982 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 24, 2006 Saturday
                              Late Edition - Final

Judge Orders U.S. to Decide If Muslim Scholar Can Enter

BYLINE: By ANTHONY RAMIREZ

SECTION: Section B; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 468 words


A federal judge in New York yesterday ordered the Bush administration to decide
by September whether to grant an entry visa to a prominent Muslim scholar. The
scholar has been barred from entering the United States for nearly two years,
first because of supposed ties to terrorism, then for unspecified national
security reasons.

The American Civil Liberties Union filed the suit on behalf of three academic
groups, including the PEN American Center, which had invited the scholar, Tariq
Ramadan, a Swiss citizen, to speak at its meetings.

In a 34-page ruling, Judge Paul A. Crotty of United States District Court in
Manhattan said that while the United States must come to a decision on admitting
Mr. Ramadan, the academic groups had not met the legal burden for other demands.

The groups had sought an order to stop the government from barring Mr. Ramadan
under provisions of the Patriot Act and a finding that the government had
abridged the free-speech rights of the groups, which also include the American
Academy of Religion and the American Association of University Professors.

Judge Crotty, noting the government's shifting reasons for Mr. Ramadan's
exclusion, said, ''While the Government may exclude Ramadan if he poses a
legitimate threat to national security, it may not invoke 'national security' as
a protective shroud to justify the exclusion of aliens on the basis of their
political beliefs.''

Jameel Jaffer, deputy director of the A.C.L.U.'s national security program, said
that ''we're very happy with the decision that we got.''

Mr. Jaffer added that the decision was significant, ''one, because it clearly
rejects the government's contention that Professor Ramadan endorsed terrorism
and two, it makes clear that the government cannot use the immigration laws as a
means of manipulating political debate inside the United States.''

The suit was filed against the State Department and the Department of Homeland
Security. Bridget Kelly, a spokeswoman for the United States attorney for the
Southern District, said the government's lawyers were reviewing the ruling and
would have no immediate comment.

Mr. Ramadan is a scholar of Arab descent who is now a visiting fellow at Oxford
University. He has published more than 20 books, 700 articles, and 170
audiotapes focusing on Islam and the Western world.

He is also the grandson of Hasan al-Banna, a founder in 1928 of the Muslim
Brotherhood, an Egyptian group that opposes Hosni Mubarak, the president of
Egypt and an ally of the United States. A group that has been known for
violence, the brotherhood recently elected members to Egypt's parliament.

Mr. Ramadan's troubles began in July 2004 when his work visa, known as H-1B, was
revoked and he was later unable to accept a tenured professorship at the
University of Notre Dame.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (93%); NATIONAL SECURITY (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); RELIGION
(91%); TERRORISM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (90%); US
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT VISAS (89%);
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); LITIGATION
(89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAWYERS
(78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); VERDICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (76%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (76%); TEACHER UNIONS (76%); IMMIGRATION LAW (75%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (73%); POLITICAL DEBATES (73%); IMMIGRATION (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(73%); GRANDCHILDREN (50%) Terrorism; Decisions and Verdicts; Islam; Terrorism;
Security and Warning Systems; Suits and Litigation

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (84%); US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY (59%); AMERICAN ACADEMY OF RELIGION (55%); AMERICAN ASSOCIATION OF
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (55%) American Civil Liberties Union; State Department;
Homeland Security Department; Pen American Center

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (50%) Anthony Ramirez; Paul A (Judge) Crotty; Tariq
Ramadan; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EGYPT (93%)

LOAD-DATE: June 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             983 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

After Londonistan

BYLINE: By Christopher Caldwell.

Christopher Caldwell, a contributing writer, is at work on a book about
immigration, Islam and Europe.

SECTION: Section 6; Column 1; Magazine; Counterterrorism in the U.K.; Pg. 42

LENGTH: 8232 words


I.


''Behold!'' reads an official police notice on the waiting-room wall at the
Bethnal Green police station, in the East London borough of Tower Hamlets.
''Fear from people should not prevent one from saying the truth if he knows
it.'' It is a hadith saying of the Prophet Muhammad, stuck amid a row of posters
urging Britons to do their civic duty and report any crimes they might get wind
of. Tower Hamlets, which includes large Bengali and Somali communities, is a
majority-minority borough. Someone there apparently felt that the hadith poster
might help woo those for whom civic duty was an insufficient spur.

Today, Britain has more than a million and a half Muslims. A million live in
London, where they make up an eighth of the population. They are not just the
refugees and tempest-tossed laborers of the developing world, large though those
groups may be. London's West End is full of Saudi princes and financiers, and
journalists and politicians from around the Arab world; its East End is home to
erudite theologians from the Indian subcontinent, along with some unhinged ones.
In the 1980's and 90's, a hands-off government allowed London to become a haven
for radicals and a center for calls to jihad. Culturally and politically (and
theologically and gastronomically), London ranks among the capitals of the
Muslim world and is certainly its chief point of contact with the United States
and the rest of the West. Since last July 7, when four young British Muslims
used backpack bombs to take their own lives and those of 52 others on London's
public-transport system, getting information out of the city's various Muslim
communities has become a desperate preoccupation of British law enforcement.

Lord Carlile of Berriew, a Welshman who is Britain's independent reviewer of
counterterrorism laws, has wide access to classified intelligence about
terrorism plans. He is the last person you would expect to hype the dangers. For
one thing, his party, the Liberal Democrats, has reaped electoral gains by
opposing Tony Blair's war on terror, particularly Blair's belief that Iraq is a
front in that war. For another, Lord Carlile has made a name for himself as a
civil libertarian -- a champion of legal underdogs from the terminally ill to
the transsexual -- and civil libertarians are the ones who have led the
opposition to antiterror measures. ''How serious is it?'' he asked, sitting
beside a conference-room table in his law chambers off the Strand on a sunny
morning this spring. ''Very. Complacency, tempting though it is, is the worst
possible attitude. We've been fortunate we haven't had more attacks. There will
be more.''

British unease about terrorism has deepened in recent weeks. In early June,
hundreds of London police officers, backed by chemical-weapons experts, raided a
row house and shot a man in Forest Gate, a heavily South Asian neighborhood,
reportedly acting on a tip that some kind of cyanide device was inside. They
discovered nothing -- aside from hostile neighbors and the outrage of several
influential Muslim organizations.

Not long before, a report on last summer's bombings, issued by the Home Office,
which is in charge of national law enforcement, told a disturbing story of
normal English Muslim kids turning into terrorists. Three of the bombers were
Englishmen of Pakistani descent from Beeston, a neighborhood in Leeds. One was a
Jamaican-born Muslim convert from nearby Huddersfield. A few years ago, all of
them would have been considered part of the new, multicultural England branded
''Cool Britannia'' in the press and bragged about by government and citizens
alike. Especially demoralizing was the posthumous video message of 30-year-old
Mohammad Sidique Khan, the ringleader, which was broadcast on Al Jazeera two
months after his death. His claims that Muslims were being mistreated throughout
the world were familiar enough from other suicide-bomber videos. But Khan's
thick, native Yorkshire accent -- like something that had strayed out of a film
adaptation of a Bronte novel, or a documentary about striking miners -- was
disheartening to British viewers. By then, Khan's white childhood friends had
made it known that they had called him Sid and had been really fond of him. One
told the BBC, ''I just thought of him as a Beeston lad, and that's what he was
-- a Beeston lad, born and bred.''

Seven or eight major plots were reportedly broken up between 2001 and the July 7
bombings. One involved a ricin attack on the Heathrow Express train planned by
terrorists linked to a radical Algerian group. Since July 7, there have been
four more serious terror plots -- including a widely reported incident last year
on July 21 when four suicide bombs failed to detonate. The would-be terrorists
were arrested days later, but not before a Brazilian on his way to work was
mistaken for one of them and shot dead by the police in the Stockwell
Underground station. Considering that Britain is less despised among the world's
Islamist radicals than the United States, and that its Muslim communities are,
by and large, smaller, better-integrated and more prosperous than those on the
continent, this is a lot of activity.

II.

''Let no one be in any doubt,'' Prime Minister Tony Blair told the country a
month after last July's attacks. ''The rules of the game are changing.'' Britain
has been adjusting its terror laws since the Blair government came to power in
1997. But Sept. 11, 2001, sparked calls for broad new government powers, and
July 7, 2005, has created a consensus -- a fragile one, but a consensus
nonetheless -- that even those are insufficient. The new rules Blair spoke of
were to be found in a 12-point plan that included tighter enforcement of asylum
and deportation, blacklists of extremist bookshops and bans on hard-line
Islamist groups. Some of the measures were discarded as too punitive, but the
ones that remain have dominated parliamentary and public debate ever since.
After the bombings, Blair warned that those who do not ''share and support the
values that sustain the British way of life,'' or who incite hatred against
Britain and its people, ''have no place here.'' In February, he added that
Islamist preachers who condone terrorism ''should not be in this country.'' It
was tempting to assume that Blair was simply hardening his line, moving from
Islam-Is-Peace to Love-It-or-Leave-It. But the government insists that it will
do everything in consultation with the country's 1.6 million Muslims, half of
whom are under 25, with the goal of winning their hearts and minds.

Whether that kind of outreach is compatible with a hard line depends, of course,
on Muslim sentiments. Identifying and influencing those sentiments -- promoting
''moderate Muslims'' is the way the challenge is usually framed -- is trickier
than it sounds. What is a moderate Muslim? It could mean someone who's not very
serious about his religion or someone who's quite serious about his religion but
not very political about it. What of the common formulation that terrorism is
''not Islam''? This could be a politically correct dodge or a hardheaded
diagnosis that something more unholy is at work. The mainstream Islamic
organizations, which unite Muslims around political grievances, are certainly a
useful route into the British political system, but maybe they are whipping up
those grievances in the first place. And nonbelievers are so numerous among
people of immigrant background that dealing with religious leaders may be a
wrongheaded strategy in the first place. Britain is working out its answers to
these questions by trial and error.

Potential terrorists now in Britain -- those worthy of being kept under careful
watch -- may number in the several hundreds, as Blair said last year, or in the
thousands, as a police official told me this spring. Britain's approach --
tightening up law enforcement for all its citizens, while trying to ensure that
Muslims feel represented in every step of the process -- differs from that of
both the United States, which has focused on border control and electronic
eavesdropping, and France, which relies on infiltration and an aggressive
investigative judiciary. But its basic problem in fighting terrorism is the same
one that all Western countries face. Britain is trying to clamp down on its
Muslim communities and empower them at the same time. Clamp down too hard, and
you alienate the people you want to win over. Empower communities
indiscriminately, and you give free rein to people it is foolish to trust.

III.

Juliet Luswa, a police constable who grew up in Uganda, and Ahmed Asania, a
Bangladeshi-English special police constable, see a lot of London when they walk
the beat on a Friday afternoon in Shoreditch, Spitalfields and Whitechapel. The
areas are both rich and poor, teeming with immigrants and encroached on by the
booming banks and brokerages of the City of London nearby. They are both yuppie
dining destinations and caldrons of deprivation.

Asania visits a woman who runs a Middle Eastern-style hookah bar who has seen
her bike, stolen the week before, being sold by a street dealer a block away.
Among the worshipers leaving Friday prayers at the Jamia Masjid mosque -- which
was built as a Huguenot church in the 18th century and served as a synagogue for
most of the 20th -- they greet an elderly Liberal Democrat politician from
somewhere in South Asia who has just won a seat on the local council, despite
his unsteady English. Asania and Luswa point out the flats on Heneage Street
where the most dangerous Caribbean gangs loiter and the podlike public toilets
on Bethnal Green Road, which are going to be removed because heroin addicts
barricade themselves inside with their works.

Back on Brick Lane, a musclebound, slick-haired hood, loitering in front of a
fried-chicken shop across the street, starts haranguing Luswa in Urdu, which she
doesn't speak. The guy has a reputation for this sort of thing. His insults are
probably misogynistic. A couple of people nearby snicker. You would need to know
a lot about the neighborhood to say whether they're laughing out of sympathy,
contempt or intimidation.

''He's in a boxing league,'' Asania mentions as the two walk away. ''He's really
excellent.'' It seems to be an explanation of something.

The London Metropolitan Police have long had an official, national
counterterrorist role and were prominent in the fight against the I.R.A. But
there is not yet a consensus on what the police role ought to be in the fight
against Islamist terrorism. Are they there to take the fight to the malefactors,
assuming they can find them, through hard-edged tactics ranging from
surveillance to raids? Or are they there to keep the peace and listen,
particularly in minority neighborhoods, minimizing the discontent, insecurity
and alienation on which terrorism feeds? ''Communities defeat terrorism'' has
become the mantra of the police under Sir Ian Blair (no relation to the prime
minister), who has been commissioner since early last year. Blair is undertaking
big reforms in the police, even as adversaries inside and outside the force call
on Tony Blair to fire him -- over the recent Forest Gate raid and the
mistaken-identity killing in Stockwell last summer. By the end of this year, he
hopes to have set up hundreds of Safer Neighborhoods teams, like the one Luswa
and Asania serve on, which mix traditional bobby work with a bit of cultural
translation. Commissioner Blair aspires to kill two birds with one stone --
enhancing police familiarity with the most intimate corners of dangerous
neighborhoods while winning the trust of communities that often feel left out of
the main current of British life. But, as in the London of Hogarth and Mayhew,
the borderline between cultural variety and dangerous criminality can be a fuzzy
one.

The British government has dropped broad hints that it is stepping up
surveillance and infiltration. The percentage of intelligence resources devoted
to terrorism has more than doubled in the last five years. Mosques are not off
limits. ''Any cleric with radical ideas proselytizes at his peril,'' Lord
Carlile told me. According to the Home Office, extremists are using mosques less
and less -- and private homes more and more -- to carry out their activities.

But the inability of the police to spot what was happening in Leeds on the eve
of the July 7 bombings has given rise to doubts over whether there is much
surveillance at all -- or, if there is, whether it works. Beeston had a Muslim
youth club, which Mohammad Sidique Khan helped manage; an Islamist bookstore;
and a place known, even before July 7, as Al Qaeda gym, where Khan and two of
his collaborators worked out. Nearly a year after the attacks, the Home Office
admits that no one has yet given a clear account of what went on inside those
places.

Aggressive information-gathering is also meeting steady community opposition.
Section 44 of the Terrorism Act 2000 lets the police designate areas where
anyone can be stopped and searched without cause. Muslims say that Section 44 is
being used to target them. It tends to be the first thing heads of Muslim
organizations complain about if you bring up the war on terror. Liberty, the
British equivalent of the American Civil Liberties Union, has accused the London
Police of making virtually the entire city a Section 44 area. And other
governmental organizations have put police antiterrorist operations under close
scrutiny. After the raid in Forest Gate earlier this month, the Independent
Police Complaints Commission arrived on the scene to respond to complaints that
had been filed before the wider public even knew the purpose of the raid.

IV.

How you go about gathering information on a community depends on whether you
think the best intelligence is dug out by agents or volunteered by concerned
citizens. This is a question on which police officers of the very highest rank
are divided. Sir Ian's predecessor, Lord Stevens of Kirkwhelpington, champions
traditional police skills. ''It helps when communities come out with
information,'' he said in May. ''But most I.R.A. attacks were solved by
fingerprints and other forensic police work. This is not just hearts and minds.
You can never put all your eggs in that basket.''

Sir Ian, speaking on a drizzly May afternoon in the Westminster police
headquarters building called New Scotland Yard, puts himself in the camp of
those who think that most useful information is volunteered. And that is no less
true when dealing with Muslims than with any other religious group. ''After an
atrocity of the scale of the 7th of July, it is impossible that we will not be
more intrusive,'' explained Sir Ian, a ruddy and eloquent man with excitable
eyes and a direct manner. ''But we can't do this to them, we can only do this
with them. We start from a different place than we did with the Irish Republican
Army, which had declared war against the British state. This is a far more
difficult arena. We mustn't be seen to be attempting to infiltrate the entire
Muslim community, 99.9 percent of which are entirely law-abiding.'' Safer
Neighborhoods teams, in other words, are not spies. ''The whole deal here,'' he
continued, ''is to engender the trust that one afternoon may allow one of those
Islamic leaders to say to the sergeant, 'You know, I'm worried about young
so-and-so.'''

It takes no great leap of imagination to see how sensitive policing could
prevent terrorism. The garbage man who serviced 18 Alexandra Grove in Leeds,
where Khan and his friends made the bombs for the July 7 attacks, said that in
the days before the explosions he collected something he had never seen before
on the job: rubber cartons of peroxide in large quantities. That peroxide, used
to make bombs, bleached the hair of the young men, to the consternation of their
Pakistani parents, and killed the flowers in the boxes outside the window.

But community policing carries a big risk: in reaching out to people on the
streets, the police may become overly dependent on them. At a local level, it
can mean police collusion with whichever interest group makes the most credible
threat of disruption. A year and a half ago, Sikhs in Birmingham rioted over the
play ''Behzti'' (''Dishonor''), which many found offensive. Representatives of
the theater and the community sat down with the police. The theater subsequently
issued a statement saying that the safety of its patrons could not be
guaranteed. As John Lloyd, a director of the Reuters Institute for the Study of
Journalism at Oxford, recalls, ''The police decided they were more interested in
not having a riot than in freedom of expression.'' The play closed. When the
representative organizations in question are not Sikh groups but Muslim ones,
which are more numerous and more visible, the likelihood of conflict increases a
lot.

V.

What the police are doing on the street in East London is being replicated in
other walks of life. The legislative packet Tony Blair outlined last August
tries to balance two things: the harder line demanded by the public after July 7
and an unwillingness -- whether out of common decency, constitutional propriety
or political correctness -- to single out Muslims. Proposals that didn't manage
both things -- closing radical mosques, for instance, which clearly made targets
of Muslims -- have been sidelined. But ensuring that all new laws were both
tough and unbiased hasn't got Blair out of the woods. On the contrary, it has
produced strange, new ad hoc coalitions against him. On one side are many Tories
who have shed their traditional law-and-order views and now object to seeing
law-abiding Middle Englanders scrutinized as if they were potential terrorists.
On the other side are the left of his own party and the even more left-leaning
Liberal Democrats.

In controversy after controversy, it has been New Labor versus everyone else.
First, the government continued its fight -- started before July 7 -- to
establish a new national identity card. The rationale has always been clear: to
identify people who are in the country illegally, as a tool against both
terrorism and welfare fraud. But the database established along with the card
was wide-ranging enough to frighten civil libertarians. ''What if you've had an
abortion, or been treated for a sexually transmitted disease?'' asks David
Davis, who as the Tories' shadow home secretary formulates his party's terrorism
policy. ''The government says this information can't be accessed by someone
without your knowing about it. If not, then why the hell is it there?'' He has a
point, but since July 7, the political alignment favors security over privacy,
and the card is on track to be issued in two or three years.

The government also sought laws that would permit it to detain terrorist
suspects for 90 days without charge. There was strong resistance, particularly
from ''ancient rights'' Tories, who pointed out that habeas corpus has been
enshrined in British law for 700 years. The government and the police replied
that the evidentiary puzzles that arise when international terrorist networks,
computers and tight deadlines meet were something entirely new. One case they
like to mention involved inquiries abroad concerning 10 men with 860 false
identities, using 2,500 different mobile-phone SIM cards and encrypted computers
on which much of the data was in a Farsi dialect. The government did not get its
90 days, but it did get 28, a victory under the circumstances.

In a further initiative, the government sought to establish an offense of
''glorifying terrorism.'' The new crime was meant to catch the whipping-up of
homicidal feeling, as when the group al-Muhajiroun publicized an event, on the
second anniversary of the World Trade Center attacks, that would celebrate the
9/11 hijackers as ''the Magnificent 19.'' It was also meant to block
recruitment. The home secretary at the time, Charles Clarke, suggested that
saying ''Terrorists go straight to paradise when they die'' might be captured by
the law. But what else might be captured? Some asked if an Irishman who
celebrated the Easter Rising of 1916 would fall afoul of the statute. Not to
mention Blair's own wife, the human rights lawyer Cherie Booth, who once said,
with reference to the Palestinians, ''As long as young people feel that they
have got no hope but to blow themselves up, you are never going to make
progress.'' The law passed on an understanding of ''glorification'' that
resembled Justice Potter Stewart's famed definition of hard-core pornography: as
something that judges and the public would know when they saw it. The law has
probably been too undermined by ridicule to serve for much.

The government also brought to a final vote a ''law against incitement to
religious hatred'' that it had been discussing for five years. It is here that
the intellectual underpinnings of the Blair approach were clearest. The law,
which had been sought only by Muslims, was first demanded by the U.K. Action
Committee on Islamic Affairs, a group formed to protest Salman Rushdie's
portrayal of the Prophet Muhammad in ''The Satanic Verses.'' One argument for
the law was that Anglicans, as worshipers in an established church, were already
protected from certain insults by blasphemy laws, while Jews and Sikhs were
protected from others by antiracism laws. But to the legislation's detractors,
these were just post-facto rationalizations, for the law was unprecedented in
its sweep. As drafted, it would have made it difficult to criticize anything
that advanced itself in the name of religious belief or practice, since the law
permitted prosecution of anybody who was ''reckless as to whether religious
hatred would be stirred up'' by things he said or wrote.

It was a sort of horse trading with the principles of free speech, and it drove
much of the country into a fury. The Daily Mail columnist Melanie Phillips later
told me: ''The term 'politically correct' does not do justice to this sinister
totalitarian project. It is against not just freedom of speech but also freedom
of thought.'' She added that Britons were particularly vulnerable to such
incursions: ''It's very British not to want to give offense. And political Islam
is the world grievance culture par excellence. It's a perfect fit.'' Rowan
Atkinson, the comedian, said that the law, if passed, would make it impossible
to crack jokes involving religion.

The measure was clobbered in public opinion and was neutered by Parliament when
it came to a vote in late January. David Blunkett -- the blind, hard-line,
scandal-plagued home secretary from 2001 until 2004 and the architect of much of
Britain's post-9/11 antiterror policy -- defended the bill to the bitter end.
Many accused him of offering a sop to Muslim organizations in exchange for which
they were supposed to accept the rest of the Blair antiterror program. Blunkett
makes no bones about the law's having been meant mainly to protect Muslims.
''Yes, I do accept that,'' he said when we spoke in April. ''They were the
primary beneficiaries because they would have been provided with a degree of
certainty they didn't have before. But the debate got silly. It got distorted
into whether people could make jokes about religion.''

It didn't help the bill that it was scheduled for a vote in Parliament as the
Danish cartoon affair was exploding across the Middle East. Gunmen raged in
Gaza, and it wasn't long before protesters would hold up placards outside
London's Danish Embassy calling for genocide against nonbelievers. Under such
circumstances, limiting people's ability to criticize Islam looked not only
cowardly but imprudent.

VI.

Britons have a strong rhetorical attachment to liberty, as something for which a
certain price in danger and disorder is worth paying. When I asked Blunkett if
he accepted the idea that terrorists had enjoyed too many freedoms in London in
the 1990's, he said, ''Well, in the sense that Karl Marx moved to London,
Britain has always had a tradition of taking in people oppressed in their own
countries.'' This is a common view. Immigrant troublemakers are likened to Marx
and Engels, and any difficulties welcoming whole groups are likened to those
occasioned by the arrival of Russian Jews in the 19th century or of Huguenots in
the 17th.

This freedom has another name, for those less willing to take it in stride:
''Londonistan.'' In January, at his trial for incitement to murder and other
charges, the radical cleric Abu Hamza claimed that between 1997 and 2000,
members of MI5, the British domestic security service, effectively O.K.'d his
frequent incitements to jihad, on one occasion telling him: ''Well, it's freedom
of speech. You don't have to worry as long as we don't see blood on the
streets.'' Hamza is an Egyptian-born British citizen who was maimed during the
Afghan war against the Soviet Union and who later ran the Finsbury Park mosque
in North London. Foreign governments (including the United States') urged for
years that Hamza be arrested, most loudly after he was accused of organizing a
1998 attack in Yemen -- in which his son was an assailant -- that killed four
tourists. Hamza's mosque was also linked to a plot to construct a weapon using
ricin. When the police raided it in 2003, they found guns, chemical-warfare
suits, stolen passports and laminating equipment. Hamza was finally arrested in
2004.

The term ''Londonistan'' was first coined by French officials outraged at the
British government's inability -- for the better part of a decade -- to
extradite the Algerian Rachid Ramda, who had been charged in France with
financing a series of attacks on public transport in Paris in 1995. Until Ramda
was finally sent to France this past December, British courts held that he could
not get a fair trial there. Other prominent jihadists -- the Syrian-born Omar
Bakri Muhammed, who fled the country after July 7; the Syrian-Spanish Qaeda
leader Abu-Musab al-Suri, captured by coalition forces in Pakistan last fall;
and Abu Qatada, who led several European Qaeda cells and is now fighting
deportation to his native Jordan -- found a safe haven in 90's London.

The government has lately worked hard to roll up the most brazen radicals. But a
series of geostrategic accidents has complicated its efforts. The leaders of Al
Qaeda -- a movement created by a Saudi and chased into exile in Sudan and then
Afghanistan -- have apparently wound up in or near Pakistan, one of Britain's
major sources of immigration since the 50's. A significant conclusion of the
government investigation of the July 7 bombings was that two of the bombers --
Mohammad Sidique Khan and Shehzad Tanweer -- probably ''had some contact with Al
Qaeda figures'' on a trip they made to Pakistan in 2004.

Like most modern ''diaspora'' immigrants, the Pakistani-British visit their
native country with little difficulty. There were 400,000 British visitors to
Pakistan in 2004. All countries with large Muslim diasporas are vulnerable to
the worldwide Wahhabi radicalization fomented at mosques and cultural centers
financed by Saudi Arabia's government and its private charities. But on top of
that, Britain is vulnerable to radicalizing trends of South Asia -- India,
Bangladesh and Pakistan. These trends risk becoming Britain's own, particularly
among its socially isolated minorities.

For many years, Britain has had a well-deserved reputation as the European
country that best integrated its new arrivals. For one thing, it had rich
immigrants as well as poor. Many Muslims -- not just Arabian playboys but also
East African businessmen -- arrived with some capital, hired their fellow exiles
and educated their families. Britain's tradition of local democratic
institutions, like town and city councils, means that anywhere an immigrant
population settles, a class of political leaders grows out of it. There are now
several Muslims in Parliament and even in the House of Lords. The contrast with
France, where 1 in 10 residents are Muslims but there are no Muslims among the
577 deputies in the National Assembly, is stark.

But over the past quarter-century, Britain has seen a dispiriting tendency
toward segregation, or resegregation. Young newcomers have not found a niche in
the service economy as easily as the arrivals of 40 and 50 years ago did in the
industrial one. Others, born in Britain, have cast about for identities other
than the British one they were raised with. In 2001, the northern industrial
towns of Oldham, Burnley and Bradford experienced several days of violent racial
mayhem between white and Asian gangs. A Home Office report issued in the wake of
the riots found ''separate educational arrangements, community and voluntary
bodies, employment, places of worship, language, social and cultural networks,''
producing living arrangements that ''do not seem to touch at any point.'' As one
Pakistani Briton told the report's authors, ''When I leave this meeting with
you, I will go home and not see another white face until I come back here next
week.'' Last year, Trevor Phillips, chairman of the Commission for Racial
Equality, warned that much of Britain was ''sleepwalking its way toward
segregation.'' And this segregation is especially entrenched among Muslims. The
researchers Tariq Modood and Richard Berthoud have shown that only 1 percent of
British Bangladeshis and Pakistanis have white partners, versus 20 percent of
Afro-Carribeans. The percentage of South Asian Britons who return to Bangladesh
and Pakistan to find wives or husbands is hard to measure, but some researchers
place it above 50 percent, and a European demographer calls ethnic endogamy
''arrestingly high.''

It is not just outward behaviors but also inward mentalities that are diverging.
Through a familiar paradox, global media play a role in this divergence. London
is one of six cities in which The Daily Jang, Pakistan's largest paper, is
published, so the second-generation tube rider who 20 years ago would have been
absorbed in the county cricket scores in his Evening Standard is now preoccupied
with the conduct of India in Kashmir and with what Pakistani Muslims ought to do
about it. Many South Asian immigrants get their news from Urdu television
stations and, despite the language barrier, from Al Jazeera. Many more are
likely to subscribe to Al Jazeera once its English-language service -- slated to
have made its debut this spring, but delayed -- is up and running.

South Asian religion has changed, too. The Islam that most immigrants took to
Britain from the Indian subcontinent was a pious traditional Sufism, marked by
great reverence for the Prophet Muhammad and an elaborate system of mentorship,
under the control of various pirs, or holy men. Probably the majority of
Britain's 1,500 or so mosques have their roots in Sufism. This kind of Islam has
not been wiped out, but it has been losing ground in South Asia and Britain
alike to simpler, more fashionable trends in Sunni Islam. The Deobandi school,
which was founded in Pakistan in the 19th century, has grown increasingly
conservative -- and distrustful of non-Islamic cultures -- under the influence
of the Saudi Wahhabis. At least since the Afghan war in the 80's, hard-line
Deobandi madrasas have spread throughout Pakistan. Jamaat-i-Islami, the
sectarian and highly politicized movement started by the journalist Abu A'la
Maududi, has grown since the 60's and is influential in the largest Muslim group
in Britain, the Muslim Council of Britain (M.C.B.). While the M.C.B. has no
official government status, it does claim to speak for much of the Muslim
population and is the government's interlocutor of first resort when integration
is at issue.

Afzal Khan, an attorney who has just completed a term as lord mayor of
Manchester, is a Labor member of the City Council and sits on the central
working committee of the M.C.B. as well. Khan recently secured the financing
that will help him realize his dream -- to build an Islamic cultural center in
the city he moved to as a youth, where 125,000 Muslims now live. Since this
project is about ''bridge building,'' he sees no need to apologize for having
sought a great deal of the money for it from Saudi Arabia. ''My attitude is, if
it's a good cause, everyone has a right to contribute,'' he told me in an empty
conference room in Manchester's City Hall on his last day as mayor. ''If anyone
in America wants to give a million, they have as much right as anyone else.''

Asked to address terrorism, Khan said: ''The real issue is taking a step back
and looking at the whole issue in a wider context. One side's terrorist is
another side's freedom fighter. How do we bring about a just and fair world, so
there are not any causes for terrorism? You have the Middle East. Then America
comes into the game, and that brings in petrol. Quite frankly, it has been
appalling. They didn't give a damn about the suffering of people. That's one
thing that winds people up.

''And another thing,'' he adds. ''There are many Muslims who have a question:
How come America gets to decide who gets a nuclear weapon?''

When you talk to many Muslim leaders in Britain, you hear them focus almost
obsessively on international politics, to the exclusion of religious, social and
local political issues. The charitable way of looking at this is to say that it
is a function of young people's burning to change the world -- for the median
age of Muslims is more than a decade younger than that of other Britons, which
is pushing into the early 40's. The uncharitable way is to say that even some
mainstream religious leaders are practicing what the French Islamologist Olivier
Roy calls ''neofundamentalism'' -- or what the Iranian journalist Amir Taheri
calls ''a religion without a theology, a secular wolf disguised as a religious
lamb.''

If the ''religion'' causing problems is not really about religious things at
all, then the risk of talking at cross-purposes is high. The ''national''
government wants to talk about local integration and facilities and role models,
while ''local'' representatives want to talk about the West Bank. Sir Ian Blair,
the police commissioner, has suggested broadening the interchange with Muslims
following what he calls a ''traffic light'' system. The government will
obviously speak to community leaders (green), and it obviously won't speak to
terrorists (red), but it will speak to certain ''amber'' (yellow) interlocutors
whom Americans might be reluctant to touch. Among those who fit in the amber
category might be Yusuf Qaradawi, the telemufti of Qatar, who has issued several
fatwas in support of suicide bombing. Lecturing in the United States recently,
Commissioner Blair granted that Qaradawi ''has views on the Palestinian intifada
that probably would not be very acceptable either here or in the U.K.,'' but
also said that he was impressed that ''he can command an audience of 50,000
young people at the drop of a hat.''

Sir Ian once said that ''there is nothing wrong with being a fundamentalist
Muslim, any more than there is anything wrong with being a fundamentalist
Christian.'' He was assailed in the press, but he had a point. What if terrorism
does not come from a certain attitude toward religion but from a certain
attitude toward politics? Pushing Muslim identity in a more ''fundamentalist''
direction could mean more contemplation of God and less contemplation of
grievance. Pushing Muslim identity in a more ''mainstream'' direction could mean
encouraging grandstanding and political ultimatums.

The Muslim Council of Britain now boycotts Holocaust Memorial Day every January,
on the grounds that it focuses too exclusively on the genocide committed against
the Jews. In response, Asim Siddiqui, the young leader of a London-based Muslim
group called City Circle, organized a separate Holocaust memorial event. City
Circle declares itself ''nonaligned to any overseas or established doctrinal
organization.'' Siddiqui is clearly a courageous and independent man. Yet the
M.C.B. still gets more invitations to governmental meetings and is accepted as
the logical outlet for the community's demands after, say, an antiterrorist
raid. It is a good example of how the ''traffic light'' strategy can fail. Its
incentives drive community representatives toward radicalism. Strident political
voices are not just admitted to conversation -- they are the preferred voices,
because they are seen as more ''authentic.'' If the government's top priority is
finding people with the street credibility to dissuade potential terrorists,
then the ideal Muslim interlocutor is someone who shares the terrorists' goals
while publicly condemning their means. Standing up for Holocaust victims and for
fellowship among Britain's peoples is not much of a credential.

VII.

How much sympathy do most Muslims have for radical extremists? ''Abu Hamza is in
Belmarsh prison,'' says the Palestinian journalist Abdel Bari Atwan. ''Have you
seen a demonstration for his release? A petition protesting his treatment?''

Atwan edits Al Quds al Arabi, an international Arabic-language daily. Its
offices are upstairs from a housing authority in Hammersmith, where the
redeveloped part of King Street peters out into hairdressers and used-clothing
shops. Through a security-locked front door you enter a mini-newsroom of dusty
carpets and a half-dozen old and mismatched computers. The walls are hung with
Palestinian posters, and Arabic TV runs in the corner. Atwan's premises are
modest, and his paper has a low profile locally. But it has a reputation
throughout the Arab world for reporting the news without fear or favor. Atwan
interviewed Osama bin Laden at his hideout in Afghanistan in 1996 and recently
wrote an authoritative history of his movement. When Al Qaeda claimed
responsibility for the March 2004 Madrid bombings, it was to Atwan that the
claim was faxed.

The problem, as Atwan sees it, is that the British and the Americans have always
underestimated the intelligence and logic of Al Qaeda: ''For the British, it's a
terrorist organization that did Sept. 11 and is linked to July 7, that kills
indiscriminately. But they never try to understand what's behind it. They never
look at the roots of the problem. It's a terrorist organization, yes! But why?''
Atwan's answer is that the United States and its allies pursue a foreign policy
that includes military occupation -- in Israel, Iraq, Afghanistan and elsewhere.
Until that changes, he says, ''the current escalation of suicide attacks is
unlikely to abate.''

Taji Mustafa, a charismatic and confrontational spokesman for the group Hizb
ut-Tahrir, would agree. Hizb ut-Tahrir, like Al Qaeda, favors the
re-establishment of the caliphate, the central Muslim authority disbanded by
Mustafa Kemal Ataturk in 1924. Arguing that its doctrines can serve as a
''conveyor belt'' to terrorism, the British government has discussed banning the
group, whose activities have already been banned in Germany. ''Ourselves, the
vast majority unequivocally condemn terrorism,'' said Mustafa, who is the son of
Nigerian parents, over a cup of tea in a hotel near Regent's Park. ''None of us
justifies targeting civilians in London or Madrid.'' Nonviolence is the official
Hizb ut-Tahrir position, although when it comes to Israel, Mustafa (in his
conversation) and the organization (in its literature) are much less direct in
their disavowal of violence.

Mustafa says that in talking up a ban on Hizb ut-Tahrir, the Blair government is
expanding the definition of terrorism to cover nonterrorists. ''They're creating
a thought crime,'' Mustafa said. ''If they ban Hizb ut-Tahrir, is it going to
stop me as an individual from arguing for a caliphate?'' But worse, he says that
the government is dodging a legitimate argument over its foreign policy and
misrepresenting the wishes of British Muslims. Mustafa was particularly angered
at a speech Blair gave nine days after the bombings last summer, in which he
described the ''evil ideology'' of terrorists in a way that made it sound a lot
like Hizb ut-Tahrir's ideology. ''They demand the elimination of Israel,'' Blair
said, ''the withdrawal of all Westerners from Muslim countries. . .the
establishment of effectively Taliban states and Shariah law in the Arab world en
route to one caliphate of all Muslim nations. We don't have to wonder what type
of country those states would be.''

''Why didn't he take our views on?'' asked an indignant Mustafa. ''My challenge
is, Go to Whitechapel and ask: Do you question the state of Israel? Do you
believe in Shariah law?''

Shariah does not quite command majority support among British Muslims. A poll in
February in The Daily Telegraph showed that 40 percent of British Muslims favor
the establishment of Islamic law -- but only piecemeal, and under certain
circumstances. Even in heavily Muslim neighborhoods, there is no great public
clamor to ban alcohol -- usually a telltale sign of pro-Shariah agitation. And
Britain's relaxed laws regarding religious dress -- more akin to the American
model than to the French -- have allowed it to avoid the controversies over the
Muslim headscarf that have roiled the rest of Europe. But Mustafa's other claim
-- that the vast majority of citizens in heavily Muslim Whitechapel sympathize
viscerally and overwhelmingly with the radical position on Israel and, more
generally, on foreign policy -- must be faced squarely. For Mustafa is
unquestionably correct.

People often talk about the ''diversity'' of the British Muslim population. This
is fair if the dimension you are concerned about is skin color or per capita
income or attitudes on the relative merits of Hanafi and Hanbali jurisprudence.
But if the dimension is Western foreign policy, then there is really very little
diversity at all. A Draft Report on Young Muslims and Extremism leaked from the
Home Office in 2004 found that a main source of anger among youth was ''a
perception of 'double standards' in British foreign policy, where democracy is
preached but oppression of the 'Ummah' (the one nation of believers) is
practiced or tolerated, e.g. in Palestine, Iraq, Afghanistan, Kashmir,
Chechnya.'' By overwhelming numbers, Muslims oppose all intervention in the Arab
and Muslim world. Somewhere between 64 and 80 percent, depending on the poll you
consult, opposed the recent Afghan war. ''Yes, we have a responsibility to
encourage our children against extremism,'' I was told by Abdirahman Warsame, a
Somali who was chosen by the Muslim Association of Britain to run the Finsbury
Park mosque after Abu Hamza, ''but government has the responsibility to review
its policy.''

Foreign policy may be the only dimension on which moderates and radicals agree.
But it happens to be the dimension the terrorists cite when they blow up buses.
That harmony of worldview is a dire problem for Britain in general and Muslims
in particular -- no matter how narrow the terrain on which it is built. It
creates a climate in which a sympathetic hearing is guaranteed for any claim
that the real cause of terrorism is Iraq or Israel or America's love of big oil.
(And if you are hunting terrorists by, say, tapping phones, it makes terrorists
impossible to identify solely through the politics they profess.)

In this light, Britain's participation in the war in Iraq opened a can of worms.
A draft of a top-secret Joint Intelligence Committee report, leaked to The
Observer this spring, found that ''Iraq is likely to be an important motivating
factor for some time to come in the radicalization of British Muslims and for
those extremists who view attacks against the U.K. as legitimate.'' John Denham,
a Labor M.P. who resigned from the government over the Iraq invasion, says that
such viewpoints are common. ''Iraq is one of the factors that feed the view that
the government is casual to the point of unconcern about lives of Muslims,'' he
told me in the cafeteria in Portcullis House, across the street from Parliament.
''By providing a focal point for Muslim anger, it was likely to bring a rise in
world terrorism.''

Whether Iraq is a ''cause'' of terror or a mere pretext is a difficult question.
Radical jihadists have threatened and attacked countries that opted out of the
Iraq conflict. And if Iraq ''causes'' someone to become a suicide bomber, it is
almost certainly not in the way Western liberals understand political causation.
The terrorist may already hold jihadist views. He may be whipped into bloodlust
by images on TV or the Internet. He may regard the invasion of Iraq as an
incursion upon the prerogatives of the Ummah -- but the source of his anger is
unlikely to be any supposed violation of international law. In the end, though,
it may not matter if everyone means something different by ''Iraq.'' A shared
opposition to the war tightens the identification between radical and nonradical
Muslims, and between both those groups and some members of the non-Muslim
Western left, and this muddies the terms with which the battle of ideas around
terrorism is fought.

There is another problem. If the jihadists from all over the world who have gone
to fight in Iraq follow the example of their Afghan forebears and carry on the
jihad when they return home, then Britain is going to be very hard hit. Earlier
this month, The Sunday Times reported that there is a ''British brigade'' of 150
radicals fighting coalition forces in Iraq. Shortly before the death of
Abu-Musab al-Zarqawi in a U.S. bombing raid earlier this month, his Web site was
running English-language recruitment messages reading, ''They are fighting; you
should be too.''

A wave of arrests in the past few weeks has made clear how hard it is to
separate the fight at home and the fight abroad. In the Yorkshire town of
Dewsbury, not far from Beeston, the teenage grandson of a prominent British
Muslim scholar was arrested for links to the 17-man bombing conspiracy in
Ontario. The two brothers mistakenly arrested in Forest Gate appeared to have a
half-brother involved in February's protest in front of the Danish Embassy after
the cartoon controversy. Following the raid, Yvonne Ridley, a journalist who was
seized by the Taliban in 2001, converted to Islam two years later and is now a
leader of the anti-Iraq war Respect Party, called on Muslims to stop cooperating
with the police. Muhammed Abdul Bari, the new leader of the Muslim Council of
Britain, spoke of community anger and warned: ''Angry people can do anything.
Angry people can even feel that they should take the law into their own hands,
so anger has to be directed into positive action.''

VIII.

On a breezy evening in May, Denis MacShane, the Labor M.P. from the northern
coal-and-steel town of Rotherham, sat on the parliamentary terrace overlooking
the Thames, eating a dinner of bangers and mash that he had carried out on a
tray from the commons cafeteria. Other members were drinking their pints and
smoking their cigarettes. As the child of a Polish immigrant, MacShane expects
newcomers to claim their voices in the British conversation quickly. In 2003, he
came under fire from party leaders for calling on moderate Muslims to speak up
more loudly against terror. After July 7, he organized Muslim and non-Muslim
leaders in Rotherham to take out a newspaper ad condemning the bombings.
MacShane has always been enamored of the freedom-fighting side of his country
and the cold warriors in his party -- but he is realistic about the timetable of
the current conflict. It is almost as if he expects to win the war on terror
with the same patience that enables his fellow countrymen to stand in lines.
''You can't stop individuals doing violence,'' he told me. ''You need to wear
down acceptance and approval. Asking Muslims to repudiate all these Muslim
causes is like inviting the Galway peasant of the 1940's to support Churchill.''
It's tough to tell if he's stressing the nonnegotiability of such a demand or
the recalcitrance with which it is likely to be met.

MacShane is basically counseling patience, as many in Britain's government do. A
month before the July 7 attacks, Britain's Joint Intelligence Committee made the
judgment that ''there would probably be a successful attack of some sort in the
U.K. in the next five years.'' Today, British authorities are not much more
confident of thwarting all plots, so they have erected a line of defense that is
absorptive, not pre-emptive. It rests on harmony between social groups and on
the country's ability to suffer atrocities from time to time, as it did during
the heyday of the I.R.A., without escalating unrest or oppression, or the rise
of extremist parties. Britain is now betting that the country will retain its
historically bottomless reserves of sang-froid in the face of a threat that is
orders of magnitude more dangerous than the threat of the I.R.A.; that there is
something in the makeup of Britons that makes them more stoical than, say,
Americans in New York about bombs going off; that the quiet tenor of the British
fight against Islamist terrorism thus far is a sign of good manners and
forbearance, not of abject fright or sneaking sympathy; and that Britain in the
age of the Diana funeral is the same country it was during the blitz.

It is a risky bet.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: SAFER NEIGHBORHOODS? To Sir Ian Blair, top left, London's
police commissioner, much of the answer to terrorism lies in developing a
rapport between the police and residents of heavily Muslim communities like
Brick Lane, Whitechapel and Forest Gate, bottom left, where in June, the police
raided a row house but found nothing. Abdel Bari Atwan, bottom right, editor of
an Arabic daily headquartered in Hammersmith, says that as long as the U.S. and
its allies occupy other countries, ''the current escalation of suicide attacks
is unlikely to abate.'' (Photographs By Sarah Caron For The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); POLITICS (89%); RELIGION (88%); COUNTERTERRORISM (86%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); JOURNALISM (76%); REFUGEES (69%); WAR ON TERROR (67%);
SUICIDE (63%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: TONY BLAIR (73%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (97%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%); SOMALIA (79%);
SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             985 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 25, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

BYLINE: By Ihsan Taylor

SECTION: Section 7; Column 1; Book Review Desk; Paperback Row; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 765 words


BLINDING LIGHT, by Paul Theroux. (Mariner/Houghton Mifflin, $14.95.) In this
Faustian allegory Slade Steadman, a rich and rather grumpy middle-aged writer
with only one published work to his name, travels to Ecuador to drink a
hallucinogenic brew he hopes will stimulate his creativity. Disappointed by the
experience, he turns to another drug, expensive and rare (and fictional), that
heightens both his powers of perception and his libido, but also leaves him with
an unfortunate side effect: periodic blindness. Under the influence Steadman is
reinvigorated, and satisfies his sexual fantasies while writing a novel of
erotic exploration. But this forbidden knowledge comes at a price, and Steadman,
like Dr. Faustus, rises high, then falls far and fast. In the Book Review Hari
Kunzru called ''Blinding Light'' a ''bravura performance.''

BLIND SPOT: The Secret History of American Counterterrorism, by Timothy Naftali.
(Basic, $16.) Naftali, a historian who served as a consultant to the 9/11
Commission, demonstrates that terrorists have been a threat throughout much of
America's recent past and that many of the quandaries now confronting the
country -- how to identify and defeat terrorists, protect the borders, preserve
freedom while ensuring safety -- had long been debated.

THE WOMAN FROM HAMBURG: And Other True Stories, by Hanna Krall. Translated by
Madeline G. Levine. (Other Press, $14.95.) A Polish journalist, Krall is drawn
to unusual stories of World War II survivors, Jews and non-Jews alike, and
portrays how they lived, died and coexisted. Our reviewer, Elena Lappin, said
Krall ''reports the basic facts but adds a novelistic twist, weaving her
interviews into elegant, multilayered narratives.''

OUT OF EDEN: An Odyssey of Ecological Invasion, by Alan Burdick. (Farrar, Straus
& Giroux, $14.) This is a detailed survey of how technology aids the global
migration -- and devastation -- of species. ''The greatest threat to biological
diversity,'' Burdick writes, ''is no longer just bulldozers or pesticides but,
in a sense, nature itself.'' The author follows herpetologists to the jungles of
Guam, where the Australian brown tree snake has decimated native bird species;
explores underground lava tubes with an entomologist; and helps strain ballast
waters from tankers in San Francisco Bay. ''Out of Eden'' was a National Book
Award finalist in 2005.

LET IT RAIN COFFEE, by Angie Cruz. (Simon & Schuster, $14.) Cruz's second novel
explores the identity crisis of the Dominican diaspora through the story of the
resilient Colon family, whose members move from a remote island village to New
York, where constant hardships keep their dreams out of reach.

THE CONFEDERATE BATTLE FLAG: America's Most Embattled Emblem, by John M. Coski.
(Belknap/Harvard University, $17.95.) Coski, the historian at the Museum of the
Confederacy in Richmond, Va., delves into the history of the St. Andrew's cross
battle flag, which remains an emblem of heroic self-determination and has also
served as the banner of white supremacy.

CHAPLIN AND AGEE: The Untold Story of the Tramp, the Writer, and the Lost
Screenplay, by John Wranovics. (Palgrave Macmillan, $14.95.) This is a deft
retelling of James Agee's later years, his deepening friendship with Charlie
Chaplin in the 1940's and 50's, and the screenplay Agee wrote -- about a nuclear
apocalypse in New York -- for Chaplin's Little Tramp character.

THIRTEEN STEPS DOWN, by Ruth Rendell. (Vintage Crime/Black Lizard, $13.) In
Rendell's unnerving suspense novel, a delusional young repairman named Mix
Cellini has two fixations -- the necrophilic serial killer John Christie, hanged
50 years earlier, and the fashion model he's stalking. Mix is kept on edge by
his eccentric landlady, who also has an intriguing connection to Christie. In
the Book Review Marilyn Stasio praised Rendell's ''macabre sense of the
absurd.'' Lincoln Rhyme, Jeffery Deaver's quadriplegic forensic scientist, made
his inspired debut in ''The Bone Collector'' (1997). In THE TWELFTH CARD (Pocket
Star, $9.99), Rhyme and his detective partner, Amelia Sachs, try to determine
why a hit man is aiming at a 16-year-old Harlem schoolgirl who is researching
one of her ancestors.

FINDING GEORGE ORWELL IN BURMA, by Emma Larkin. (Penguin, $15.) As Larkin
explains, Myanmar (formerly Burma), a country with one of the worst human rights
records, resembles the world envisioned by George Orwell in ''Nineteen
Eighty-Four.'' Drawing on Orwell's experiences as a young man in Burma, Larkin
creates a lucid travelogue of this forbidding country.    Ihsan Taylor


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos (Photographs by Greg Martin
 Jerry Bauer)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Review

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BOOK REVIEWS (92%); WRITERS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); BIOLOGY (89%);
PUBLISHING (77%); JOURNALISM (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); BLINDNESS (74%); SEPTEMBER
11 ATTACK (73%); HISTORY (73%); BIODIVERSITY (71%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS
(70%); COUNTERTERRORISM (68%); BORDER CONTROL (67%); WORLD WAR II (64%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (64%); ISLANDS & REEFS (62%); BIRDS (61%); ENTOMOLOGY (60%); ZOOLOGY
(60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

COMPANY: FARRAR STRAUS & GIROUX INC (53%); SIMON & SCHUSTER INC (51%)

INDUSTRY: SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (53%); NAICS511130
BOOK PUBLISHERS (51%)

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (79%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); GUAM (69%)

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             990 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 28, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Many Algerians Are Not Reconciled by Amnesty Law

BYLINE: By CRAIG S. SMITH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1437 words

DATELINE: ALGIERS


In the 1990's, Algeria was the Iraq of the Arab world, ripping out its own heart
in a bloodbath that pitted a rising Islamist movement against military death
squads, killing more than 100,000 people. It was a model of hell on earth.

More recently the country has offered itself as a very different kind of model,
one of reconciliation after civil war. American officials have said that as
Iraqis fashion their own national reconciliation effort, Algeria is worthy of
close study.

But interviews with dozens of people affected by Algeria's approach suggest that
its amnesty program is less a model than a cautionary tale. Few are happy, and
the fighting is not over. Dozens of people are dying monthly, according to
journalists here who follow the killing.

''We've reached a dangerous point when the criminals are out of prison and the
people who don't agree with it are arrested,'' said Cherifa Kheddar, whose
brother and sister were killed by Islamic extremists in 1996.

The Algerian approach is this: a national reconciliation law, approved by
referendum in September and promulgated in March, set thousands of convicted
Islamist fighters free while ordering silence from their victims. The law
shelters government death squads from prosecution.

It provides money to some Islamist fighters to help them start new lives and
even seeks to expunge the word terrorist from the national discourse. The people
who cut throats and those whose throats were cut are now referred to as
''victims of the national tragedy.''

[To date, according to a government report issued on June 27, 40,000 people --
2,200 former Islamist fighters and 37,800 others -- have applied for amnesty or
compensation under the program, Reuters reported.]

It was a faster, more sweeping solution than the cathartic ''truth and
reconciliation commissions'' that have operated in South Africa and elsewhere,
creating a public forum in which victims could tell their stories and others
could confess their crimes in return for amnesty.

But here in Algeria, people like Ms. Kheddar are frustrated and angry that the
killers will never be judged.

''Our position has always been that justice must work first and that those found
guilty can be pardoned later on,'' Ms. Kheddar said. ''But the national
reconciliation gives impunity even to those people who have killed hundreds of
times.''

Former Islamic fighters are equally dissatisfied with the law.

Abdelhak Layada, the founder of the Armed Islamic Group, which attacked
foreigners, took its terror campaign to Europe and was blamed for the worst of
the period's atrocities, warned that without ''true reconciliation,'' the
tensions that led to the violence would build once again.

''The wounds won't really be healed without a real political settlement,'' Mr.
Layada said in the sitting room of his concrete house in a region south of
Algiers once called the ''triangle of death'' because of massacres there. The
door to the house is pierced with bullets from an army assault in 1992 shortly
after the formation of the Armed Islamic Group, known by its initials in French,
G.I.A. Though condemned to death, he was released from prison in March as part
of the reconciliation program.

Mr. Layada declines to talk in detail about his fighting days, hinting that he
has secrets to tell but that his freedom is too fresh to risk. He said he
regretted the killing of innocent civilians, including the beheading of seven
Trappist monks who were abducted in a bid to win his freedom. He said he had no
control over how the movement evolved after his imprisonment in 1993.

''When I was in the G.I.A., it was one organization,'' he said. ''After I went
to prison, there were many G.I.A.'s.''

But he says the country still yearns for an Islamic state, despite enduring
years of horrifying violence. ''Let us organize our political party and we'll
see how strong it is,'' he said, lounging in his sitting room, dressed in a pale
green robe.

Mr. Layada, who has short black hair, a black goatee and wire-rimmed glasses
with tortoise shell stems, warned that unless the state satisfied the people's
desire for a government based on Islamic law, ''it will push them to rise up.''

He said the government was fooling itself and the people to pretend that the
violence had ended. He referred to the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat,
which split from his organization, rejected the government's national
reconciliation plan and has remained active with hundreds of followers. Its
leaders, Hassan Hattab and Moktar ben Moktar, were once fighters under Mr.
Layada's command.

''Ask the authorities if they can stop them,'' he said with a broad smile.
''When you leave a small fire burning, it can spread.''

Mr. Layada is not alone in his pessimistic assessment of the attempted
reconciliation.

''They haven't solved the root of the problem,'' said Ali Benhadjar, who won a
parliamentary seat in 1991 as an Islamist candidate and took up arms when a
military-led government nullified election results to avert an Islamist victory.

''They are just giving people money and telling them to be quiet.'' Mr.
Benhadjar said. This is not a solution.''

Mr. Benhadjar led another splinter group, the League for Dawa and Jihad. He
claims responsibility for killing the leader of the Armed Islamic Group, Djamel
Zitouni, under whose rule that group's worst atrocities were committed,
including the beheading of the monks.

''I sent my men to kill him and they did,'' Mr. Benhadjar said proudly, standing
in his cramped herbal medicine shop in the mountain town of Medea south of
Algiers.

He argued that the reconciliation law was meant more for the government security
services, who participated in many killings, than it was for Islamist fighters.
The law prohibits people from pursuing claims against the state. ''This
reconciliation is serving the regime,'' he said.

He warned that unless the government allowed the Islamists to work for the
Islamic state that they dream of, the violence would return.

''The law in the Western world was made by human beings, but Islamic law is
coming from God,'' Mr. Benhadjar said, stroking his long russet beard. He said
Algeria and other Arab states ''have strayed from the law of Islam, and so
sooner or later there will be a clash between these governments and the
people.''

But for much of the population traumatized by the violence, the law is a kind of
betrayal of the innocent people who died.

''We don't have the right to talk about these things anymore,'' said a woman in
a bookshop on Didouche Mourad Street in downtown Algiers, referring to a
black-and-white photograph of her friend Joachim Grau, a Portuguese man who once
owned the shop and was gunned down in 1994. ''They want people to forget.''

At Notre Dame d'Afrique, a Roman Catholic basilica outside town, the police
recently forced nuns to remove portraits of the seven monks beheaded in the
failed bid to free Mr. Layada, because the display breached the reconciliation
law.

Ms. Kheddar, who watched Islamists drag her brother and sister off to brutal
deaths, spends every Sunday with other survivors of the violence in front of the
governmental palace, displaying photos of women who were killed and demanding
justice.

She vows to keep the weekly vigil until there has been a full accounting of who
did what to whom. Though she has been arrested once, she does not shy from
repeating the horrors of that June evening a decade ago.

She was napping in her room when her sister cried out to come quickly. Their
brother, Mohamed Rheda Kheddar, was at the front door surrounded by five young
Islamic extremists pointing guns at his head.

The men ushered them into the sitting room, then berated the family for owning a
television, berated her brother for smoking and berated the women for not
covering their heads. They told the family that Algeria needed to be purged and
purified, and took her brother into an adjoining apartment. They tortured him
for more than an hour with the claw of a hammer before cutting his throat.

When they came for her sister, Ms. Kheddar managed to escape and get help from a
neighboring police station. She said she believed that the men had planned to
rape her sister, but shot her and fled when they discovered that Ms. Kheddar was
gone.

Ms. Kheddar found her brother on the floor of his bathroom. She said he looked
as if he were sleeping on a rug of bright red velour. It was only later that she
realized that the family did not own a rug of red velour. In shock, Ms. Kheddar
said, she had not understood that what she had seen was his drying blood.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Abdelhak Layada, founder of the Armed Islamic Group, said the
country's wounds ''won't really be healed without a real political settlement.''

 With a poster in each hand at a rally on June 18, Cherifa Kheddar joined in
calling for justice for victims of terror by Islamist insurgents in Algeria.
(Photographs by Samantha Appleton for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORISM (90%); AMNESTY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CIVIL
WAR (90%); RELIGION (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); JOURNALISM (74%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS
(73%); PARDONS (73%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); LEGISLATION (71%); APPROVALS
(71%); VERDICTS (71%); WRITERS (69%); GENOCIDE (66%); REFERENDUMS (52%) Islam;
Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare; Law and Legislation; Amnesties and Pardons; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: ARMED ISLAMIC GROUP (59%)

PERSON: Craig S Smith

CITY: ALGIERS, ALGERIA (79%)

COUNTRY: ALGERIA (97%); IRAQ (94%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Algeria; Algeria

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1002 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 5, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Koizumi Blames China and South Korea for Rift

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 5

LENGTH: 377 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 4


Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi squarely blamed China and South Korea on
Wednesday for worsening relations with Japan, accusing them of interference in
Japan's domestic matters.

In a nationally broadcast news conference for the new year, Mr. Koizumi defended
his annual visits to the Yasukuni Shrine, the memorial to Japan's war dead,
although the visits have frozen Japan's diplomatic relations with its neighbors.
The leaders of China and South Korea have refused to meet Mr. Koizumi as a
protest over his visits to the shrine, which also honors top-ranked war
criminals and is considered a symbol of Japanese militarism in Asia.

''I can't understand why foreign governments would intervene in a spiritual
matter and try to turn it into a diplomatic problem,'' Mr. Koizumi said, adding
that he visited the shrine to pray for peace.

The comments, which drew immediate condemnation from Seoul, came as Tokyo and
Beijing are embroiled in a bitter dispute over the suicide of a Japanese
diplomat in Shanghai in 2004. The remarks amounted to another sign that after a
year of rising tensions and Japan's growing estrangement from the region, all
sides appeared to be hardening their positions.

South Korea's foreign minister, Ban Ki Moon, responded to Mr. Koizumi by saying
bluntly that Japan's leaders needed a ''better understanding of history'' and
should earn the ''trust and respect of other countries.''

There was no immediate comment from Beijing.

The rivalry between China and Japan has been punctuated by a feud over the
diplomat's suicide. A Japanese newsweekly reported that the diplomat killed
himself after he was blackmailed into providing secret information by a Chinese
agent who threatened to reveal his affair with a bar hostess.

The Japanese Foreign Ministry attributed the death to ''regrettable actions by
local Chinese security authorities'' in violation of the Vienna Convention on
Diplomatic Relations. China accused Japan of trying to ''smear China's image.''

Mr. Koizumi's tough talk tapped into a growing resentment and fear of a rising
China among ordinary Japanese. Business and personal exchanges are greater than
ever, as Mr. Koizumi himself pointed out, but the diplomatic friction has also
begun to change public opinion.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (79%); WORLD WAR II (76%);
GENOCIDE (74%); SUICIDE (72%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(67%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (61%) World War II (1939-45); Yasukuni Shrine
(Tokyo); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: BAN KI-MOON (58%) Norimitsu Onishi; Junichiro (Prime Min) Koizumi

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (88%); SHANGHAI, CHINA (79%); SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(79%); BEIJING, CHINA (73%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); JAPAN (96%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (95%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: China; South Korea

LOAD-DATE: January 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1004 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             January 6, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Bosnia: Wife Of War Crimes Suspect Killed In Raid

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD (IHT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 69 words


The wife of a Bosnian Serb war crimes suspect was killed in an exchange of
gunfire when European Union peacekeeping troops raided their home near the
eastern village of Rogatica to arrest him, European military officials in Bosnia
said. The suspect, Dragomir Abazovic, and the couple's 11-year-old son were
wounded. A spokesman for the European Union force said the soldiers acted in
self-defense.   NICHOLAS WOOD (IHT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); ARMED FORCES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ARRESTS
(88%); PEACEKEEPING (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); SELF
DEFENSE (86%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (93%) European Union

PERSON: Dragomir Abazovic; Nicholas Wood

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: January 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1007 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 10, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 914 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

18 Iraqi Police Killed In Suicide Bombing
Two suicide bombers carrying police identity cards killed at least 18 officers
and wounded 25 at an Interior Ministry checkpoint, just a few hundred yards from
a ceremony attended by the American ambassador.   A1

Paul Bremer, who served as the senior civilian administrator in Iraq, says he
complained to President Bush and other officials that far too few troops were
committed to the occupation in the first year after Saddam Hussein was ousted.

A6

Iran to Reopen Nuclear Facility
Iran, defying its European partners and the United States, plans to reopen its
uranium enrichment complex to resume nuclear activities that it suspended 14
months ago, officials involved in negotiations with Iran said.   A10

Clone Research Discredited
Dr. Hwang Woo Suk, the South Korean researcher who claimed to have cloned human
cells, fabricated evidence for all of his research, according to a report
released by a Seoul National University panel investigating his work.   A1

Sharon Shows Improvement
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel showed some improvement, breathing on his
own and moving an arm a bit, as doctors began bringing him out of a coma.   A12

Anomaly in India Abortions
As many as 10 million female fetuses may have been aborted in India during the
past 20 years as families tried to secure male heirs, according to a study
published in The Lancet, the British medical journal.   A11

Turkey Criticized for Flu Tactics
Turkey's slow response to the spread of bird flu there has helped the disease
move unchecked in the eastern part of the country, and, within the last week,
from birds to people.   A11

NATIONAL   A13-23

Court Nominee Begins Confirmation Hearings
Judge Samuel A. Alito Jr., addressing concerns among Democrats that his past
support for conservative positions makes him too much of an ideologue for a seat
on the Supreme Court, began his public drive for confirmation by stating that
judges should have no agendas or preferred outcomes of their own.   A1

Advice on Races in House
House Republicans who led the call to oust Representative Tom DeLay urged
colleagues to hold off from making quick commitments in new leadership races
until they win guarantees of significant changes in the way the House does
business.   A14

Judges Briefed on Spying
The Justice Department held an unusual closed-door briefing for judges on a
secret foreign-intelligence court in response to concerns about President Bush's
decision to allow domestic eavesdropping.   A14

Cheney Taken to Hospital
Vice President Dick Cheney went to a hospital for four and a half hours after
complaining of shortness of breath, but he was back at the White House in the
afternoon, amid a number of unanswered questions about his condition.   A14

Rise in Female Immigrants
As many as 11 million illegal immigrants are thought to be living and working in
the United States, with academics, immigration advocates and Border Patrol
agents all agreeing that the number of women making the trip is on the rise.
A1

Bush Defends Education Law
President Bush visited an exemplary school near Baltimore to say that his
signature education law, No Child Left Behind, is working and that he would
resist any move by educators and Congress to change it.   A19

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

How East Harlem Became An Epicenter of Diabetes
A yearlong examination by The New York Times found that the prevalence of
diabetes in East Harlem, a largely Latino and African-American community, stands
in stark contrast to the reality just blocks away, in the wealthier precincts of
the Upper East Side, where the disease afflicts relatively few people.   A1

Bill Bans Indoor Smoking
New Jersey lawmakers approved a far-reaching ban on smoking in indoor public
places that includes virtually all of the state's bars and restaurants, but
leaves exempt the gaming areas of Atlantic City's 12 casinos.   B1

Sentencing in Ferry Crash
The pilot who passed out at the helm of the Staten Island ferry in 2003, causing
a crash that killed 11 people and seriously injured dozens of others, and his
supervisor were each sentenced to more than a year in prison for their roles in
the accident.   B1

Neediest Cases   B7

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

Health & Fitness   F5

SPORTSTUESDAY   D1-6

ARTS   E1-10

OBITUARIES   C17

Heinrich Harrer
An Austrain explorer whose life story inspired the movie ''Seven Years in
Tibet'' and who tutored the young Dalai Lama, he was 93.   C17

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Dow Closes Above 11,000
The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 11,000 for the first time since
June 2001, pointing to renewed investor confidence.   C1

Bank Faces Sex Bias Suit
Six women who are senior bankers at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein Services have
sued the investment bank, contending that they were denied equal bonuses and
promotions given to men with less experience.   C1

Saks Makes More Trims
The parent company of Saks Fifth Avenue moved to thin out its management team
and put Parisian, the last of its midprice department store chains, up for sale.
C1

Making E-ZPass Easier
Several companies are rushing to provide technologies that could open up E-ZPass
lanes, which let motorists zip by highway tollbooths in several states, to any
motorist with a credit card.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Wrong on human rights; restoring the right to vote; Washington
shuffle; beyond the slogans in Latin America.

Columns: John Tierney, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E4
TV Listings   E9

Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (90%); RESEARCH REPORTS (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%);
ESPIONAGE (84%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); DEATHS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); CLONING
(74%); ABORTION (71%); CONSERVATISM (71%); AVIAN INFLUENZA (69%); HUMAN CLONING
(69%); JUDGES (68%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%);
SUPREME COURTS (63%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); DICK CHENEY (58%); SAMUEL
ALITO (56%)

CITY: SEOUL, KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF (92%); INDIA (92%); TURKEY (92%); ISRAEL (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1016 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 23, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein's Trial Is Set to Resume, but Who Will Preside?

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi, Mona Mahmoud and Omar
al-Neami contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 807 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 22


Two days before the trial of Saddam Hussein is set to resume after a month's
recess, confusion surrounds the tribunal that is trying him, with the identity
of the judge who will preside in court still uncertain.

The judge who has become the trial's most public face, Rizgar Muhammad Amin,
submitted a letter of resignation this month, saying he was fed up with
criticism by high-ranking Iraqi officials who wanted him to be tougher with Mr.
Hussein. A colleague on the five-judge panel, Said al-Hammash, is prepared to
replace Judge Amin if he does not return Tuesday.

But in recent days President Jalal Talabani and other Iraqi leaders, apparently
eager to dispel the widespread impression that Judge Amin was forced off the
case through political pressure, have urged him to stay on. The tribunal has not
accepted Judge Amin's resignation. An American official who is close to the
tribunal said Sunday that he did not know which judge would be presiding.

''We'll know for sure on Tuesday morning at about 10 o'clock,'' said the
official, who spoke on condition of anonymity in an effort to avoid the
appearance of interfering in the tribunal's decisions.

Judge Amin's potential successor is facing troubles of his own. Last week, a
senior Iraqi official petitioned the court to bar Judge Hammash from presiding
at the trial, saying the judge was a former member of Mr. Hussein's Baath Party.
The official, Ali Feisal al-Lami, is a director of the de-Baathification
commission, set up to purge former high-level Baathists from public office.
Judge Hammash has denied that he was a Baathist.

The office of Prime Minister Ibrahim al-Jaafari has told the tribunal to ignore
Mr. Lami's petition, saying he has no authority over the judges. But one
tribunal official said he believed that to avoid controversy, the body might
choose to pass over Judge Hammash even if Judge Amin resigns. The official spoke
on condition of anonymity, saying he was not authorized to speak publicly.

The judicial disputes have threatened to bring further disarray to a trial that
has already seen its share of chaos. Some judges on the tribunal say they fear
that Mr. Hussein and his fellow defendants, who have unleashed repeated
broadsides against the tribunal, will pick up on the questions surrounding Judge
Amin's resignation and stir further conflict.

The trial, which started on Oct. 19, will resume with more testimony from
witnesses to the massacre of 148 men and boys in the Shiite town of Dujail,
north of Baghdad, in 1982 after an assassination attempt there against Mr.
Hussein. Former members of Mr. Hussein's government could be among those who are
called to testify in the next two weeks, the American official said.

The current phase of the trial, the first of several expected cases against Mr.
Hussein and other top officials in his government, is likely to last at least
until the end of May, the official said.

As Iraqi parties positioned themselves on Sunday after the release of election
results, Tariq al-Hashemi, a leader of Iraq's largest Sunni Arab political
coalition, said Sunni Arabs would not accept the inclusion in a new government
of any official who was involved in violence against Sunnis by the Shiite-led
security forces. The warning appeared to be aimed at Bayan Jabr, the current
interior minister, who is widely believed by Sunnis to have orchestrated death
squads that have carried out killings.

Mr. Hashemi's coalition, the Iraqi Consensus Front, won 44 of the new
Parliament's 275 seats in the December elections, and is expected to be part of
a government with the Shiite and Kurdish alliances. But at a news conference on
Sunday, Mr. Hashemi also said the group's leaders would consult with party
members before deciding whether to be part of a government or the opposition.

Insurgent violence left at least a dozen people dead across Iraq on Sunday. In
Baquba, the bodies of five policemen, some mutilated, were left outside a
hospital, police officials said. In Balad Ruz, northeast of Baghdad, insurgents
fired rocket-propelled grenades at the home of a police officer, killing five of
his relatives but leaving the officer unharmed, the police said.

North of Baghdad in Hawija, the bodies of a prominent Sunni Arab tribal leader
and his son were found shot to death with their hands bound. The leader, Ibrahim
Ali al-Neami, 75, and his 28 year-old son, Ziad, were last seen Saturday leaving
their home south of Kirkuk for a funeral in Hawija, the police said.

The last of three Reuters journalists who had been detained by the American
military in Iraq was freed Sunday after nearly eight months without being
charged, the agency reported. Samir Muhammad Noor, a 30 year-old cameraman, was
arrested in June. Two other Reuters journalists, also Iraqis, were released Jan.
15, also without being charged.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Said al-Hammash is prepared to preside over the trial, if
necessary. (Photo by Jacob Silberberg/Associated Press)
 The courtroom where an Iraqi tribunal has been conducting Saddam Hussein's
trial, which resumes Tuesday. (Photo by Jason Straziuso/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); RESIGNATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (79%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WITNESSES (78%); PETITIONS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (74%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (72%); ASSASSINATION (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (60%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%); JALAL TALABANI (74%) Robert F Worth; Rizgar
Mohammed (Judge) Amin; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Jalal (Pres) Talabani

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1019 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 24, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kurd to Preside at Hussein Trial, Set to Resume Today

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi and Mona Mahmoud contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Jan. 23


A new judge was appointed Monday to take charge of the trial of Saddam Hussein
and seven co-defendants, the latest twist in a legal process that has been
plagued by unruliness and accusations of political influence.

Raouf Rasheed Abdel Rahman, 67, will preside Tuesday when the trial resumes
after a month's recess, said Raid Juhi, the chief investigative judge of the
tribunal. Judge Rahman will take over from Rizgar Muhammad Amin, who resigned
two weeks ago, saying he was tired of criticism from high-level Iraqi officials
who wanted him to be tougher with Mr. Hussein.

The appointment of Judge Rahman comes as a surprise, because another judge, Said
al-Hammash, was next in line to succeed Judge Amin. Last week an Iraqi official
petitioned the tribunal to bar Judge Hammash, saying he was a former member of
Mr. Hussein's Baath Party. Judge Hammash has denied it, and the office of Prime
Minister Ibrahim Jaafari directed the tribunal to pay no attention to the
petition.

But the prospect of a political battle with the de-Baathification commission,
which is charged with purging former high-level Baathists from public office and
brought the accusation against Judge Hammash, appears to have swayed the
tribunal, which moved him to another chamber.

Over all, the episode is seen as having created a troubling impression that the
tribunal is unstable and vulnerable to political interference. Of the panel of
five judges who started out on Mr. Hussein's trial on Oct. 19, three have now
been replaced.

Judge Amin may yet return, Mr. Juhi said, because his resignation has not become
formal.

''Judicial positions are not musical chairs,'' said Miranda Sissons, a senior
associate at the International Center for Transitional Justice, who is observing
the trial. ''There has to be some measure of consistency to be sure the trial
has integrity.''

Judge Rahman, a Kurd, served as the chief judge of the Suleimaniya Criminal
Court in the Iraqi region of Kurdistan before joining the Iraqi High Tribunal.

The tribunal's announcement came as an outbreak of insurgent violence on Monday
left at least a dozen people dead across Iraq.

In Baghdad, a suicide bomber drove a car packed with explosives into a police
checkpoint near the fortified Green Zone, killing a police officer and two
civilians and wounding seven people, Interior Ministry officials said. A police
patrol hit a roadside bomb, injuring two officers, and a member of Parliament,
Jabir Khalifa al-Jabir, narrowly avoided an assassination attempt when gunmen
opened fire on his car, killing his bodyguard and injuring his son.

South of Baghdad in the restive city of Mahmudiya, a suicide bomber detonated
his vehicle outside a hospital, killing one civilian and wounding five others.

In Mosul, far to the north, gunmen shot and killed Jasim Muhammad, a prominent
member of the Kurdistan Democratic Party, as he left his home. Elsewhere in the
city, a roadside bomb detonated on an Iraqi Army patrol, killing a soldier and
wounding another.

In the oil city of Kirkuk, a roadside bomb killed one policeman and wounded four
others. In Baquba, insurgents detonated a bomb outside a house in the Tahrir
district, wounding seven people, and then blew up a second bomb as the police
and ambulances arrived, wounding six policemen, police officials said.

The American military said a soldier was killed while on a foot patrol in the
southwest part of the capital. Military officials also said two American airmen
were killed and one was wounded Sunday while escorting a convoy near Taji,
Reuters reported.

The Association of Muslim Scholars, a hard-line Sunni Arab group, issued a
statement on Monday saying that Interior Ministry forces had rounded up 32
people in western Baghdad and shot and killed two of them. Later, three of those
abducted, all teenagers, were discovered not far away with signs of torture on
their bodies, the statement said.

The Iraqi Islamic Party, Iraq's best-known Sunni Arab political party, also
issued a statement describing the event, though it did not directly accuse the
Interior Ministry.

The Interior Ministry said it was not aware of any raid in the area. Many Sunnis
have been killed in western Baghdad in raids by gunmen dressed as security
officers in recent months, but the identity of the killers is usually unknown.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: A young woman held a photo of her father yesterday after he was
killed in a Sunni Arab neighborhood in northern Baghdad. The man died in a
morning raid by an armed group wearing uniforms, the police said. (Photo by
Khalid Mohammed/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: JUDGES (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (85%); SHOOTINGS (85%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (85%); BOMBINGS (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (84%); GUNSHOT
WOUNDS (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (79%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%);
RESIGNATIONS (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); PETITIONS (74%); GENOCIDE
(73%); ASSASSINATION (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%);
PRIME MINISTERS (72%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(65%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (65%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (65%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(65%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (64%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%) Robert F Worth; Raouf Rasheed Abdel (Judge) Rahman;
Said al- (Judge) Hammash; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (94%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1020 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 24, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkish Court Drops Charges Against Novelist

BYLINE: By SEBNEM ARSU

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 548 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 23


An Istanbul court dropped charges against the novelist Orhan Pamuk on Monday,
ending a trial that put Turkey at odds with the European Union over the issue of
freedom of speech.

Mr. Pamuk, whose works have been translated into dozens of languages, spoke in a
newspaper interview about the mass killings of Armenians by the Ottoman Empire
in 1915, and also of the deaths of Kurds in Turkish operations in the 1980's
against a separatist group. He was then prosecuted for ''insulting Turkish
identity.''

The subject of the 1915 massacres remains taboo in Turkey.

The court had asked the government to rule on whether to proceed with the case.
On Sunday, the Justice Ministry told the court to make the decision, citing
changes made to the penal code last year. On Monday, the court dropped the
charges.

The ruling was immediately welcomed by the European legislators. But the lawyer
for the novelist, Haluk Inanici, chided the court for framing its decision in
bureaucratic terms rather than addressing the issue of freedom of expression.

''The court dropped the charges not because the trial violated the freedom of
speech,'' he said, but because ''there was a missing approval by the Justice
Ministry to proceed with the trial.''

Mr. Pamuk was facing a sentence of up to three years in jail if he was convicted
of insulting Turkish identity in the interview he gave to Das Magazine, a Swiss
publication, in 2005.

Mr. Pamuk's high profile abroad, in Europe and elsewhere, prompted widespread
opposition to his prosecution, an advantage that many intellectuals who face
similar charges do not have, said Vecdi Sayar, general secretary of
International PEN, a worldwide association of writers. Mr. Pamuk's novels
include ''My Name Is Red,'' ''The Black Book'' and ''Snow.''

PEN says about 70 intellectuals have been charged under Article 301 of the
revised penal code, which calls for punishment for public comments that
''denigrate Turkishness, the government, the army and the memory of the founder
of modern Turkey, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk.''

''There are many people abroad who fail to see beyond Orhan Pamuk's trial,'' Mr.
Sayar said. ''Saving a writer like Orhan Pamuk from prosecution may stand as a
symbolic example on its own. But it is not an overall resolution for other
intellectuals and writers that still face similar charges in Turkey.''

The governing Justice and Development Party, which worked to align Turkish laws
with European standards before the European Union membership talks began last
October, tried to appear impartial in handling Mr. Pamuk's case. But many senior
government officials interpreted the heavy international criticism as an
interference in the national judiciary system.

Mr. Sayar said the government feared losing the support of nationalist
constituents who opposed Mr. Pamuk's comments.

Televised pictures from Mr. Pamuk's first hearing in December showed policemen
wearing armor trying to save the 53-year-old novelist from a barrage of eggs,
and protesters who jumped on his vehicle punching the windshield.

''The Justice Ministry could have dropped the charges before the local court and
spoken clearly about the necessities of freedom of speech,'' Mr. Sayar said.
''But in fear of annoying the nationalist circles, they did not.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: January 26, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Tuesday about a Turkish court's decision to drop
charges against the novelist Orhan Pamuk misidentified Vecdi Sayar, who noted
that there were still charges pending against numerous other intellectuals in
Turkey. He is president of the Turkish Center of International PEN, an
association of writers, not the general secretary of International PEN.

An article on Tuesday about a Turkish court's decision to drop charges against
the novelist Orhan Pamuk misidentified Vecdi Sayar, who noted that there were
still charges pending against numerous other intellectuals in Turkey. He is
president of the Turkish Center of International PEN, an association of writers,
not the general secretary of International PEN.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(90%); WRITERS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (90%); CRIMINAL LAW (89%); INTERVIEWS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); LAWYERS (75%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(71%); APPROVALS (69%); WAR & CONFLICT (68%) Freedom of Speech and Expression;
Kurds; Armenians; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); INTERNATIONAL PEN (59%) European Union;
International PEN

PERSON: Sebnem Arsu; Orhan Pamuk; Vecdi Sayar

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (93%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); ARMENIA
(93%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: January 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1024 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           January 26, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 993 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Early Indications Show Large Gains for Hamas
Hamas, the militant Islamic party sworn to the destruction of Israel, won a
large share of votes in Palestinian legislative elections, depriving the more
secular Fatah party of its monopoly on power, surveys of voters leaving the
polls indicated.   A1

Drop in China AIDS Estimate


China released a study conducted with international health agencies that reduced
the estimated number of cases of people with H.I.V and AIDS, to 650,000 from the
840,000 estimated in 2003.   A1

Iran Welcomes Russian Offer
Iran's top nuclear negotiator said he welcomed a Russian proposal to defuse the
confrontation between Iran and the West over its nuclear programs by
establishing a joint venture to enrich uranium in Russia. He stopped short of
accepting the offer, though.   A8

China and the United States both want to prevent Iran from acquiring nuclear
weapons, but their ''approach may differ,'' Deputy Secretary of State Robert B.
Zoellick said.   A6

Pope Tackles Mysteries of Love
Pope Benedict XVI issued a meditation on love, presenting Roman Catholicism's
potential for good rather than imposing potentially divisive rules for
orthodoxy.   A8

Sri Lanka Sets Peace Talks
Sri Lanka's warring parties agreed to begin talking to each other after more
than 18 months of deadlock over a site for peace talks and scores of killings in
the meantime.   A7

Putin Ties Spies to New Rules
President Vladimir V. Putin accused foreign intelligence operatives of using
private organizations to interfere in Russia's internal affairs, saying that
accusations that four British diplomats were spies justified new restrictions on
the groups.   A3

Russian officials called the attack on natural gas pipelines in the Caucasus a
terrorist act, suggesting that groups near the Chechnya region are aiming
attacks at Russia's energy distribution system.   A6

NATIONAL   A14-21

Bush Will Seek to Solidify Party's Lead in Address
Having stabilized his political standing, President Bush intends to use his
State of the Union address to kick off the next phase of a comeback plan that is
focused on retaining his party's slim majority in Congress and completing
unfinished business from his existing agenda.   A18

Lobbyists to Fight Restrictions
Lobbyist and advocates pushed back against the drive to impose new restrictions
on lobbying, saying Congress risks cutting off lawmakers from information and
educational travel.   A14

A.C.L.U. Suit Critical of Law
Citing the case of a prominent Muslim scholar who has been barred from the
United States, the American Civil Liberties Union filed a federal lawsuit
seeking to strike down a clause of the Patriot Act that bans foreigners who
endorse terrorism from traveling to this country.   A18

Crash Data on Air Ambulances
Crashes involving helicopters and planes used as ambulances killed 54 people in
a three-year period ending a year ago, most of them pilots, paramedics and
nurses, according to a special study by the National Transportation Safety
Board.   A15

EDUCATION

Schools' Names for Sale
Naming rights have expanded nationwide beyond athletic facilities as financially
strapped school districts have begun a blitz of new efforts to attract private
money.   A1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Risks Cited With Heart Drug
A drug used worldwide to reduce bleeding during heart surgery can increase the
risk of kidney failure, heart attacks and strokes, and should be abandoned,
doctors are reporting.   A21

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

M.T.A.'s Harder Line May Lead to Labor Unrest
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority proposed a contract considerably
harsher than the one that New York City's transit workers narrowly voted down
Friday, a move some labor experts said was meant to pressure union leaders to
accept binding arbitration -- but could instead lead to new labor unrest.   A1

Big Business Backs Spitzer
Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, known for his high-profile Wall Street
investigations, has apparently not angered everyone in the business world. In
raising $19 million in his quest to become governor of New York, he has taken
contributions from some of the biggest names on Wall Street.   B1

Taxes Soar on Long Island
Long Islanders pay among the highest property taxes in the New York region, a
new study says.   B1

Neediest Cases   B6


SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-6

HOUSE & HOME   F1-10

THURSDAY STYLES   G1-8

OBITUARIES   B7

ARTS   E1-12

New Phone Fells Art Thief
A new cellphone was the downfall of Robert Mang, a 50-year-old who in 2003
pulled off one of the biggest art heists in recent years: the removal of the
''Saliera'' (or saltcellar), a rare gold-plated sculpture by Benvenuto Cellini,
from the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna. After holding the Cellini
masterpiece for nearly three years, Mr. Mang was identified as the culprit.
Police had circulated security camera images of him buying a cellphone.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

Enron Fraud Trial Nears
As Kenneth L. Lay and Jeffrey K. Skilling, the onetime leaders of Enron, step
into a court of law next week, the outcome of their fraud trial is far from
certain, creating one of the most closely watched white- collar criminal cases
ever.   A1

Bush's Health Strategy
President Bush has made ''consumer-directed'' health savings plans a cornerstone
of his policy for addressing the nation's runaway medical costs, and he plans to
push them again. But so far there is little evidence that the approach is
helping consumers come to grips with the high price of health care.   C1

One Guidant Suitor Standing
Johnson & Johnson announced that it had decided not to increase its last offer
for Guidant. The decision leaves Boston Scientific as the apparent winner in the
battle for Guidant.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Senators in need of a spine; the African Union gets it half-right;
change from within at Disney; Lawrence Downes on Amy, Joey and Mary Jo.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E8
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E10
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HAMAS (90%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%);
ESPIONAGE (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); LOBBYING (89%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (87%); AMBULANCE & RESCUE SERVICES (85%); AL FATAH (78%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (78%); POLLS & SURVEYS (77%); PEACE PROCESS (76%); AGENCY RULEMAKING
(76%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); NATURAL GAS (72%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (71%); US PATRIOT
ACT (68%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (67%); SUITS & CLAIMS (65%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (64%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (63%);
ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION & DISTRIBUTION (62%); EMERGENCY VEHICLES (61%);
LITIGATION (60%); MILITARY WEAPONS (53%); HELICOPTERS (50%); NATURAL GAS
PIPELINES (50%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (93%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (57%); POPE BENEDICT XVI (51%);
ROBERT ZOELLICK (51%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
UNITED STATES (93%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SRI LANKA (92%);
ISRAEL (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%)

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1025 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 27, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Kosovo Albanians Mourn Pro-Independence Leader

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 819 words

DATELINE: PRISTINA, Kosovo, Jan. 26


Kosovo's Albanian majority gathered by the tens of thousands on Thursday to bid
farewell to their president in a proud and somber funeral ceremony that seemed
to underscore their aspirations for independence.

After 16 years as the ethnic Albanian leader in the province, Ibrahim Rugova --
a veteran pacifist who struggled to gain independence for this disputed region
but died of lung cancer last Saturday -- was given every honor the region could
muster.

For six hours this city, the regional capital, was brought to a halt for a
ceremony attended by four presidents and representatives from more than 40
countries. Stores and schools were closed, and the regional government announced
a holiday.

Kosovo is still officially part of Serbia but has been administered by the
United Nations since June 1999, when Serbian security forces, accused of
committing atrocities against the Albanians, were forced to leave the province.
Mr. Rugova died just as talks on the province's future status were about to
begin.

But for many here on Thursday, there was little in the ceremony to suggest that
it was taking place in a disputed province. There were few signs of the 17,000
or so peacekeepers who usually patrol the region. Instead, Kosovo's Protection
Corps, defined by the United Nations as a civil disaster response unit but
widely viewed by Albanians as the province's fledgling defense force, led the
cortege. The armed guards, recruited from the ranks of Kosovo's now dispersed
guerrilla army that fought the Serbian security forces during the conflict here
from 1997 to 1999, walked slowly alongside the president's coffin as it was
borne on a gun carriage, draped in flags.

''He was the president of our state,'' said Zymer Kastrati, 80, who traveled by
bus with 10 members of his family from Pec in eastern Kosovo. Mr. Rugova twice
won the presidency of Kosovo's regional government, elected by the provincial
legislature in 2002 and 2004.

While the United Nations has final authority here, the regional government has
substantial say in areas like the economy, health, education and other social
affairs.

Many Albanians traveled across Kosovo in freezing temperatures to attend the
ceremony after four and half days of official mourning. Many were members of the
Democratic League of Kosovo, the movement Mr. Rugova helped to form in the late
1980's as a counterweight to the rise of Serbian nationalism. Members of
Kosovo's extensive exile communities flew in from as far as way as Australia and
the United States.

Some said they came out of duty to the man they described as the father of their
nation.

''He was a very patient and peaceful man -- ideal qualities, since we Kosovars
are a hot-blooded people,'' said Gresa Rexhepi, 16, a Pristina high school
student. ''I'm sure his goal will be achieved very soon.''

Dignitaries paid tribute to the president before he was laid to rest at a
memorial site for former members of the Kosovo Liberation Army. The head of the
United Nations mission in the province, Soren JessenPetersen, said President
Rugova had ''remained dedicated exclusively to peaceful means.''

''His death is a great loss,'' Javier Solana, the European Union's foreign
policy chief, said at the ceremony. ''It is one of the cruel ironies of history
that he left at the moment he was most needed, the very moment he expected to
provide leadership in helping to settle the future status of Kosovo.''

Mr. Jessen-Petersen suggested that Mr. Rugova's desire for independence might
yet become a reality, a suggestion echoed by diplomats who say negotiations are
likely to lead to some kind of independent state.

''President Rugova has left a void behind him, but he has also left a vision to
guide Kosovo forward,'' Mr. Jessen-Petersen said. ''It is a vision whose
fulfillment he did not live to see, but whose realization will be achieved
through the unity and commitment of those who follow him.''

But while the ceremony appeared to suggest that this region is on the verge of
statehood, the underlying divisions were thinly disguised. Members of Kosovo's
Serbian population were notably absent, as were representatives of the Serbian
government.

A request by Serbia's president, Boris Tadic, to attend the funeral was rejected
by Mr. Rugova's office because it reasserted Serbia's claim to the province.

President Tadic asked to be able to go to ''Kosovo, which is a part of Serbia's
territorial integrity,'' and pay his respects. Subsequently, all but one of
Kosovo's Serbian representatives declined to join the ceremony.

There were also reminders of the deep divisions running though Kosovo's Albanian
population. Some war veterans, long critical of Mr. Rugova's advocacy of
nonviolence during repression at the hands of Serbian security forces in Kosovo
in the 1990's, condemned the government's decision to bury him at the Kosovo
Liberation Army memorial site.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: The body of Ibrahim Rugova, president of Kosovo, was lowered
into his grave yesterday by members of the Kosovo Protection Corps. (Photo by
Andrew Testa for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (79%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); ARMIES (77%); GENOCIDE (77%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); CANCER
(71%); HIGH SCHOOLS (69%); WEATHER (65%); LUNG CANCER (56%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (83%) United Nations

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Ibrahim (Pres) Rugova

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (92%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); ALBANIA (96%); KOSOVO (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1029 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 30, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

HUSSEIN TRIAL CHAOS

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Raouf Abdel-Rahman, above, the new chief judge at the war
crimes trial of Saddam Hussein and his associates in Baghdad, ordered that Mr.
Hussein and three other lead defendants be removed from the courtroom and tried
in absentia yesterday after outbursts by Mr. Hussein and others. Page A13. (Pool
photo by David Furst)
 (Pool photo by Darko Bandic)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Caption

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%) Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Raouf (Judge) Abdel-Rahman

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: January 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1030 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            January 31, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

28 Days to Save Darfur

BYLINE: By Kenneth H. Bacon.

Kenneth H. Bacon is the president of Refugees International.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 512 words

DATELINE: Washington


HOW can the United States best use its monthlong turn as president of the United
Nations Security Council, which it assumes tomorrow? It could start by devoting
itself to ending the violence in the Darfur region of western Sudan -- violence
that President Bush has characterized as genocide.

There is precedent for such action. The last time the United States assumed the
rotating presidency of the 15-member Security Council, it made a real
contribution to peace in the region. John C. Danforth, then the ambassador to
the United Nations, brought the entire Security Council to Kenya to pressure the
government in Khartoum and the insurgents in the south to end their 21-year
civil war. The tactic worked. Shortly afterward, Khartoum and the Sudan People's
Liberation Movement signed a comprehensive peace agreement.

Unfortunately, that agreement did nothing to end a separate conflict in Darfur,
where government-backed Arab militias, in response to insurgent attacks, have
driven more than 2.2 million people, primarily African farmers, from their land
and bombed, burned and pillaged hundreds of villages. By some estimates, more
than 200,000 people have died in the last three years.

John Bolton, the current American ambassador to the United Nations, has called
for bold action in Darfur but has provided no real leadership for more effective
moves to stop the violence. This month, Mr. Bolton should follow Mr. Danforth's
example and schedule a meeting of the Council in Darfur. This would focus the
world's attention on a war in which civilians are the primary targets and
directly involve the Council in the push toward peace.

Even if Mr. Bolton can't pull off the trip, he can still focus the Council on
Sudan. His first priority should be strengthening the woefully inadequate
peacekeeping forces there.

Right now, there are 7,000 African Union peacekeepers in the region. But this
force is simply insufficient to do the job. Only by sending United Nations
troops can we possibly bring some measure of peace and stability to Darfur.

This won't be easy. Details about the size, mandate and cost of a new United
Nations force in Darfur need to be worked out; opposition from Khartoum's
allies, Russia and China, which can veto any Security Council action, may need
to be overcome. But as Security Council president, Mr. Bolton should push for
enough peacekeepers -- possibly backed by Western airpower -- to prevent attacks
against civilians.

Mr. Bolton, who has called for stronger enforcement of arms embargoes against
Sudan, should demand the release of an unpublished United Nations study listing
those countries that ship weapons to rebels and Khartoum-backed militias. Then
the Council should use this information to punish sanctions scofflaws.

The United States has a vexing and inconsistent record on Sudan. Periods of
engagement have been followed by longer, and troubling, periods of inaction.
Now, with a month to lead the Security Council, the United States has a chance
to show the world that we can do more than just talk about genocide.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (93%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(85%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); VETO (78%); WAR CRIMES (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); REFUGEES (73%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (68%); ARMS EMBARGOES (63%); ARMS TRADE (63%); ARMED FORCES (62%)
United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Arms Sales Abroad

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (94%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);
REFUGEES INTERNATIONAL (59%) Refugees International; United Nations; Security
Council (Un)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (78%) Kenneth H Bacon; John R (Amb) Bolton; George W
(Pres) Bush

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (94%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); CHINA (79%); AFRICA (79%); KENYA
(79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (77%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: January 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1035 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein's Trial Resumes, but He Stays Away

BYLINE: By SABRINA TAVERNISE; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi, Qais Mizher and Khalid
Hassan contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 627 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, Feb. 1


The trial of Saddam Hussein resumed Wednesday without him, after he and four
other main defendants refused to attend and the judge decided to continue
anyway.

After several hours of trying to persuade Mr. Hussein and four other defendants
to go to the courtroom, Iraqi court officials gave up, and the judge, Raouf
Abdel-Rahman, announced that the trial would continue without them, at least for
now.

It was not immediately clear how long the five defendants would remain absent.
They include Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, Mr. Hussein's half brother; Taha Yassin
Ramadan, a former vice president; Awad al-Bandar, a former chief judge in the
revolutionary court; and Mizher Abdullah Kadam Roweed al-Musheikhi, a former
senior Baathist. Seven court-appointed lawyers represent them.

The chairs for the defendants were mostly empty as the session began, an
inauspicious start to another session of a trial that has been interrupted by
outbursts and diatribes by Mr. Hussein and his associates since it began on Oct.
19.

American and Iraqi officials have tried to show Iraqis that Mr. Hussein's trial
will be fair, but it may not be viewed that way if he is not present for much of
it.

In the previous court session, on Sunday, the judge ejected four of the
defendants after they shouted curses and interrupted the trial. The prosecutor,
Jaafar al-Mousawi, said he had tried repeatedly to persuade them to go to court
on Wednesday, but to no avail.

The trial has often veered off course, interrupted by Mr. Hussein and his
associates, and on Sunday, Judge Abdel-Rahman, who was recently appointed after
a previous judge resigned, told them that he would not tolerate their antics.

On Wednesday, the judge appeared to cast the defendants' absence as his own
decision, and seemed to imply that he could compel them to return if he chose.

''Defendants were in violation of the procedures of this trial,'' he said. ''The
tribunal decided to continue the trial without their presence.''

Three defendants remained. The case being tried is of the massacre of 148 Shiite
men and boys in the village of Dujail in 1982.

Iraq's political process inched forward on Wednesday night, with leaders saying
that talks over the formation of a permanent government had intensified.

A large group of political leaders, including Sunnis and the Kurdish leader
Massoud Barzani, met for a banquet in the house of Abdul Aziz al-Hakim, Iraq's
most powerful Shiite political leader, said Bahaa al-Aaraji, an influential
Shiite.

The leaders reiterated pledges to form a government that included all of Iraq's
religious and ethnic groups, but they did not announce a prime minister or a
president, posts that have been the subject of behind-the-scenes negotiations
for weeks.

Alaa Makky, a senior leader of the Iraqi Islamic Party, Iraq's largest Sunni
Arab group, said Tuesday in an interview that his party was talking with several
political parties, including that of Ayad Allawi, a former prime minister who
leads a group of secular parties, about joining forces to gain more seats in the
Parliament.

Iraqi insurgents continued their violent attacks on Wednesday. At least 5 Iraqis
were killed and more than 60 were wounded when a man walked into a crowd of
Shiite day laborers in eastern Baghdad and blew himself up.

Over all, at least six Iraqis were killed Wednesday in attacks in Baghdad,
officials said.

Five bodies with torture marks were found Wednesday in the Rustamiya district of
eastern Baghdad, and gunmen in western Baghdad kidnapped two Iraqi journalists,
an Interior Ministry official said.

The American military said that insurgents attacked an American patrol in Hit,
in western Iraq, on Tuesday, and that two children were killed and five adults
wounded.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
APPOINTMENTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WAR CRIMES (85%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUDGES (78%); PUBLIC
DEFENDERS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); POLITICS (75%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%); PRIME MINISTERS (65%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (63%); POLITICAL PARTIES (60%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (60%);
ETHNIC GROUPS (60%); ETHNICITY (50%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Shiite Muslims; Sunni Muslims; Kurds

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Saddam Hussein; Raouf (Judge) Abdel-Rahman; Sabrina
Tavernise

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1036 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: Army Helped Hide War Crimes Fugitive

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 134 words


The Supreme Defense Council, the top defense body for Serbia and Montenegro, the
loose federation that replaced what was left of Yugoslavia after the 1991-95
war, said that retired army officers helped hide Gen. Ratko Mladic, left, the
Bosnian Serb military commander who is among the most wanted Balkan leaders
charged with war crimes, until 2002 at unspecified ''army compounds.'' The
council reiterated that his current whereabouts was unknown. It was the first
time the defense authorities had admitted that the military has helped General
Mladic. From June 2002 onward, his ''hiding outside army compounds was taken
over by retired officers'' from Serbia and from the Bosnian Serb military, as
well as some civilians, the council said in a statement without providing
details or naming the officers.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARMIES (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); GENOCIDE
(70%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Ratko (Gen) Mladic

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (94%);
MONTENEGRO (93%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1039 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 7, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Helping Bill O'Reilly

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 758 words


Please, readers, help Bill O'Reilly!

After Mr. O'Reilly denounced me in December as a ''left-wing ideologue'' (a
charge that alarmed me, given his expertise on ideologues), I challenged him to
defend traditional values by joining me on a trip to Darfur. I wrote: ''You'll
have to leave your studio, Bill. You'll encounter pure evil. If you're like me,
you'll be scared  and you'll finally be using your talents for an important
cause.''

A few days ago, I finally got my answer. Mr. O'Reilly declared in his column:
''I do three hours of daily news analysis on TV and radio. There's no way I can
go to Africa.''

No need to give up so easily, Bill. With a satellite phone, you can do your show
from anywhere.

But maybe Mr. O'Reilly's concern is cost, so I thought my readers might want to
give him a hand. You can help sponsor a trip by Mr. O'Reilly to Darfur, where he
can use his television savvy to thunder against something actually meriting his
blustery rage.

If you want to help, send e-mail to sponsorbill@gmail.com or snail mail to me at
The Times, and tell me how much you're willing to pay for Mr. O'Reilly's
expenses in Darfur. Offers will be anonymous, except maybe to the N.S.A. Don't
send money; all I'm looking for is pledges. I'll post updates at
nytimes.com/ontheground.

(Note: pledges cannot be earmarked. It is not possible to underwrite only Mr.
O'Reilly's outgoing ticket to Darfur without bringing him home as well.)

Sure, this is a desperate measure. But with several hundred thousand people
already murdered in Darfur and two million homeless and living in shantytowns,
the best hope for those still alive is a strong dose of American outrage.

Worse, all the horrors that we've already seen in Darfur may be remembered only
as the prelude. Security in the region is deteriorating, African Union
peacekeepers are becoming targets, and the U.N. has warned that if humanitarian
agencies are forced out, the death toll may rise to 100,000 per month.

Just as dangerous, the government-supported janjaweed -- the brutal militia
responsible for the slaughter -- is now making regular raids across the border
into Chad. There is a growing risk that Chad will collapse into war as well,
hugely increasing the death toll and spreading chaos across a much larger
region.

Last week, the United Nations agreed to plan for an international force. It will
be nice if the force materializes -- but even that half-step is probably almost
a year away. The solution isn't American ground forces, but a starting point
would be American resolve to put genocide at the top of the international
agenda. Unfortunately, Mr. Bush barely lets the word ''Darfur'' past his lips.

The best way for President Bush to honor Coretta Scott King isn't simply to
recite platitudes at her funeral today, but to push loudly and forcefully to
stop genocide. Was the essential message of the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr.
about the need to be seen at funerals? Or about standing up to injustice, like a
genocide in which infants are grabbed from their mothers' arms and tossed onto
bonfires?

The reality is that the only way the White House will move on Darfur is if it is
flooded with calls from the public -- and that will happen only when the
genocide is brought home to living rooms around America.

According to the Tyndall Report, which analyzes the content of the evening
newscasts of the broadcast networks, their coverage of Darfur actually declined
last year. The total for all three networks was 26 minutes in 2004. That wasn't
much -- but it dropped to just 18 minutes during all of 2005.

ABC's evening news program had 11 minutes about Darfur over the year, NBC's had
5 minutes, and CBS's found genocide worth only 2 minutes of airtime during the
course of 2005.

In contrast, the networks gave the Michael Jackson trial in 2005 a total of 84
minutes of coverage. There aren't comparable figures for cable networks like
Fox, but Mr. O'Reilly and other cable newscasters pretty much ignored the Darfur
catastrophe.

Mr. O'Reilly has a big audience and a knack for stirring outrage. Lately, he
(quite properly) galvanized an outcry over a ridiculously light sentence for a
sexual predator in Vermont. The upshot was that the sentence was increased. Good
stuff!

So imagine the furor Mr. O'Reilly could stir up if he publicized the hundreds of
thousands of rapes, murders and mutilations in Darfur. He could save lives on a
grand scale.

Join the pledge drive! I'm starting with my own $1,000 pledge to sponsor Mr.
O'Reilly's trip. Please help.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (85%); WAR CRIMES
(85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%); LIBERALISM (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%);
PEACEKEEPING (73%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (66%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%);
WAR & CONFLICT (66%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (61%); GENOCIDE (60%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (60%); MURDER (57%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Television; News and News Media; United States International Relations

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof; Bill O'Reilly; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur Province (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1041 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Turkey: Trial Of Journalists Begins

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 163 words


The trial of five newspaper columnists charged with insulting the country's
courts got under way in Istanbul in what is seen as another test of the
relationship between Turkey and the European Union, which has called for
increased rights to free expression in Turkey. The journalists -- Ismet Berkan,
Murat Belge and Haluk Sahin of the liberal newspaper Radikal, and Hasan Cemal
and Erol Katircioglu of the center-right newspaper Milliyet -- had criticized
court rulings that tried to block an academic conference on the Armenian
genocide, its first public discussion in Turkey. They are charged under the same
law as was the author Orhan Pamuk, who publicly questioned Turkey's official
denial of the genocide, and face prison terms of 6 months to 10 years if
convicted. The case against Mr. Pamul brought Turkey international scorn, and
his charges were dropped last month. A group of European Parliament observers is
attending the current trial, which was adjourned to April 11.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WRITERS (92%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
JOURNALISM (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); LIBERALISM (87%); WAR CRIMES (86%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); LIBERAL MEDIA (73%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (69%);
LITERATURE (67%) Freedom of Speech and Expression; News and News Media; Books
and Literature; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Freedom of the
Press

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (91%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (56%) European Union

PERSON: Orhan Pamuk; Ismet Berkan; Murat Belge; Haluk Sahin; Hasan Cemal

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); ARMENIA
(90%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey; Armenia

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1046 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hawaii Agrees to Broad Changes in Procedures for Incarcerated Gay Youths

BYLINE: By JANIS L. MAGIN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 668 words

DATELINE: HONOLULU, Feb. 12


Under a settlement with the federal government, the state has agreed to make
sweeping improvements at Hawaii's troubled youth prison in the next three years,
but a civil liberties group that sued over the problems says the agreement does
not go far enough to protect gay wards from harassment, abuse and
discrimination.

The settlement with the Justice Department came last week as a federal district
judge, J. Michael Seabright, issued a preliminary injunction in a lawsuit that
was filed in September by the American Civil Liberties Union of Hawaii. The
judge described conditions at the prison, the Hawaii Youth Correctional
Facility, as ''chaotic'' and called for the state to stop the abuse and
harassment of lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender wards.

The lawsuit, coming after a Justice Department report last summer that described
the 71-bed youth facility in Kailua as ''existing in a state of chaos,'' was
filed on behalf of an 18-year-old lesbian, an 18-year-old boy perceived by
guards and other teenage wards to be gay and a 17-year-old male-to-female
transgender girl. It says the teenagers were physically and verbally abused by
staff members at the facility as well as by other wards because of their sexual
and gender orientation.

''Everyone knew that the climate was pretty pervasive and nobody did anything
about it,'' said Lois Perrin, legal director for the A.C.L.U. of Hawaii. Judge
Seabright has scheduled a status conference on the case for Monday.

Hawaii's attorney general, Mark J. Bennett, said on Friday that the state
planned to develop specific policies to deal with lesbian, gay, bisexual and
transgender wards, and that state officials would consult with the A.C.L.U. in
doing so.

Ms. Perrin, who delivered a list of proposed injunctions to the court on Friday,
said the A.C.L.U. wanted the changes done under a court order and more quickly
than the three years the state had to comply with the federal agreement.

''We're asking that they are not allowed to discriminate, harass or abuse wards,
based on actual or perceived sexual orientation, gender identity or sex,'' Ms.
Perrin said. She said the A.C.L.U. also wanted the state to thoroughly
investigate accusations of harassment and abuse, to stop using isolation to
protect wards from abuse by other teens, and to provide a physically and
psychologically safe environment.

The state's settlement agreement with the Justice Department imposes dozens of
conditions on the youth prison, including the development of suicide prevention
and intervention procedures, the protection of young wards from physical and
sexual abuse, and the employment of enough staff members to adequately supervise
and care for the wards. An independent monitor will oversee the state's changes.

The state also agreed to conduct criminal record checks within the next four
months on all employees who worked directly with the youths.

''It certainly indicates that we need to make sure that the individuals who are
employed at the facility who come in contact with youth are the right people to
be working there,'' Mr. Bennett said.

He said the agreement, the result of four months of negotiations, did not
include an admission of constitutional violations or other wrongdoing by the
state. The state has three years to comply, or the Justice Department may refile
its lawsuit.

''Obviously if we didn't think there were serious problems at the facility we
wouldn't have entered into as comprehensive an agreement as this one was,'' Mr.
Bennett said. ''This agreement imposes substantial burdens on the state. It's
going to be expensive and it's going to take time.''

A number of Hawaii institutions have had trouble with the federal government.
Thirteen years of federal oversight at Hawaii State Hospital in Kaneohe, the
state's mental health facility, ended a little over a year ago. The Oahu
Community Correctional Center operated under federal supervision from 1985 to
1999 under a consent decree that limited the number of inmates.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%);
CORRECTIONS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ADOLESCENTS
(89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (78%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (77%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (76%); JUDGES (76%); INJUNCTIONS (76%); SUICIDE (73%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); SEX OFFENSES (70%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (60%)
Prisons and Prisoners; Discrimination; Assaults; Homosexuality; Suits and
Litigation

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%) American Civil Liberties
Union

PERSON: MARK J BENNETT (58%) janis l magin

CITY: HONOLULU, HI, USA (79%)

STATE: HAWAII, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Hawaii; Kailua (Hawaii)

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1047 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Japan's Offensive Foreign Minister

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 349 words


People everywhere wish they could be proud of every bit of their countries'
histories. But honest people understand that's impossible, and wise people
appreciate the positive value of acknowledging and learning from painful truths
about past misdeeds. Then there is Japan's new foreign minister, Taro Aso, who
has been neither honest nor wise in the inflammatory statements he has been
making about Japan's disastrous era of militarism, colonialism and war crimes
that culminated in the Second World War.

Besides offending neighboring countries that Japan needs as allies and trading
partners, he is disserving the people he has been pandering to. World War II
ended before most of today's Japanese were born. Yet public discourse in Japan
and modern history lessons in its schools have never properly come to terms with
the country's responsibility for such terrible events as the mass kidnapping and
sexual enslavement of Korean young women, the biological warfare experiments
carried out on Chinese cities and helpless prisoners of war, and the sadistic
slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Chinese civilians in the city of Nanjing.

That is why so many Asians have been angered by a string of appalling remarks
Mr. Aso has made since being named foreign minister last fall. Two of the most
recent were his suggestion that Japan's emperor ought to visit the militaristic
Yasukuni Shrine, where 14 Japanese war criminals are among those honored, and
his claim that Taiwan owes its high educational standards to enlightened
Japanese policies during the 50-year occupation that began when Tokyo grabbed
the island as war booty from China in 1895. Mr. Aso's later lame efforts to
clarify his words left their effect unchanged.

Mr. Aso has also been going out of his way to inflame Japan's already difficult
relations with Beijing by characterizing China's long-term military buildup as a
''considerable threat'' to Japan. China has no recent record of threatening
Japan. As the rest of the world knows, it was the other way around. Mr. Aso's
sense of diplomacy is as odd as his sense of history.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); WORLD WAR
II (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HISTORY
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (71%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (71%); POWS & MIAS (71%);
GENOCIDE (71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); SLAVERY (71%); ACADEMIC STANDARDS
(69%) Editorials; World War II (1939-45); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (55%)

PERSON: TARO ASO (79%) Taro (Min) Aso

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (69%); TOKYO, JAPAN (57%)

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: JAPAN (96%); CHINA (94%); TAIWAN (79%)

REGION: Japan

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1050 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 783 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-18

Iraqi Government Tested By Cleric's Rise to Power
The sudden rise to political power of Moktada al-Sadr, the man who led two
deadly uprisings against American troops in 2004 and now controls 32 seats in
Iraq's Parliament, poses a stark new set of challenges for Iraq's fledgling
democracy.   A18

Deal Reached in Haiti Voting


A high-ranking official at the Organization of American States said an agreement
had been reached between presidential front-runner Rene Preval and the leaders
of Haiti's interim government to retabulate the results from last week's
elections and declare him president-elect.   A1

Millions Sought to Change Iran
The Bush administration, frustrated by Iranian defiance over its nuclear
program, proposed to spend $85 million to promote political change inside Iran
by subsidizing dissident groups.   A14

Britain Expands Terror Laws
After a series of bruising parliamentary duels, Prime Minister Tony Blair of
Britain secured victory in the House of Commons in a vote to expand
counterterrorism laws by making ''glorification'' of terrorism a criminal
offense.   A5

Pakistan Riots Turning Political
Protests over cartoons satirizing the Prophet Muhammad have become enmeshed with
politics in Pakistan as groups opposed to the president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf,
have led the protests and directed the anger over the cartoons into denunciation
of his alliance with the West.   A13

NATIONAL   A20-31

Cheney Breaks Silence On Accidental Shooting
Vice President Dick Cheney broke a four-day silence about his accidental
shooting of a hunting partner, saying he took full responsibility for the
incident while vigorously defending his decision to delay releasing news about
it until the next day.   A1

Chertoff on Storm Response
Michael Chertoff, the homeland security secretary, endured three hours of
intense personal criticism by Senate Republicans and Democrats investigating the
response to Hurricane Katrina, several of whom said he bears responsibility for
a multitude of errors.   A1

N.S.A. Spying Inquiry Opens
The ethics office of the Justice Department has begun a review of the
department's role in the National Security Agency's domestic eavesdropping
program, a move that could shed light on internal dissension over the legal
status of the program.   A30

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Bone Supplements Discredited
A seven-year study of healthy women over 50 found no broad benefit from calcium
and vitamin D supplements in preventing broken bones, despite widespread
endorsement of the supplements by doctors.   A1

NASA Cites Political Pressure
Top political appointees in the NASA press office exerted pressure during the
2004 campaign to cut the flow of news releases on glaciers, climate and
pollution, according to public affairs officers at the agency.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Trying to Win Hearts While Killing Enemies
The Army's 10th Mountain Division, based at Fort Drum, N.Y., prepared for
deployment to Afghanistan this month by developing a military ethos that goes
beyond the tactics of past conventional warfare to a new age of ideological
warfare: using language and cultural training to fight for the hearts and minds
of the populace.   A1

New Challenges for Suburbs
The pioneers of the nation's earliest suburbs -- like Nassau and Westchester
Counties in New York, Bergen and Hudson Counties in New Jersey and Fairfield in
Connecticut -- are struggling with unexpected and often unrecognized problems
that demand new solutions and leadership, according to a new study.   B1

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-8

HOUSE & HOME   F1-10

THURSDAY STYLES   G1-8

OBITUARIES   B10

ARTS   E1-10

'Avenue Q' to Close in Las Vegas
After five lackluster months on the Las Vegas Strip, the producers of ''Avenue
Q,'' the 2004 Tony Award winner for best musical, said they would close the
Vegas version of the ribald, puppet-happy musical in late May.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-18

New Fed Chairman Speaks
Ben S. Bernanke, the new chairman of the Federal Reserve, testified before
Congress that the Fed might still have to raise interest rates one or two more
times to ensure that inflation does not flare any higher. But he kept his
options open.   A1

Online Firms Are Grilled
Google, Yahoo, Microsoft and Cisco Systems came under fire at a House
human-rights hearing on Wednesday for what a subcommittee chairman called a
''sickening collaboration'' with the Chinese government that was ''decapitating
the voice of the dissidents'' there.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A32-33

Editorials: A deadly vacuum; the wrong way to guard the ports; tutoring gap;
Helene Cooper on American aid in Pakistan: all guns, no butter.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E8
Crossword   E8
Public Lives   E9
Weather   B11

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(90%); POLITICS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (88%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES (88%); SCIENCE NEWS (88%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(78%); ELECTIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (78%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); SHOOTINGS (77%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (77%);
ARMED FORCES (77%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); ETHICS (73%); POLITICAL DONATIONS &
FUNDRAISING (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (73%); BONE FRACTURES (72%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (72%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (71%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (68%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES
(67%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (66%); RIOTS (66%); VITAMIN SUPPLEMENTS
(64%); WOMEN'S HEALTH (63%); HURRICANE KATRINA (63%); HURRICANES (62%);
MOUNTAINS (60%); GLACIERS & ICEBERGS (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (57%)

PERSON: MICHAEL CHERTOFF (77%); MOQTADA AL-SADR (73%); TONY BLAIR (58%); DICK
CHENEY (58%); PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (54%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAQ (94%); HAITI (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%)

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1053 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Now Prozac Battles Dark Dreams That Khmer Rouge Left

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Phnom Penh Journal; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1028 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


Mao Irang is an evangelist for the new magic in Cambodia, a treatment that can
cure everything from headaches to blackouts to nightmares to bursts of violence.

''I ask my friends, 'What is your problem?' '' she said. '' 'Does your food get
stuck in your throat? Do you have pain here, and here, and here? Do you have
problems with your sleep?' I say, 'O.K., try this doctor.' ''

Her doctor is Ka Sunbunaut, one of only 26 psychiatrists in this nation of 12
million traumatized people, the survivors and the children of survivors of one
of the past century's most horrifying episodes of mass killing.

After therapy with him, said Ms. Mao Irang, 35, a social worker tormented by her
memories, ''I felt like I was another person; I was not a prisoner anymore.''

She was liberated through a combination of talk therapy and psychiatric drugs --
treatments that are largely alien to Cambodians, who often turn to faith healers
and herbalists. But the word is spreading now among a relatively small circle of
educated people: your ailments have a cause, and there are treatments that can
help you.

It is a quarter century since the Khmer Rouge was driven from power after
causing the deaths of 1.7 million people from 1975 to 1979 through execution,
starvation or overwork.

''Until today, most people don't realize they have psychological problems,'' Dr.
Ka Sunbunaut said in an interview. ''They don't understand about trauma. Mostly,
they believe it is all related to karma.''

Now, though, people here are increasingly turning to drugs like Prozac and
Valium, which are expensive but available without a prescription. Dr. Ka
Sunbunaut said most of the medicines he prescribed were generic drugs
manufactured in Asia.

''He gave me holy medicine,'' said Preap Phal Theary, 52, a wholesale rice
dealer and former French teacher. ''It is a holy medicine. It has changed my
life. I've become a normal person instead of a sick person.''

She said that before being treated, she had blackouts and intestinal problems.
She had convulsions, and passed out whenever she went to the bathroom, she said.

''For 15 years I tried all kinds of medication, modern and ancient, with herbs
and Chinese cures and spiritual cures and monks' blessings and praying at my
home altar,'' she said. ''For 15 years I had two jobs. One was to feed my
children and the other was to be ready to fall into a coma at any moment, so I
always needed an escort.''

Psychiatrists now are considering the possible effects on traumatized people
like Ms. Preap Phal Theary of plans to hold a trial for surviving leaders of the
Khmer Rouge. Preliminary work is being done to set up a tribunal, although it
will be many months before any defendants are put in the dock.

Convictions of the former Khmer Rouge leaders could bring some clarity and
relief to people who still do not understand the causes of their suffering,
doctors say. But for many the trial could revive traumas that have been
suppressed over the years.

''At the moment I'm not sure whether a tribunal can bring peace or problems in
our society,'' said Dr. Sotheara Chhim, a psychiatrist who is managing director
of the Transcultural Psychosocial Organization, which is preparing for the
trial.

He said his concerns were ''retraumatization'' of survivors who will come face
to face with the past; new trauma on young people who did not experience the
Khmer Rouge era; and renewed anger and hostility among victims.

''I believe everybody has suffered,'' he said in an interview. ''Everybody has
inside some memory, some past trauma. But their abilities to cope are
different.''

The Khmer Rouge era itself could be seen as an episode of madness. In a utopian
frenzy these radical Communists sought to erase the modern world and
systematically killed off most of the country's educated and skilled people. Few
doctors survived.

Cambodia has no in-patient clinics for mental patients, the doctor said, and
only 40 psychiatric nurses (and another 40 in training). He is only now
organizing a committee for mental health, with its own budget, in the Ministry
of Health.

No reliable data exist on the traumatic effects of the past, partly because
people are not generally aware of the lasting impact of their experiences, said
Dr. Sotheara Chhim. ''People think their past problems have been buried and
don't realize that the present is connected to the past,'' he said.

A study of Cambodian refugees in the United States, published last August in The
Journal of the American Medical Association, found that 62 percent had suffered
from posttraumatic stress disorder in the previous year, compared with a rate of
3.6 percent in the general United States population. It found that 51 percent
had suffered from major depression, compared with 9.5 percent of the general
population.

According to the study, 99 percent of the survivors of the Khmer Rouge years
reported almost starving to death, 96 percent said they had been forced into
slave labor, 90 percent said that a family member or friend had been killed and
54 percent said they had been tortured.

Even if they learn to cope, their memories remain to torment them, the doctors
said.

Ms. Preap Phal Theary, the rice seller, closed her eyes for a moment. ''I see a
man running, and I see a man shooting,'' she said. ''I hear gunfire. You don't
just have a picture of people running in a field, you have sound, too. I can
hear the people saying, 'Oh, they killed him.' It is like a snapshot in my
mind.''

Until she was treated, she said, loud noises, gunshots and the sight of people
arguing caused her to pass out.

For Ms. Mao Irang, who was orphaned in the Khmer Rouge years, the most vivid
memory almost seems to have been a nightmare.

''When I heard my parents were killed I fainted,'' she said. ''I did not wake up
for a week. In the hospital they thought I was dead. They put me in a pile of
bodies.

''When I woke up I thought, 'What is that smell?' And I crawl, crawl, crawl to
the door. And then I realize I am in the dead people's room.''

She was 7 or 8 years old at the time.

She pressed the palms of her hands against her eyes. ''Today, I feel much
better,'' she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Khmer Rouge fighter guarding Cambodians forced into farm
labor. In 1975-79, during the Khmer Rouge's reign, 1.7 million died through
execution, starvation or overwork, and the psychic trauma persists today. (Photo
by Alain Taieb/Crobin Sygma)
 Dr. Ka Sunbunaut, left, one of only 26 psychiatrists in Cambodia, has been
treating Mao Irang, right, since 2003 for her tormented memories. (Photo by
Jerry Redfern/Asiaworks)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); POWER FAILURES (90%);
ANTIDEPRESSANTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CHILDREN (89%); ALTERNATIVE MEDICINE
(89%); MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (89%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (89%); RELIGION (89%);
PSYCHIATRY (89%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (88%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (78%); MENTAL
ILLNESS (78%); OVER-THE-COUNTER DRUGS (78%); STARVATION (77%); PSYCHOLOGY (76%);
GENERIC DRUGS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); HERBAL MEDICINE (74%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GASTROINTESTINAL DISORDERS (66%); INTERVIEWS (64%);
PHARMACEUTICAL PREPARATION MFG (62%); FARM PRODUCT WHOLESALERS (50%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Prozac (Drug); Valium (Drug); Mental
Health and Disorders

ORGANIZATION: Khmer Rouge (Cambodia)

PERSON: Seth Mydans

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%); ASIA (78%)

REGION: Cambodia; Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1054 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Some Yemenis Back Fugitive Terror Figures

BYLINE: By HASSAN M. FATTAH; Scott Shane and Thom Shanker contributed reporting
from Washington for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 1022 words

DATELINE: SANA, Yemen, Feb. 15


Almost two weeks after 23 prisoners suspected of terrorist ties broke out of a
maximum-security prison here, the fugitives are emerging as unlikely folk
heroes: the men who thumbed their noses at the Yemeni government and, more
significantly, at America.

Many Yemenis see the episode as the ultimate response to years of cooperation
between the government of Yemen and the United States that has resulted in the
arrest of thousands of people, many of whom have been held for long periods
without trial. Residents of Sana are now pointing to the audacious,
Hollywood-style escape from a maximum-security prison as an example of the
unraveling security situation in Yemen and of the growing estrangement between
the government and the average citizen.

''Are they seen as heroes here? Certainly,'' said Muhammad al-Saderi, a leader
in Yemen's opposition Nasserist party. ''The 23 came from all over the country,
and the way it looks to many is that the government isn't just facing off with a
few extremist groups, it's facing off with the whole country.''

A nationwide manhunt continued Wednesday as the Yemeni government offered a
$25,000 reward for information leading to the arrest of the 13 people suspected
of being operatives of Al Qaeda among the escapees. Side streets leading to the
prison remained blocked off, while security men patrolled in and around the
mosque where the men emerged.

Yemeni security agents set up checkpoints within this densely packed city and on
roads leading out, while United States warships patrolled the Yemeni shores.
Diplomatic and security officials said the men were likely either to sneak
across the border with Saudi Arabia into the unforgiving ''Empty Quarter'' or to
take to the sea along human trafficking routes that run across the Gulf of Aden
to Somalia.

United States and Yemeni analysts said the circumstances of the escape suggested
that the prisoners might have received help from guards or other Yemeni
government employees. ''It would be hard to imagine pulling something like this
off without some inside help,'' one official in Washington said. ''What isn't
clear is at what level, and how many people were involved.''

The men broke out of the maximum-security prison run by the Political Security
Department early on Feb. 3, squeezing through a tunnel leading from the basement
prison cell where they were all held to a mosque, on a main street on the edge
of the Yemeni capital. They dug the tunnel in the soft soils around the prison
in three months using makeshift tools, all the while hiding the operation and
the dirt they excavated from the prison authorities.

Among them were Jamal Ahmed al-Badawi, the suspected organizer of the October
2000 bombing of the United States destroyer Cole, who had pulled off a previous
prison break, and Fawaz al-Rabeei, who was convicted of leading a cell that
bombed the French oil tanker Limburg off the Yemeni coast in 2002.

Also with them was Jaber Elbaneh, an American-Yemeni implicated along with the
Lackawanna Six, a reputed sleeper cell in Buffalo, N.Y. Six of the seven pleaded
guilty to providing material support to a terrorist organization and are serving
prison terms. Mr. Elbaneh was convicted in absentia, and the United States
placed a $5 million bounty on his head.

In Washington, the former commander of the Cole said he was outraged that the
government allowed the man convicted of plotting the attack to escape from a
local prison -- for a second time. ''Justice with respect to those who attacked
the U.S.S. Cole is not being served,'' said Cmdr. Kirk S. Lippold, in an unusual
public complaint by a naval officer. He was in command of the Cole in October
2000 when the destroyer was attacked by Qaeda suicide bombers, killing 17
American sailors.

Acknowledging that he was speaking in an interview without official Navy
approval, Commander Lippold called on American leaders to do more to pressure
the Yemeni government, and to offer help catching the fugitives.

The breakout comes at a particularly difficult moment for the government, which
has been fighting rebel Shiite forces near the Saudi border. Last week, 15
rebels and 5 Yemeni soldiers were killed in the clashes. It also raises the
threat level for Americans in the country, with the United States Embassy urging
them to ''review their personal security practices,'' particularly for those
times when they are neither at home nor at work.

''This is more than embarrassing, this is a disaster,'' said a Western diplomat
in Sana, who spoke on condition of anonymity so as not to embarrass the
government. ''You can be sure that these men aren't going to go back to being
farmers or open convenience stores. They are going to try to get back in the
fight.''

But Yemenis say cases like that of Mr. Elbaneh -- who has been held here since
2003, and without a reasonable charge, they say -- is one reason many sympathize
with the escapees. Diplomats said Mr. Elbaneh had been arrested for
''financial'' crimes, in addition to the warrant by the United States. Yemen's
Constitution forbids the government from extraditing him to the United States,
said Khaled Saleh Alanesi, a human rights lawyer who represents Mr. Elbaneh and
at least one other fugitive. ''You won't hear anybody criticizing their escape
because their arrests were illegal,'' Mr. Alanesi said. ''After all, who do you
think most people sympathize with, the government, or the ones who appear to
have gotten away from an unjust imprisonment?''

As men gathered Wednesday for the daily ritual of chewing khat, a leaf chewed by
many Yemenis as a mild stimulant, the men, who asked that that their names not
be used for fear of retribution, debated the implications of the breakout.

While many expressed sympathy, a heavy-set man who led a political party here
added a degree of skepticism. ''Most of these guys were old friends of the
political security service,'' he said, speaking of the 1980's, when the security
services organized groups of Yemenis to fight in Afghanistan. ''You can bet
these men were sure that they were going to get out of the prison when they got
there.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Yemen on Tuesday released photos of the 23 people suspected of
terrorist ties who escaped from a prison. (Photo by Agence France-Presse --
Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRISONS (92%); CORRECTIONS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); ARRESTS (78%);
AL-QAEDA (73%); CIVIL SERVICES (72%); NAVAL VESSELS (69%); MILITARY VESSELS
(69%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (50%) Prison Escapes; Terrorism; Cole (USS); Bombs and
Explosives; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%)

PERSON: Hassan M Fattah; Jamal Ahmed Ali Al- Badawi; Kirk S (Comdr) Lippold

CITY: SANAA, YEMEN (79%)

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (78%)

COUNTRY: YEMEN (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); SOMALIA (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%)

REGION: Yemen; Yemen

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1056 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

ACCORD IN HOUSE TO HOLD INQUIRY ON SURVEILLANCE

BYLINE: By ERIC LICHTBLAU and SHERYL GAY STOLBERG

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1268 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 16


Leaders of the House Intelligence Committee said Thursday that they had agreed
to open a Congressional inquiry prompted by the Bush administration's domestic
surveillance program. But a dispute immediately broke out among committee
Republicans over the scope of the inquiry.

Representative Heather A. Wilson, the New Mexico Republican and committee member
who called last week for the investigation, said the review ''will have multiple
avenues, because we want to completely understand the program and move
forward.''

But an aide to Representative Peter Hoekstra, the Michigan Republican who leads
the committee, said the inquiry would be much more limited in scope, focusing on
whether federal surveillance laws needed to be changed and not on the
eavesdropping program itself.

The agreement to conduct an inquiry came as the Senate Intelligence Committee
put off a vote on conducting its own investigation after the White House,
reversing course, agreed to open discussions about changing federal surveillance
law. Senate Democrats accused Republicans of bowing to White House pressure.

For weeks, the Bush administration has been strongly resisting calls from
Democrats and some Republicans for a full review into the National Security
Agency's surveillance program, saying such inquiries are unnecessary and risked
disclosing national security information that could help Al Qaeda.

Elsewhere on Thursday, a federal judge ordered the administration to begin
turning over internal documents on the surveillance program, the Justice
Department balked at having John Ashcroft, the former attorney general, and
other former department officials testify about it before Congress, and lawyers
for a Kentucky man prepared to bring a federal civil rights lawsuit on Friday
against President Bush to have the surveillance declared illegal and
unconstitutional.

The surveillance, authorized in secret by President Bush soon after the Sept. 11
attacks, has allowed the N.S.A. to eavesdrop on the international phone and
e-mail communications of hundreds and perhaps thousands of people within the
United States without warrants when the authorities suspect that they might have
links to terrorists.

Mr. Hoekstra has been one of the staunchest defenders of the program. But in
discussions this week with other Republican and Democratic leaders of the
committee, he agreed to have the committee open the inquiry, officials said,
after signs that some Republicans on the panel had growing concerns about the
operation.

Ms. Wilson said the review would include closed-door briefings by intelligence
officials about the operational details of the program, a review of its legality
and discussion about whether changes are needed in the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Act, or FISA, which bans eavesdropping in intelligence
investigations without a court order.

While the administration agreed under pressure last week to provide limited
operational details to the House and Senate intelligence committees, Ms. Wilson
said she wanted more information and remained uncertain whether the N.S.A. had
the needed safeguards in place to protect against civil rights abuses against
Americans.

But Jamal Ware, a spokesman for Mr. Hoekstra, said: ''This is not an inquiry
into the program. It's a comprehensive review of the FISA statute. '' He said
Mr. Hoekstra ''wants to set up a process to move forward and look at the entire
statute and ways to modernize it.''

But aides in two other Congressional offices, speaking only on condition of
anonymity because they were not authorized to speak publicly, said their
understanding of the agreement was that the inquiry would focus in large part on
operational details of the surveillance program.

Meanwhile, in the Senate, the chairman of the Intelligence Committee, Senator
Pat Roberts of Kansas, said the White House had agreed in principle to negotiate
on legislation that would give Congress authority to oversee the eavesdropping.

Mr. Roberts used the deal to push off a vote on a plan by Democrats to conduct a
full-scale investigation of the program. The senior Democrat on the panel,
Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, emerged from a closed-door
committee meeting fuming and accused Republicans of caving to White House
pressure.

''It is apparent to me that the White House has applied heavy pressure in recent
weeks to prevent the committee from doing its job,'' Mr. Rockefeller said.
''Although some members of this committee indicate they need more time to decide
on what action to take, I believe this is another stalling tactic.''

In a sign of the bitter partisan split the potential inquiry has engendered, the
Senate panel met behind closed doors for nearly two hours before voting, along
party lines, simply to adjourn. Mr. Roberts said that if there was no detailed
agreement with the White House by the time of the next committee meeting, on
March 7, the panel could take up the issue of an inquiry then.

''The administration is now committed to legislation and has agreed to brief
more Intelligence Committee members on the nature of the surveillance program,''
Mr. Roberts said, adding that ''the administration has come a long way in the
last month.''

Mr. Roberts and other Republicans say they are wary of an investigation into the
secret program because providing information to Congress might result in leaks.
But Democrats say there is no way to pass legislation involving the program
until they have more information about it.

''I don't think it's possible for Congress to produce responsible bipartisan
legislation dealing with a program that Congress knows very little about,''
Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said.

Until now, Mr. Bush has steadfastly resisted the idea of new legislation,
arguing that he has the inherent authority to order the wiretaps and that
Congress also gave him the power to do so when it authorized him to use military
force after the Sept. 11 attacks. But the White House is under increasing
pressure from Republicans who are skeptical of that assertion.

Democrats and a growing number of Republicans say the eavesdropping violates the
surveillance act, which when it was passed in 1978 created a special
intelligence court to oversee domestic wiretapping. They have called for the law
to be revamped. On Thursday, Mr. Roberts talked about possible changes in the
act without saying what they might be.

The White House is unlikely to agree to bring the wiretapping under the scope of
the FISA court, as most Democrats and some Republicans want. Instead, the
administration appears interested in a proposal by Senator Mike DeWine,
Republican of Ohio, that would explicitly authorize the wiretapping, without
court warrants, but create small Congressional subcommittees to oversee it.

Mr. DeWine said that Harriet E. Miers, the White House counsel, called him
Wednesday, on the eve of the expected Intelligence Committee vote, to talk about
his legislation, and the White House indicated some support for it.

But the DeWine proposal is unlikely to satisfy other critics of the program,
including some Republicans, who say it must be brought within the scope of the
intelligence court. Among them is Senator Arlen Specter, Republican of
Pennsylvania and the chairman of the Judiciary Committee, who is circulating
legislation that would require the court to pass judgment on whether the
wiretapping is constitutional.

''Unless they're prepared to have a determination on constitutionality as to
their programs, window dressing oversight will not be sufficient,'' Mr. Specter
said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: US REPUBLICAN PARTY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (88%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); WIRETAPPING (78%); LEGISLATION (78%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS
(76%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (76%); LAWYERS (74%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (74%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(69%); AL-QAEDA (66%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (66%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%);
JUDGES (65%) Terrorism; Surveillance of Citizens by Government; Wiretapping and
Other Eavesdropping Devices and Methods ; Law and Legislation; Terrorism; Suits
and Litigation; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (55%); NATIONAL SECURITY AGENCY (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTICE (54%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); HEATHER WILSON (79%); PETER HOEKSTRA (79%) Eric
Lichtblau; Sheryl Gay Stolberg; George W (Pres) Bush; Heather A (Rep) Wilson;
Peter (Rep) Hoekstra; John Ashcroft

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1058 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 21, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Austria Imposes 3-Year Sentence on Notorious Holocaust Denier

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 359 words

DATELINE: VIENNA, Feb. 20


The British historian David Irving on Monday pleaded guilty to denying the
Holocaust and was sentenced to three years in prison. He conceded that he was
wrong when he said there were no Nazi gas chambers at the Auschwitz death camp.

Mr. Irving, handcuffed and wearing a navy blue suit, arrived in court carrying a
copy of one of his books, ''Hitler's War,'' which challenges the extent of the
Holocaust.

''I made a mistake when I said there were no gas chambers at Auschwitz,'' he
told the court before his sentencing, at which he faced up to 10 years in
prison.

''In no way did I deny the killings of millions of people by the Nazis,''
testified Mr. Irving, who has written nearly 30 books.

He also expressed sorrow ''for all the innocent people who died during the
Second World War.''

Mr. Irving's lawyer, Elmar Kresbach, immediately announced that he would appeal
the sentence.

''I consider the verdict a little too stringent,'' he said. ''I would say it's a
bit of a message trial.''

Mr. Irving appeared shocked as the sentence was read. Moments later, an elderly
man who identified himself as a family friend called out, ''Stay strong, David!
Stay strong!'' The man was escorted from the courtroom.

Mr. Irving, 67, has been in custody since Nov. 11, when he was arrested in the
southern province of Styria on charges stemming from two speeches he gave in
Austria in 1989 in which he was accused of denying the Nazis' annihilation of
six million Jews. He has contended that most of those who died at camps like
Auschwitz were not executed, but instead succumbed to diseases like typhus.

He was denied bail by a Vienna court, which said there was a risk he would flee
the country. He was convicted under a 1992 law, which applies to ''whoever
denies, grossly plays down, approves or tries to excuse the National Socialist
genocide or other National Socialist crimes against humanity in a print
publication, in broadcast or other media.''

Mr. Irving's trial came during a period of intense debate in Europe over freedom
of expression, after European newspapers printed caricatures of the Prophet
Muhammad that set off deadly protests worldwide.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: David Irving arriving at his trial yesterday, with one of his
books. (Photo by Guenter R. Artinger/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SENTENCING (93%); HOLOCAUST (92%); JAIL SENTENCING (91%); GENOCIDE
(90%); WORLD WAR II (90%); LITIGATION (90%); GUILTY PLEAS (90%); TESTIMONY
(89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); HISTORY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (78%); VERDICTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); BAIL (73%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (69%); ARRESTS (69%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (64%); APPEALS (52%)
Nazi Policies Toward Jews and Minorities; Sentences (Criminal); Gas Chambers;
Concentration Camps

PERSON: David Irving

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (86%)

STATE: STYRIA, AUSTRIA (76%)

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (91%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%); POLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (53%)

REGION: Austria; Auschwitz (Poland); Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: February 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1060 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                          February 22, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Denies Top Suspect In Massacre Was Found

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD; Warren Hoge contributed reporting from the United
Nations for this article, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 685 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, Feb. 21


The Serbian government sought Tuesday to quash news reports suggesting that the
leading Balkan war crimes suspect, Ratko Mladic, had been located and that his
surrender was being negotiated.

Independent news and radio stations in Serbia and in Bosnia and Herzegovina
issued conflicting reports Tuesday afternoon stating that General Mladic, former
commander of the Bosnian Serb army, had been arrested or was engaged in talks to
convince him to surrender for trial for crimes committed during the war in
Bosnia, from 1992 to 1995.

B92, a Belgrade television and radio news network, reported that he had been
located in Bosnia and would be taken to Tuzla, the site of a European Union
military base and airport, from where he could be flown to the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia in The Hague. It quoted unidentified
sources.

The Associated Press, also quoting an unnamed security official, said that
General Mladic had been located and that negotiations were under way to secure
his surrender.

But a spokesman for the Serbian government, Srdjan Djuric, strongly denied the
reports, stating that claims of General Mladic's arrest appeared intended to
undermine the government's intention ''to fully cooperate with The Hague.''

Western diplomats and an analyst said that while there was no evidence General
Mladic had been arrested, there were signs that Serbia was close to tracking him
down.

''Everybody who is involved in this process is on standby,'' said a diplomat who
is close to police and legal officials assigned to help find the general. ''They
possibly have his location, but are not yet moving in,'' said the official, who
was granted anonymity because he was not authorized to talk to the media.

Bratislav Grubacic, the editor of VIP, a news service, said, ''There are some
indications that they are using back channels'' to negotiate with the general.

He said the government wanted to avoid having the general go before a Serbian
court, which could prove politically embarrassing because the Serbian electorate
remains highly nationalistic.

''They would like to have a solution that would be face-saving for them, in
which he could be transferred somehow to Bosnia,'' Mr. Grubacic said. He said
members of the security services had denied any operation to arrest the general
or negotiate his surrender.

Numerous inaccurate reports of the former general's arrest have surfaced in the
11 years since he was indicted by the tribunal on charges of leading the
massacre of at least 8,000 Muslim men and boys in around Srebrenica in July
1995.

But the speculation Tuesday was the most intense in years, and came as Serbia
was facing possible suspension of political and trade talks with the European
Union.

European governments have warned that the talks, a potential step toward
eventual membership, could be suspended if Serbia failed to arrest General
Mladic. The European Union's foreign ministers are due to discuss the issue on
Monday.

Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor at The Hague, urged the European Union to
suspend the talks until General Mladic was arrested. She has complained that
cooperation with Belgrade had ground to a halt and recently demanded that the
general be handed over this month.

Officials at tribunal said she had contacted Belgrade late Tuesday and was told
that General Mladic had not been located or arrested, and that the press reports
were false.

In New York, Stephane Dujarric, the spokesman for Secretary General Kofi Annan,
said officials at the United Nations headquarters ''have checked with the
tribunal in The Hague, and we've been told that there is absolutely no
information that Mladic has been arrested or located.''

But he did say Milan Lukic, a Bosnian Serb paramilitary leader indicted in 1998,
had been handed over to the tribunal by Argentina, where he was arrested in
August 2005 after nearly seven years on the run.

He has been charged with murdering, severely beating, unlawfully detaining and
terrorizing Bosnian Muslim and other non-Serb civilians and looting and
destroying their property.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); ARRESTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (77%); RADIO BROADCAST INDUSTRY
(77%); ARMED FORCES (77%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
Public Opinion

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (56%)

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (56%) European Union

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (56%)

PERSON: Ratko Mladic; Nicholas Wood; Carla Del Ponte

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (87%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA
(79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); SERBIA (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%);
EUROPE (94%); NETHERLANDS (92%); SLOVENIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(92%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1061 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Milosevic Says His Health Is Worsening

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 125 words


Judges for the international tribunal trying Slobodan Milosevic, the former
Yugoslav president, for war crimes said they would decide this week on his
request to travel to Russia for medical care. Mr. Milosevic has been pressing
the court since December to allow him to go to the Bakoulev Scientific Center
for Cardiovascular Surgery in Moscow. During his four-year trial he has been
examined and treated by Dutch, French, Russian and Serbian specialists for his
recurrent high blood pressure and heart and vascular problems, but he has
complained that his condition is worsening. During the court session yesterday,
Mr. Milosevic stopped questioning a witness because of what he described as ''a
thundering noise'' in his head.   MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); HEART DISEASE (87%);
WITNESSES (87%); GENOCIDE (73%); HYPERTENSION (70%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); EUROPE (91%); NETHERLANDS
(90%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1063 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            February 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sudan: Minister Says Bush Belongs On U.N. Sanctions List

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 78 words


Interior Minister Zubair Bashir Taha said President Bush's name and not his
should be on a United Nations list of people who should face sanctions for
impeding peace in Darfur. A committee of the Security Council recommended this
week that Mr. Taha, the country's defense minister and intelligence chief and
various rebel and militia leaders should face a travel ban and asset freeze,
according to a copy of the list of 17 names obtained by Reuters.   MARC LACEY
(NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%);
GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (84%)
Embargoes; United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%) United
Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (92%) Marc Lacey; Zubair Bashir (Min) Taha; George W
(Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (95%); AFRICA (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1066 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                           February 28, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Bosnia's Genocide Case Against Serbia Starts

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 27


The International Court of Justice began hearings on Monday in its first
genocide case, a suit in which Bosnia charges that Serbia tried to destroy the
Muslim population of Bosnia.

Bosnia is asking the court, a judicial body of the United Nations, for formal
recognition of its people's brutal fate and financial compensation for Bosnia
and its victims.

The central argument is that Serbia violated the 1948 United Nations Convention
on Genocide ''on all counts'' in the 1992-1995 war after the breakup of
Yugoslavia.

Although other national and international courts have had genocide trials, the
International Court of Justice has never taken up the issue of one state
accusing another of genocide.

The court, based at the Peace Palace in The Hague, adjudicates disputes between
nations and more commonly deals with territorial or maritime claims.

The public hearings now under way are the final stage in a 13-year-old process.
Since Bosnia filed its suit in 1993, the two sides have exchanged voluminous
legal briefs, and Serbia has tried to settle the dispute through diplomacy and
through efforts to block the court from taking the case. But the court has ruled
that it has jurisdiction, allowing the case to proceed.

The hearings are scheduled to continue until May 9. After that, it is quite
likely to take months before the international panel of judges delivers its
verdict.

In his opening statement, the Bosnian representative, Sakib Softic, said that
the violence instigated by the Belgrade government in 1992 ''destroyed the
character of Bosnia and Herzegovina and certainly destroyed a substantial part
of its non-Serb population.''

Mr. Softic said the Belgrade authorities took that population ''on a path to
hell, a path littered with dead bodies, broken families, lost youths and lost
futures.''

Despite the magnitude of the massacres, he said, many Serbs have continued to
deny the history of war crimes. The suit aims to do away with ''the falsifying
of history,'' Mr. Softic said.

An estimated 100,000 Serbs, Croats and Bosnian Muslims were killed in the Bosnia
conflict. About two-thirds were Bosnian Muslims. Serbian forces, acting in
concert with local Bosnian Serbs, set out to create Serb-only regions in a
policy known as ethnic cleansing.

The suit cites numerous cases of the deliberate killing of Muslim civilians in
their towns and houses, as well as in concentration camps. It also documents
large-scale rape and torture and the destruction of mosques and cultural
heritage sites.

A lawyer on the Bosnian team, Phon van den Biesen, said in an earlier interview
that Bosnia was relying on publicly available evidence.

''We have not tried to get materials from intelligence services,'' he said. ''We
have found more than enough material.''

The material includes evidence and rulings from a different court, the United
Nations war crimes tribunal that deals with the former Yugoslavia, also in The
Hague. That tribunal has already ruled that genocide occurred at Srebrenica, in
eastern Bosnia, in 1995 when close to 8,000 unarmed men and boys were executed
and thrown into mass graves.

The tribunal has convicted several Bosnian Serb military officers of genocide
and is now trying former President Slobodan Milosevic, also on genocide charges.

The Bosnia case before the International Court of Justice may be a factor
delaying the arrest of Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb military leader who
is charged with genocide and remains at large.

Some lawyers at the court say Belgrade may be refusing to hand over General
Mladic for fear that evidence at his trial could strengthen the Bosnian suit
against Serbia. In the war, Belgrade provided covert support to General Mladic's
ostensibly separate army, including financing, equipment, personnel and
intelligence.

In taking their case to court, Bosnians are seeking greater recognition for
their suffering and an implicit confirmation of their moral superiority over
their neighbors, which they feel the Dayton peace accord of 1995 did not
provide.

Moreover, the continuing denial by Serbian nationalists of the atrocities in the
war causes continuing outrage among many survivors.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); RELIGION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); JURISDICTION (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC GROUPS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (78%); ADMIRALTY
LAW (73%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (73%); TORTURE (72%); INTERVIEWS (69%); HISTORIC
DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES (67%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(56%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (95%); UNITED
NATIONS (84%) International Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%);
CROATIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%); NETHERLANDS (78%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1068 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 769 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-15

Bush Visits Afghanistan As Taliban Presence Grows
Four years after the Taliban were ousted from power by the American military,
their presence in southern Afghanistan is bigger and more menacing than ever,
say police and government officials and aid workers.   A1

President Bush, on his way to a three-day visit to India and Pakistan, made a
surprise visit to Afghanistan to meet with President Hamid Karzai and to see for
the first time the government created after the fall of the Taliban.

A14

German Role in Iraq Contested
Despite its denials, Germany, a vocal critic of the Bush administration's
decision to use military force to topple Saddam Hussein, provided continuing,
systematic and regular support to the war effort, according to a classified
German review.   A1

Iraq Reconsiders Political Map
Political leaders of Iraq's Kurdish, Sunni and secular parties are considering a
plan to ask the country's largest Shiite bloc to withdraw Ibrahim Jaafari as
their candidate for prime minister in the new government.   A12

Senior Pentagon officials said that, in the aftermath of a burst of sectarian
violence in Iraq, it was unlikely that a decision would be made on troop cuts
when top Army commanders meet with President Bush next week.   A10

Calling Clinton to Testify
Lawyers for Slobodan Milosevic have asked the court trying him on war crimes
charges to issue a subpoena for Bill Clinton to testify at the trial, saying
that he ''had unique knowledge'' of events during the Balkan wars.   A6

NATIONAL   A16-25

Fines for Mine Companies Lowered or Not Collected
In its drive to foster a more cooperative relationship with mining companies,
the Bush administration has decreased major fines for safety violations since
2001, and in nearly half the cases, it has not collected the fines, according to
a data analysis by The New York Times.   A1

Teenager Pleads Guilty
Lionel Tate, the teenager who was sentenced to life in prison five years ago for
stomping a younger playmate to death when he was 12, pleaded guilty to armed
robbery in a deal that spares him a life sentence for violating probation.   A16


Storm Response Recorded
A newly released transcript of a government videoconference shows that hours
after Hurricane Katrina made landfall, federal and state officials did not know
that the levees in New Orleans were failing and were cautiously congratulating
one another on the government response.   A16

U.S. Stockpiles Antiviral Drugs
The Bush Administration announced that it was buying enough antiviral drugs to
treat 14 million people in the event of a pandemic flu, but Democrats complained
that the administration had yet to spend all of the money that Congress
appropriated to buy drugs and that the delay is putting people at risk.   A21

Inmates Shackled in Labor
Despite sporadic complaints and occasional lawsuits, the practice of shackling
female prisoners while they are in labor continues to be relatively common,
state legislators and a human rights group said.   A16


NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

U.S. Sues New York Over Voting Rights Reform
The Justice Department sued New York State for failing to overhaul its election
system and replace its aging voting machines. It is the first lawsuit the
federal government has filed to force a state to comply with the voting
guidelines enacted by Congress after the 2000 election debacle.   A1

Woman's Missing Hours
Police officials continue to examine a 17- hour span between when a 24-year-old
graduate student was last seen and when her body was found wrapped in a quilt in
Brooklyn. Detectives are grappling with both the missing hours and the crime's
apparent random nature.   A1

SPORTSTHURSDAY   D1-6

HOUSE & HOME   F1-12

THURSDAY STYLES   G1-10

ARTS   E1-12

FASHION   B9

OBITUARIES   B8

Owen Chamberlain
A physicist who shared a Nobel Prize for discovering the antiproton, which
opened a glimpse into the strange world of antimatter, he was 85.   B8

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Women in the Work Force
The growth in the percentage of adult women working outside the home has stalled
since the mid-1990's, a change that many researchers believe is because changes
in the work force have limited the ability of women to pursue jobs.   A1

Auto Makers Scale Back
General Motors and Ford announced plans to scale back production in the second
quarter as sales continued to decline.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: The Dubai ports deal; the abusive new federalism; betraying student
athletes; Helene Cooper on Indian women who are being helped up the ladder.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge   E9
Crossword   E10
TV Listings   E11
Weather   D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SUBPOENAS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); LITIGATION (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (86%); FINES & PENALTIES (86%);
SENTENCING (86%); CORRECTIONS (86%); GUILTY PLEAS (86%); PRISONS (85%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); ARMIES (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); ARMED FORCES (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); PROBATION
(77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (75%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (73%); DISASTER PLANNING (73%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (72%); HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (72%); HURRICANE KATRINA (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%);
ROBBERY (69%); WAR CRIMES (69%); LAWYERS (66%); TRANSCRIPTS (65%); MINES &
MINING (64%); ANTIVIRALS (63%); HURRICANES (60%); INFLUENZA (60%);
APPROPRIATIONS (60%); EPIDEMICS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); BILL CLINTON (79%); HAMAD KARZAI (58%); SADDAM
HUSSEIN (58%)

CITY: NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%)

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); GERMANY (91%)

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1071 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 2, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Taliban Rebels Still Menacing Afghan South

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1408 words

DATELINE: LOY KAREZ, Afghanistan


When Haji Lalai Mama, the 60-year-old tribal elder in these parts, gamely tried
to organize a village defense force against the Taliban recently, he had to do
it with a relative handful of men and just three rifles. ''We were patrolling
and ready,'' he recalled.

But they were not ready enough. The Taliban surprised them under cover of
darkness by using a side road. One villager was killed, and 10 others were
wounded by a grenade. Two Taliban fighters were captured in the clash. The rest
disappeared into the night.

The men at Loy Karez were exceptional in making a stand at all. Few in southern
Afghanistan are ready to stand up to the Taliban, at least not without greater
support or benefits from the Afghan government.

In fact, four years after the Taliban were ousted from power by the American
military, their presence is bigger and more menacing than ever, say police and
government officials, village elders, farmers and aid workers across southern
Afghanistan.

American and Afghan officials have said for months that the Taliban are no
longer capable of fighting large battles, and in their weakness have changed
tactics to roadside bombings or attacking soft targets, like harassing
villagers, killing teachers and burning schools.

Yet despite its evident military supremacy, the American-led alliance has not
been able to root out the insurgency. And the Taliban's tactics have succeeded
in sowing fear, nearly all here agree.

The militants have closed down some 200 schools through threats and burnings
across the south of Afghanistan, and killed dozens of government officials,
tribal elders and civilians over the last year. Commerce has sharply declined in
Kandahar, largely because of the rash of suicide bombings in the last few
months.

In the villages, people are asking foreigners and nongovernmental organizations
not to come around anymore, not because they do not need the aid, but for fear
of reprisals from the Taliban, aid workers and villagers said.

Some, like the local Afghan border police commander, Col. Abdul Razziq, 30, say
the situation is reaching a pivotal point, at least in his area.

''People are fed up now with the Taliban,'' he said. ''They don't let
organizations come and builds roads, dig bore wells and build schools. People
are fed up with them. I think now people have to fight them. How long can they
tolerate this?''

The American military reacts quickly with overwhelming airpower when it
encounters a Taliban group of any size, as it did recently in Helmand Province
when local officials claimed 200 Taliban fighters were at large.

But until now, the Taliban, criminals and drug smugglers, who often work
together, have had an easy time in Helmand because there has been virtually no
security presence in the province, neither from the Afghan Army nor an
international force of any strength, said Col. Henry Worsley, the commander of
British troops.

The British are starting to arrive in Helmand as part of the new NATO force
taking over command of southern Afghanistan this year. The local police are also
short of resources and lack training, he said.

''They are clearly a threat,'' he said of the Taliban and their drug smuggler
allies. ''But they do have a fairly easy time of it now, and that's going to
change.''

British troops are planning extensive patrolling with Afghan forces, including
patrols on foot and at night to improve security in the villages, he said.

American forces have not spent much time and effort on Helmand, the commander of
the United States-led alliance, Lt. Gen. Karl Eikenberry, conceded in a recent
interview. Yet the alliance has spent a lot of time and investment on the
neighboring province of Kandahar, where the Taliban have also expanded their
influence.

General Eikenberry does not accept the suggestion of failure. ''The challenge is
not that the enemy is strong, but after 25 years of warfare, that the
institutions of the state are weak,'' he told a gathering of elders recently in
Kandahar.

When greeted with speech after speech calling on America to use its influence on
Pakistan to crack down on the Taliban operating across the border, he urged the
Afghans to look in the mirror, telling them they have a role to play, too.

''The best strategy when we have a problem is to hold a mirror to yourself,'' he
said. ''It means building a government, getting a clean government that is not
corrupt, stopping poppy cultivation, building the Afghan National Army and
national police. That is the first step.''

President Hamid Karzai also appealed to tribal elders at a recent gathering to
help, acknowledging that the government cannot achieve anything without the
cooperation of the people.

But in southern Afghanistan, the people seem to be waiting for cooperation from
the government.

A police commander in Kandahar, Mullah Gul, who has been fighting the Taliban
for four years, described them as the black sheep of the family. ''They are a
problem,'' he said, ''but it is not something that we cannot handle among
ourselves.''

While villagers may not support the government, most are sitting on the fence,
and only a few are actively helping the Taliban, police officials say. Villagers
say they are caught in the middle, and receive little government support.

''We take them very seriously,'' said Jamal Khan, 24, a farmer from Nawa
district in Helmand Province, said of the Taliban. ''They come in the night to
our village. We are not armed, and they ask for food and a place to stay. We
cannot say anything. Then the government comes in the morning and says you gave
a place to the Taliban. But what should we do?''

The school in his village was still in the process of being built, he said, but
has become the bane of the villagers' life since armed men tried to burn it
down. Villagers fought them off that time but came under fire.

''The district chief is telling the elders that we should safeguard the school,
but the elders are saying we don't have weapons, we cannot fight with the
Taliban,'' he said. Already teachers and pupils have stopped attending, he said,
adding, ''Soon they will burn the school, if not in a week, then in a year.''

But there is evidence that at least some elders and others in the area,
distrustful of a government that they say is corrupt and exploitative, are
sympathetic to the Taliban. The elders from the Sangin district of Helmand,
where American planes bombed recently, said they had joined the small number of
Taliban fighters because the government officials preyed on them and robbed
them.

''The Taliban are in the villages, among the people,'' said Ali Seraj, a
descendant of Afghanistan's royal family and native of Kandahar, who contends
that the government is losing the hearts and minds of the ordinary people.

With its corrupt and often brutal local officials, the government has pushed the
people into the arms of the Taliban, said Abdul Qadar Noorzai, head of the
Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission in Kandahar.

''These are uneducated people, they do not trust the government, they see no
help coming to them, so the local people start doing things like the Taliban
do,'' he said.

In Loy Karez, Haji Lalai, the tribal elder who led the stand against the
Taliban, identified only four men who were Taliban sympathizers.

As for the two young men captured in the skirmish, they had only joined the
Taliban commander, Abdul Samad, that day. They did not even have weapons, they
said in an interview at the police station in Kandahar, where they were being
held.

Poor, uneducated laborers from the border town of Spinbaldak, they seemed to
have joined up without much persuasion.

''A friend said, 'Let's go and fight jihad,' '' said Saifullah, 20, who sold
shoes from a pushcart in the bazaar. ''I did not want to go, but they made us
go. We are uneducated; we did not understand.''

Yet this motley group of six or seven was enough to scare the villagers. It was
only when Haji Lalai, who has a reputation as a strongman, came back to live in
the village that he girded it to stand up to the Taliban.

''We fought the Taliban and saved this land from the Taliban, so if the
government does not help us and pay attention to us, then no one else will go
against the Taliban,'' said Khudai Nazar, 32, a former policeman who joined Haji
Lalai in his village defense force. ''If they do talk to us, then the whole
region will fight the Taliban.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Haji Lalai Mama, a tribal elder, recounted a recent battle with
the Taliban at the village of Loy Karez.
Afghan policemen kept watch for a Taliban attack in Loy Karez a few days after
the rebels killed one villager.
 A Loy Karez villager in a school that was burned out by the Taliban, which has
closed down 200 schools. (Photographs by Scott Eells for The New York Times)(pg.
A14)Map of Afghanistan highlighting Loy Karez. (pg. A14)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TALIBAN (92%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); BOMBINGS (89%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (87%); ARMIES (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); ROAD & BRIDGE
CONSTRUCTION (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); CIVIL WAR (73%); ARMED FORCES (73%);
BORDER CONTROL (72%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEES (72%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (67%); SMUGGLING (66%); SCHOOL BUILDINGS (65%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (60%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Bombs and Explosives; Civil War
and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: Taliban (Afghan Group)

PERSON: Carlotta Gall; Karl (Gen) Eikenberry

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); PAKISTAN
(79%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kandahar (Afghanistan); Pakistan; Afghanistan; Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1072 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Where Killers Roam, the Poison Spreads

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 767 words

DATELINE: ALONG THE CHAD-SUDAN BORDER


For more than two years, the world has pretty much ignored the genocide
unfolding in the Darfur region of Sudan, just as it turned away from the
slaughter of Armenians, Jews, Cambodians and Rwandans in earlier decades.

And now, apparently encouraged by the world's acquiescence, Sudan is sending its
proxy forces to invade neighboring Chad and kill and rape members of the same
African tribes that have already been ethnically cleansed in Darfur itself.

I've spent the last three days along the Chad-Sudan border, where this brutal
war is unfolding. But ''war'' doesn't feel like the right term, for that implies
combat between armies.

What is happening here is more like what happens in a stockyard. Militias backed
by Sudan race on camels and pickup trucks into Chadian villages and use machine
guns to mow down farming families, whose only offense is that they belong to the
wrong tribes and have black skin.

I found it eerie to drive on the dirt track along the border because countless
villages have been torched or abandoned. Many tens of thousands of peasants have
fled their villages, and you can drive for mile after mile and see no sign of
life -- except for the smoke of the villages or fields being burned by the
Sudan-armed janjaweed militia.

In some places the janjaweed, made up of nomadic Arab tribes that persecute
several black African tribes, have turned villages into grazing lands for the
livestock they have stolen. At one point, my vehicle got stuck in the sand, and
a group of janjaweed children materialized and helped push me out. The children
were watching a huge herd of cattle with many different brands. Their fathers
were presumably off killing people.

This is my sixth trip to the Darfur region, and I've often seen burned villages
within Darfur itself, but now the cancer has spread to Chad.

One young man, Haroun Ismael, returned with me -- very nervously -- to the edge
of his village of Karmadodo, between the towns of Adre and Ade. Eleven days
earlier, Sudanese military aircraft and a force of several hundred janjaweed had
suddenly attacked the village. Mr. Haroun and his wife had run for their lives,
with his wife carrying their 3-month-old baby, Ahmed.

The janjaweed raiders overtook Mr. Haroun's wife and beat her so badly that she
is still unconscious. They also grabbed Ahmed from her arms.

''They looked at the baby,'' Mr. Haroun added, ''and since he was a boy, they
shot him.''

Sudan is also arming and equipping a proxy army of Chadian rebels under a
commander named Muhammad Nour. The rebels were repulsed when they tried to
invade Chad in late December, and now they are regrouping for another attempt.

Sudan's aim seems to be to overthrow Chad's president and install a pawn in his
place, in part because this would allow Sudan's Army to attack rebels in Darfur
from both directions.

Regardless of whether the rebels succeed in overthrowing Chad's government, they
could ignite a new civil war in Chad. Much will depend on whether the French
will use their military base in Chad to fight any Sudanese-sponsored invasion;
the French aren't saying what they'll do.

Chad's army is too small to defend its border, so it tries to defend potential
invasion routes. That leaves villages in other areas defenseless.

''See that smoke over there?'' asked Ali Muhammad in the market town of Borota.
''The janjaweed are burning our fields today.''

''Most people here have fled,'' he added, ''but I have old family members to
look after, so I can't leave.''

These areas are too insecure for the United Nations and most international aid
workers, who are already doing a heroic and dangerous job in Darfur and Chad. So
Mr. Ali and others left behind get no food aid and go hungry.

In the last few weeks, President Bush has shown an increased willingness to
address the slaughter in Darfur. He should now encourage the French to use their
forces to defend Chad from proxy invasions, make a presidential speech to
spotlight the issue, attend a donor conference for Darfur, encourage the use of
a NATO bridging force until U.N. peacekeepers can arrive, enforce a no-fly zone
and open a new initiative for peace talks among the sheiks of Darfur.

The present Western policy of playing down genocide and hoping it will peter out
has proved to be bankrupt practically as well as morally. Granted, there are no
neat solutions in Darfur. But ignoring brutality has only magnified it, and it's
just shameful to pretend not to notice the terrified villagers here, huddling
with their children each night and wondering when they are going to be
massacred.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); ARMIES (89%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (86%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); SHOOTINGS (76%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (76%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (76%); FAMILY (73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (69%); FARMERS & RANCHERS
(69%); MOTOR VEHICLES (68%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHAD (94%); RWANDA (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Chad; Darfur (Sudan); France; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1074 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 7, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serb Who Aided Hague Tribunal Called a Suicide

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 385 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 6


Milan Babic, a wartime Serbian leader who was closely cooperating with
prosecutors, committed suicide in a prison cell of the war crimes tribunal in
The Hague, the court said Monday.

Mr. Babic, 50, was found dead in his cell on Sunday evening, the court said in a
statement. A senior court official said he had hanged himself, but the court
spokeswoman would not confirm that. The official requested anonymity because he
was not authorized to speak on the subject.

Mr. Babic's death deprives the prosecution of one of its valuable insider
witnesses, a onetime close ally of the former Serbian president, Slobodan
Milosevic. He was one of the leaders of an ethnic Serbs' rebellion in Croatia in
1991, and was in close contact with the top of the Serb government in Belgrade.

But he later said he had been deceived by Belgrade and turned himself in and
pleaded guilty to crimes against humanity. Since then, he has testified against
three senior fellow Serbian politicians, including Mr. Milosevic, and he was to
give evidence in three more trials.

''He was a star witness for the prosecution, a key insider, no question,'' said
Edgar Chen, a lawyer who monitors trials at the tribunal for the Coalition for
International Justice.

One crucial question, Mr. Chen said, was whether Mr. Babic's past testimony
would remain part of the record. Court officials said it was up to the judges in
each trial to decide.

Among Serbs, Mr. Babic was widely seen as a turncoat, and tribunal officials had
been so concerned for his safety that they would not disclose where he was
serving his 13-year sentence.

He was brought back to the Netherlands in February to testify against another
Croatian Serb and former comrade, Milan Martic. His testimony was to finish
Monday.

It was the second suicide at the prison. Another Croatian Serb, Slavko
Dokmanovic, hanged himself with his tie in 1998.

In recent weeks, Mr. Babic described how the rebellion of Croatian Serbs had
been run from Serbia and led by Mr. Milosevic.

At various times, Mr. Babic and Mr. Milosevic shouted insults at each other
across the courtroom. At one point, Mr. Babic told his former ally: ''You
dragged the Serbian people into war. You brought shame upon the Serbian people.
You brought misfortune on the Croatian people, on the Muslim people.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); SUICIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TESTIMONY
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DEATHS (90%);
PRISONS (89%); CORRECTIONS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SENTENCING (78%);
EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); GUILTY PLEAS (78%);
POLITICS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (50%) Suicides and Suicide Attempts; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic; Milan Babic; Slavko Dokmanovic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (99%); SERBIA (98%); CROATIA (94%); MONTENEGRO
(92%); NETHERLANDS (91%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands); Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1077 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 8, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Provision of Antiterror Law Delays Entry of Refugees

BYLINE: By RACHEL L. SWARNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 20

LENGTH: 1053 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 7


About 9,500 Burmese refugees scheduled to be resettled in the United States from
Thailand this year are in limbo because their indirect support for armed rebels
opposed to their repressive government has put them in technical violation of
American antiterrorism law, government officials say.

The Burmese are the largest of several groups, including refugees from Cuba,
Vietnam, Liberia and Somalia, whose admission to the United States has been
jeopardized by a provision in the USA Patriot Act that denies entry to anyone
who has provided material support to a terrorist or armed rebel group. The
provision applies even if that support was coerced or the aims of the group in
question match those of American foreign policy.

The law broadens the definition of terrorist groups to include organizations
that do not appear on the State Department's list of designated terrorist
groups, effectively barring refugees loosely linked to armed groups that have
resisted authoritarian governments like those in Cuba and Myanmar, formerly
Burma.

Some of the refugees paid taxes to rebel groups that controlled their
communities. Others offered food or small sums to relatives or acquaintances in
groups with ties to rebels or were forced to provide such support, refugee
resettlement officials said.

Officials in the Homeland Security and State Departments have been working for
several months to define guidelines for a waiver to the statute that would allow
the resettlement of the refugees, who are fleeing religious, ethnic and
political persecution, and refugee officials said they hope for a resolution
soon.

But with thousands of families stranded in refugee camps overseas, officials
from the United Nations and Republicans and Democrats in Congress have begun
warning in recent weeks that the law is leaving refugees increasingly at risk.

The law has already delayed the resettlement of 146 Cubans who offered support
to armed opponents of Fidel Castro in the 1960's; 200 Burmese refugees housed in
Malaysia; 30 Hmong refugees in Thailand; 11 Vietnamese Montagnard refugees in
Cambodia; and a small number of Liberians and Somalis, United Nations statistics
show.

The United Nations is still awaiting a formal decision on the 9,500 Burmese
refugees in Thailand.

United Nations officials and members of Congress said the refugees posed no
known security risks to the United States. By tagging them as having links to
terrorists, the United Nations says, the Bush administration will make it
difficult to find other countries willing to accept them. It may also lead
countries providing the refugees with temporary shelter to reconsider their
welcome.

The delay in issuing a waiver to the statute has led the United Nations to
suspend the American resettlement of hundreds of Colombian refugees, many of
whom were forced to make payments to rebel forces, and of 1,300 Burmese refugees
housed in Malaysia, who made donations to ethnic groups linked to armed
opponents of the Burmese government.

It has also prevented some 500 asylum seekers in the United States from being
granted permanent refuge here. Many of those cases are being appealed.

''Until this issue is resolved, many deserving refugees and applicants for
asylum fleeing religious, ethnic or other forms of persecution will be unfairly
denied or postponed from achieving safe haven,'' Representatives Christopher H.
Smith, Republican of New Jersey, and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, Republican of Florida,
said last week in a letter to the homeland security secretary, Michael Chertoff.

The antiterrorism law, which was passed in 2001 and which Congress reauthorized
on Tuesday, has been increasingly applied to refugees in the past two years. So
has the Real ID Act, which further broadened the definition of terrorist groups
when it was enacted last year.

''That procedure should ensure that terrorists do not abuse refugee status or
the asylum laws of the United States,'' Mr. Smith and Ms. Ros-Lehtinen wrote.
''However, the procedure should also properly weigh situations in which
individuals are acting under duress or are legitimately resisting illegitimate
and tyrannical regimes.''

Senators Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and Edward M. Kennedy of
Massachusetts, both Democrats, wrote a similar letter last week.

Bill Strassberger, a spokesman for the Homeland Security Department, said his
agency was working with the Departments of State and Justice to resolve the
problem.

''Part of the consternation over this issue is that this process is taking some
time,'' Mr. Strassberger said. ''The process is made difficult because of the
need to balance national security with our deep commitment to assisting refugees
and providing a safe refuge.''

Those affected by the law include a Colombian woman forced by rebels to hand
over livestock. The rebels killed her husband and raped her before she escaped
the country. Because her forced support for the rebels would bar her from
admission to the United States, the United Nations settled her in another
country.

Researchers from the Human Rights Program at Harvard Law School, who traveled to
Thailand and Malaysia, interviewed scores of additional refugees. Two of them --
one who gave a hat to a cousin who belonged to an opposition group and another
who was taxed a basket of rice annually by the group -- are among the Burmese
who still hope to find refuge in the United States.

Lawyers at the Homeland Security Department have also argued that the laws now
bar the United States from admitting Afghan refugees who supported the Northern
Alliance in its battle against the Taliban or South Africans who supported the
African National Congress when it was deemed a terrorist group.

The lawyers made that case in January as they tried to persuade a panel of
judges to deny asylum to a Burmese woman who had donated money to an opposition
group. The woman, a Christian who has been detained in Texas since she entered
this country in 2004, said she had been persecuted in Myanmar for her religious
beliefs and her ethnicity.

The woman, who is being represented by Edward Neufville and who will not allow
her name to be used because her case is pending, remains in detention, awaiting
the judges' decision.

''I am still hoping,'' she said in a telephone interview on Friday.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Edward Neufville has a Burmese client being detained in Texas.
(Photo by Steve Ruark for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (94%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); US PATRIOT ACT (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (74%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%);
FOREIGN POLICY (69%); ETHNICITY (69%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (64%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(64%) Immigration and Refugees; Asylum (Political); Terrorism; Law and
Legislation; Immigration and Refugees

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (56%) Rachel L Swarns; Edward Neufville

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); MYANMAR (96%); THAILAND (94%); VIET NAM (93%);
MALAYSIA (92%); CUBA (91%); CAMBODIA (79%)

REGION: United States; Thailand; Myanmar; Cuba; Vietnam; Liberia; Somalia

LOAD-DATE: March 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1078 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 9, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia Opens Defense In Bosnia Genocide Case

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 99 words


In the first case in which one nation is accusing another of genocide, the
International Court of Justice in The Hague began hearing the defense of Serbia
in a lawsuit brought by Bosnia. At the court, which arbitrates disputes between
nations, Bosnia is charging that Serbia tried to destroy Bosnia's Muslim
population in the 1992-95 war, and it is suing for damages, not yet defined. For
the past 10 days, Bosnia has argued its case. Serbia opened its defense by
questioning that genocide had been committed and by challenging the jurisdiction
of the court in the dispute.    MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); LITIGATION (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); JURISDICTION (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION
(85%); DAMAGES (85%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Suits and
Litigation

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (92%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Marlise Simons

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA (94%);
EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); MONTENEGRO (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1080 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Death Poses Challenges as Serbia Faces Past and Future

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD and JUDY DEMPSEY; Nicholas Wood reported from Belgrade
for this article, and Judy Dempsey from Berlin.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1088 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia and Montenegro, March 12


The death of Slobodan Milosevic just as his long war-crimes trial was nearing an
end poses new complexities for Europe and the United States, which both hoped to
solve outstanding problems in the Balkans this year that are a legacy of Mr.
Milosevic's role in the region's three wars in the 1990's.

The United States has been pushing to settle Kosovo's political future, while
the European Union has given the Serbian government until April to hand over
Ratko Mladic, military leader of the Bosnian Serbs during the 1992-95 war, who
is accused of genocide, crimes against humanity and other war crimes for the
siege of Sarajevo and the massacre of thousands of Muslim men and boys around
Srebrenica in July 1995.

The death of Mr. Milosevic, the former leader of Yugoslavia who presided over
its disintegration, also throws doubt on the ability of the current Serbian
government to move ahead of nationalist sentiments and make any compromises on
either Kosovo or the handing over of Mr. Mladic or other indicted war crimes
suspects to a United Nations tribunal in The Hague. The tribunal has in the past
two weeks proved unable to prevent not only Mr. Milosevic's death but also the
suicide of a convicted war criminal, Milan Babic, wartime leader of Croatia's
Serbs.

Mr. Milosevic was just weeks away from completing his own defense in a trial
that had dragged on for more than four years, examining the actions that earned
him the epithet ''Butcher of the Balkans'' during the wars of the 1990's over
Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo. The United Nations said Sunday that an autopsy
showed he died of a heart attack, but if there proves to be anything suspicious
about the cause, which is still under investigation, his effort to be seen as a
martyr for the Serbian cause could be enhanced.

In Belgrade on Sunday, the response from most Serbs to the death was publicly
largely mute, although it stirred enormous interest both at home and among the
large community of Serb exiles who have left the country during the past 15
years of warfare and economic ruin.

Several Serbian newspapers fueled speculation about the death. In three,
headlines said he was murdered. ''The Hague killed Milosevic,'' said one.
Another said he was killed by his medical treatment.

There were few public displays of grief for Mr. Milosevic -- indeed, Sunday was
the commemoration, by the government, of the third anniversary of the
assassination of Zoran Djindjic, the prime minister and longtime opponent of Mr.
Milosevic.

The most immediate controversy concerned whether Mr. Milosevic should be buried
in Serbia and Montenegro, or in Moscow, where his widow, Mirjana Markovic, has
been living. Any funeral in Belgrade would probably be a rallying point for Mr.
Milosevic's supporters and nationalists, and it would bring his family back to
Belgrade. Mr. Milosevic might more easily be cast as a martyr, and any
appearance by Ms. Markovic would pose a fresh quandary for the Serbian
government, because there is an international warrant for her arrest on charges
of abuse of power in the 1990's.

The Socialist Party, which Mr. Milosevic led, has asked the government to waive
all charges against the family and requested that he be buried in a corner of
Belgrade's main cemetery that is known as the ''Alley of the Great.''

''It's the way he's buried and where he's buried that is the issue,'' said Zoran
Korac, a former deputy prime minister and opposition politician during Mr.
Milosevic's rule. ''You cannot prevent a man from being buried in his own
country,'' Mr. Korac said, but added that he ''would be dead set against'' any
recognition of Mr. Milosevic as leader.

Mr. Milosevic fell from popular grace after his ouster in 2000, when his
popularity ratings dropped to 10 percent, according to Strategic Marketing
Research, a polling company that monitors the popularity of Serbian politicians.
But the sight of Mr. Milosevic on television single-handedly taking on the Hague
tribunal, which many Serbs believe is biased against them, doubled those
ratings, said Srdjan Bogosavljevic, head of Strategic Marketing Research.

Some Serbs have apparently forgotten the hyperinflation, economic and diplomatic
isolation associated with Mr. Milosevic's rule. ''My salary is less now than it
was then,'' said Zoran Mihajlovic, 47, a hotel manager in Vranje, a town in
southern Serbia. If there were problems during Mr. Milosevic's time, added Mr.
Mihajlovic, who stressed that he did not support the Socialists, ''I'm sure he
didn't know about 60 percent of all the things happening in Serbia.''

But some analysts said the death of Mr. Milosevic could signal the beginning of
the end of a burden that had been weighing down Serbia even after Mr. Milosevic
was sent to the Hague tribunal in 2001.

''Slowly, the long shadow of Milosevic might now start fading,'' said Danijel
Pantic, director of the European Movement, an independent research group in
Belgrade. ''Now there is a chance of a younger generation to emerge which could
even stabilize the government.''

The first big test for the Serbian president, Boris Tadic, and his prime
minister, Vojislav Kostunica, is whether they can still persuade Mr. Mladic and
the Bosnian Serbs' wartime political leader, Radovan Karadic, to surrender to
the Hague tribunal. Both men have been fugitives for more than 10 years;
security officials confirmed last month that negotiations were under way with
Mr. Mladic over his surrender.

But Olli Rehn, enlargement commissioner for the European Union, has said talks
on an association with Serbia will be cut off on April 5 if Belgrade has not
handed over Mr. Mladic or Mr. Karadzic by then.

While some European Union countries prefer to keep the door open to give Serbian
reformers some hope of reaching their goal of bringing the country closer to the
rest of Europe, the United States and Carla Del Ponte, the tribunal's chief
prosecutor, are insisting that the European Union should not start any formal
talks for a ''stabilization and association agreement,'' a step toward eventual
membership, until the two men have been handed over.

Meeting in the Austrian town of Salzburg as word of Mr. Milosevic's death spread
on Saturday, European Union foreign ministers delivered a mixed message to
Serbia.

Ursula Plassnik, the Austrian foreign minister and chairwoman of the Salzburg
meeting, insisted that ''European unification is incomplete without the
Balkans.'' But she also warned Serbia that ''it must come to terms with the
legacy of the past.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Supporters of Slobodan Milosevic waited to sign a book of
condolences yesterday at the headquarters of the Serbian Socialist Party in
Belgrade. (Photo by Filip Horvat for The New York Times)
 Carla Del Ponte, center, chief prosecutor at the war crimes trial in The Hague,
discussed Mr. Milosevic's death at a news conference yesterday. (Photo by Robin
Utrecht/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); AUTOPSIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ANNIVERSARIES (78%); DEATHS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); MURDER (58%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; News and News Media

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); UNITED NATIONS (55%) European Union

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Judy Dempsey; Ratko (Gen) Mladic; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); EUROPE (95%); NETHERLANDS
(94%); MONTENEGRO (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); CROATIA (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Europe; Kosovo (Serbia); Bosnia and Herzegovina;
Serbia and Montenegro; Croatia

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1081 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 13, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

MILOSEVIC DIED OF HEART ATTACK, AUTOPSY SHOWS

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1219 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 12


An autopsy showed that a heart attack killed Slobodan Milosevic, the United
Nations war crimes tribunal said here on Sunday evening in a terse announcement.
The statement served only to deepen the mystery over the circumstances
surrounding Mr. Milosevic's abrupt death just as his prolonged trial was finally
nearing an end.

The autopsy result was disclosed as new evidence emerged that Mr. Milosevic, the
former Yugoslav president found dead in his prison cell bed on Saturday, had
been taking medicine not prescribed by his physicians, including an antibiotic
known to diminish or blunt the effect of the medicines he had been taking for
heart and blood-pressure problems.

It was unclear why he had taken that antibiotic, but one of Mr. Milosevic's
legal advisers said Sunday that Mr. Milosevic knew something was wrong, and had
expressed fear in a letter written one day before he was found dead that someone
had been trying to poison him. The United Nations tribunal has dismissed the
poisoning speculation.

Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor at the tribunal, said at a news conference
before the autopsy result was released that she did not rule out suicide. She
also said Mr. Milosevic had been thoroughly monitored by medical aides, and that
it was ''very strange, even if it is of course possible, that he should have
died so suddenly without these medics having noticed a worsening of his
condition.''

The death of Mr. Milosevic, 64, sent shock waves through the tribunal here,
putting it on the defensive just as a defining moment in the history of the
Yugoslav war crimes prosecutions appeared at hand. His death also raised a whole
set of new issues for the United States and European Union, which had hoped that
the conclusion of his four-year trial, with conviction widely expected, would
help expedite resolution of other problems that are vestiges of Mr. Milosevic's
catastrophic rule in the 1990's. Reaction in his homeland was largely muted, but
some newspaper headlines said he had been murdered. [Page A10.]

The autopsy, which said Mr. Milosevic had died of a myocardial infarction, or
heart attack, was performed by three Dutch pathologists at The Hague. A Belgian
specialist and two forensic experts from the Belgrade military hospital also
attended the procedure.

Their report identified ''two heart conditions'' that Mr. Milosevic had suffered
from, which they said might explain the heart attack. The results of a
toxicological report will be available later this week, the court said.

Lawyers close to Mr. Milosevic said the toxicological report could reveal
substances in his blood that might have contributed to his death. But the
question remained: If so, how did they get there?

During his trial here for war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide,
judges were told that he had seemed to be manipulating his health. Proceedings
were suspended more than 20 times. ''He has a proven track record of taking
unprescribed medicine, of messing with his medication,'' said Jean-Daniel Ruch,
an adviser to Ms. Del Ponte. ''I am not sure if we will know the full truth.''

But a January report by the prison doctor that was disclosed Sunday by Zdenko
Tomanovic, one of Mr. Milosevic's lawyers, said an antibiotic known as
rifampicin, used to treat serious bacterial infections, like tuberculosis and
leprosy, had been found in Mr. Milosevic's blood.

Dr. Donald Uges, a top toxicologist in the Netherlands who was asked by the
tribunal to confirm the findings in a further test in February, said Sunday that
he found the same antibiotic in a blood sample from Mr. Milosevic two weeks ago.

The antibiotic is known to diminish or blunt the effectiveness of the prescribed
medicines Mr. Milosevic was taking, including beta blockers, as part of his
treatment for his high blood pressure and heart problems, Dr. Uges said, and as
a result may have kept the blood pressure high.

The court first asked for the blood tests in November, when it appeared that Mr.
Milosevic's blood pressure would not go down and he was repeatedly taken ill.

Mr. Tomanovic said the findings, including Dr. Uges's confirmation, were
received on March 7 by Mr. Milosevic, which prompted him to write to the Russian
Embassy at The Hague last Friday -- one day before he was found dead.

Mr. Tomanovic showed reporters copies of two letters from Mr. Milosevic. One,
written in English, asked the embassy to forward the other four-page letter,
written in Serbian, to the government in Moscow.

In this long letter, which Mr. Tomanovic read aloud in Serbian and paraphrased
in English translation, Mr. Milosevic said blood tests had found traces of a
''strong drug'' -- an antibiotic -- that Mr. Tomanovic said was used only for
leprosy and tuberculosis.

''I have never taken any antibiotic in five years,'' Mr. Milosevic was quoted as
saying.

Mr. Tomanovic said Mr. Milosevic wrote that the blood tests proved he was being
poisoned. ''I am writing to you and asking you for help in protecting me from
the criminal activities being perpetrated in the institution operating under the
sign of the United Nations organization,'' Mr. Tomanovic quoted the letter as
saying.

The lawyer said the letter added that the people trying to poison Mr. Milosevic
also had an interest in silencing him.

Throughout his political career, and over more than four years of proceedings
here in his trial, Mr. Milosevic cast himself in the classic Serbian mold of
victim and martyr.

At the news conference, Ms. Del Ponte, the prosecutor, said she expected doubts
over the exact cause of Mr. Milosevic's death to be clarified by the autopsy and
toxicological tests, but she also repeated her regret that Mr. Milosevic had
died just as his trial was coming to an end.

''His crimes affected hundreds of thousands of people,'' she said, adding that
''there were just 50 hours of hearings left'' in the defense phase.

Ms. Del Ponte said the tribunal's attention would now turn to other war crime
cases as well as the need to arrest other fugitives.

''Now more than ever, I expect Serbia to arrest and transfer Ratko Mladic and
Radovan Karadzic,'' she said, referring to the two former Bosnian Serb leaders
who have been on the run since they were indicted as war criminals in 1995.

Although the 66-count indictment of Mr. Milosevic dealt with the wars in Bosnia,
Croatia and Kosovo, he devoted almost all of the time allotted for his defense
to Kosovo, a Serbian province. As president of Serbia and commander in chief of
its security forces, he would be legally accountable for crimes committed by
them. He dismissed events in Bosnia and hardly touched on those in Croatia,
because, he said, those were separate countries not under his command or
control.

But prosecutors said he had instigated many crimes in Bosnia and Croatia through
proxy armies which he supplied and financed.

Ms. Del Ponte said ''of course, we are very sad and frustrated'' by the
unfinished prosecution, mainly because it had deprived the victims of the wars a
verdict. She said the trial, which had taken up 466 days of hearings and in
which testimony was heard from 295 prosecution witnesses, ''represents a wealth
of evidence that is on the record.''

The trial was not only about a conviction, she said, ''but also about facts and
truth.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: At the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Zdenko Tomanovic, a
lawyer for Slobodan Milosevic, displayed a letter written by Mr. Milosevic.
(Photo by Jerry Lampen/Reuters)(pg. A10)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AUTOPSIES (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); POISONINGS (90%); HEART DISEASE
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); DEATHS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TOXICOLOGY (89%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE
(89%); FORENSICS (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (76%); ANTIBIOTICS (75%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES
(73%); PATHOLOGY (73%); NEWS BRIEFS (67%); MURDER (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (50%)
War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Autopsies; Poisoning and
Poisons

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%); MONTENEGRO
(90%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (53%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1082 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Ex-Judge Under Hussein Defends Death Sentences for Shiites

BYLINE: By ROBERT F. WORTH

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: TESTIMONY;
Pg. 17

LENGTH: 563 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, March 13


A former judge in Saddam Hussein's Revolutionary Court acknowledged Monday that
he sentenced 148 Shiites to death in 1984, but said they had received a proper
trial and had confessed to trying to assassinate Mr. Hussein at the instigation
of Iran.

The former judge, Awad al-Bandar, is one of eight defendants, including Mr.
Hussein, accused in connection with the mass tortures and executions after the
assassination attempt in 1982. The first high-level defendants testified Monday.
Mr. Hussein is expected to speak Tuesday.

The chief prosecutor and judge often seemed amazed at Mr. Bandar's defense of
his role in the trial of the 148 Shiites. Mr. Bandar said that the trial, in
1984, had taken two weeks, and that the dock in his courtroom had often been
packed as the men moved in and out.

The prosecutor, Jafar Musawi, showed Mr. Bandar documents indicating that 46 of
the 148 defendants had been ''liquidated during interrogation'' before the
trial. Prosecutors have said the trial was a sham, but Mr. Bandar seemed not to
understand. ''Is it a strange thing that a defendant died during
interrogation?'' he said.

Mr. Musawi drove his point home shortly afterward, saying, ''People were dying
during interrogation, and the strange thing is that they were afterward being
referred to the Revolutionary Court to get the death penalty.''

Mr. Bandar angrily denied that. But he invoked the war with Iran as a necessary
context for his actions, saying that ''we had an external enemy and an internal
enemy,'' and that the would-be assassins were members of the dissident Dawa
Party, with links to Iran.

Mr. Hussein offered a similar defense two weeks ago when he admitted ordering
the trial, though he stopped short of saying he had signed the execution order
prosecutors have introduced as documentary evidence.

Several defendants have questioned the authenticity of those documents, or
suggested that they were marred by errors. ''The typist must have made a
mistake,'' Mr. Bandar said, when asked why the records of the Revolutionary
Court show no mention of defense lawyers for the 148 Shiites who were executed.

Aside from Mr. Bandar, defendants who have given direct testimony so far this
week have denied any role in the torture and executions carried out after the
assassination attempt, in the Shiite village of Dujail. Taha Yassin Ramadan, a
former vice president in Mr. Hussein's government, said he had no connection to
the events in Dujail.

But Mr. Ramadan insisted on reading a lengthy written statement contending that
he was tortured after his capture in August 2003. His captors included an
American, he said, and they demanded to know where Mr. Hussein was. When he told
them he did not know, they beat and kicked him for days, he said.

The other four defendants are local Baath Party officials who are accused of
playing roles in the crackdown that followed the assassination attempt. Three
testified Sunday, saying they were innocent of wrongdoing, and disavowing
earlier signed statements given to investigators.

A fourth local official, Muhammad Azawi Ali, testified Monday, saying he had
been in the Baath Party headquarters in Dujail on the day in question. But he
also said he was illiterate and had not understood the statement he gave
investigators earlier. ''I am innocent, I am innocent, I am innocent!'' he said
as he finished his testimony.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Awad al-Bandar, left, a former judge in Saddam Hussein's
Revolutionary Court, invoked Iran during his testimony yesterday in Baghdad.
(Photo by Pool photo by Jacob Silberberg)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); SENTENCING (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); ASSASSINATION (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (89%); TESTIMONY
(89%); TORTURE (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); LAWYERS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(64%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Robert F Worth; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Awad Al-
Bandar; Jafar ABBREVIATION NOT ON FILE Musawi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%)

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); IRAQ (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1083 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

The Death of Milosevic

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 26

LENGTH: 401 words


It's hard not to feel that by dying in his cell, Slobodan Milosevic finally
succeeded in his determined effort to cheat justice. Four years and hundreds of
millions of dollars have been spent in an effort to move the Balkans away from
the sterile politics of ethnic vendettas and grievances. The goal has been to
establish the personal legal accountability of the individual politicians and
commanders most responsible for the horrific crimes against humanity committed
in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990's.

No individual was more responsible for those crimes than Mr. Milosevic. Carla
Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor of the United Nations tribunal, told an Italian
interviewer that ''the death of Milosevic represents for me a total defeat."
Without a formal conviction of Mr. Milosevic, survivors of his atrocities are
left with only a dismal record of what they endured, while Serb nationalists
have their martyr.

Mr. Milosevic's death was bad news for the fledgling notion of international
justice, but not, we hope, a total defeat. The International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia was established by the U.N. Security Council in The
Hague almost 13 years ago as the first international court for the prosecution
of war crimes since the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials after World War II. As such,
it is supposed to demonstrate that no national leader, no matter how exalted,
can ever again commit terrible crimes with impunity.

That remains to be proved. The Hague tribunal has been slow and costly: of the
161 men charged, 32 have been convicted. Worse, two of the most notorious
villains on its list remain at large, the Bosnian Serb leaders Radovan Karadzic
and Ratko Mladic. The two men are charged with genocide in the massacre of
thousands of Muslim men and boys in Srebrenica in July 1995.

It is dubious that the tribunal has had any chastening effect on the Serbs. Some
critics have argued that The Hague is simply too far from the Balkans for the
Serbs to have any involvement in the trial. Still, a successful prosecution of
Mr. Milosevic would have gone a long way toward enhancing the authority of
international tribunals.

The underlying idea that those who commit crimes against humanity won't escape
punishment is too important to be permanently set back by one death. There is
justice in the fact that Mr. Milosevic died in a cell, not in power or
comfortably in exile.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 16, 2006



CORRECTION: An editorial in Tuesday's Times gave the wrong figures for the
numbers of people charged and convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal
for the Former Yugoslavia. The tribunal has indicted 160 men and one woman, not
161 men. Forty people have been found guilty by the tribunal, not 32.

An editorial in Tuesday's Times gave the wrong figures for the numbers of people
charged and convicted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former
Yugoslavia. The tribunal has indicted 160 men and one woman, not 161 men. Forty
people have been found guilty by the tribunal, not 32.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); MEN (77%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); WORLD WAR II (66%)
Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);
UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (55%)

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (54%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); MONTENEGRO (72%); GERMANY (54%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1084 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Africa's Brutal Lebensraum

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 725 words

DATELINE: BILDIQ, Chad


The villagers in this hamlet of thatch-roof mud huts told me that they had shot
dead a member of the brutal janjaweed militia and pointed to his body. I walked
over to look at the corpse -- and his eyes opened.

He was a teenager, perhaps 16, shot down as he and four other raiders attacked
this village along the Chad-Sudan border. Most of these villages near the town
of Ade are unarmed, and it is easy for members of the Arab janjaweed to kill,
rape and pillage with impunity, while yelling racial epithets against the black
African tribes they attack. But someone in this village had an AK-47 and used it
to fend off the attack.

The boy on the ground was slight and wearing old and filthy clothes. He followed
me with his eyes for 10 seconds and then closed them, moaning softly. He had
been shot in the waist and could not move.

The janjaweed are the brutes, armed and paid by the Sudanese government, who
have engaged in a genocidal campaign to destroy villages of African tribes in
the Darfur region of Sudan. Now Sudan, encouraged by the feebleness of the
international community's response, is expanding the genocide by sending the
raiders to attack the same tribes in neighboring Chad.

The villagers vowed not to kill the boy (they were indignant that I thought they
might), and promised to turn him over to the government. And then they showed me
someone still more interesting: another captured janjaweed youth who was able to
tell his story.

This young man was tied up, not particularly harshly, in a hut. He had a bloody
gash on his forehead where he had been hit with a machete, and it seemed he
might lose his eye, but he was easily able to answer questions.

''My name is Isak Muhammad,'' he began. ''I am 21 years old.'' Video of him, of
the boy who was shot and of other scenes from my journey along the Chad-Sudan
border, can be found at www.nytimes.com/kristof.

Mr. Isak was not driven by racist abhorrence for the Wadai tribe of this
village, for he is a Wadai himself. He said a militia leader had simply promised
the raiders $250 if they succeeded in killing the sheik, as a way to terrorize
villagers and drive them away.

Where did the militia leader get his money? Almost certainly from the Sudanese
government.

The Sudanese authorities may not have the money to feed their people, but they
are spending lavishly on arming proxy forces to invade Chad, in hopes of
destabilizing tribes and installing a pro-Sudanese pawn as the leader of Chad.

So the genocide is not just driven by hatred, but also by opportunistic
mercenaries. Consider the founder of the janjaweed, Sheik Musa Hilal, a
ferocious Arab nationalist who has shown particular vigor in slaughtering
members of the Zaghawa tribe. According to a longtime acquaintance of Mr. Musa,
the sheik's own mother is Zaghawa.

As in Rwanda or even during the Holocaust, racist ideologies sometimes disguise
greed, insecurity and other pathologies. Indeed, one of the genocide's aims is
to drive away African tribes to achieve what Hitler called Lebensraum: ''living
space'' for nomadic Arabs and their camels.

So this village is simply a window into an entire region drenched in fear. Men
walk about carrying homemade spears and machetes, and parents tie amulets around
their children's necks.

As we left the village, I met a search party looking for six men who had
disappeared after an attack by other raiders. ''We heard gunshots over there a
couple of minutes ago,'' said one man, pointing to a nearby hill. ''We'll wait
two hours and then go over and see who was shot.''

As the local county leader, Saudi Hassan, puts it, ''The janjaweed are using
humans as targets -- they kill a person as if he were a chicken.'' Whether the
offenders are Nazis or Hutu extremists or Sudan's janjaweed, that is a crime not
only against the victims but also against all humanity. You can get ideas about
what you can do at www.savedarfur.org, the Web site of the Save Darfur
Coalition, which is planning a major rally on the Washington Mall on April 30.

It is brutally demoralizing for people in these villages to be hunted down as if
they were wild beasts, to have their children pulled from their arms and thrown
into burning huts. But we should be just as demoralized by our own indifference.
The shame belongs not to the good people of Darfur and Chad, but to ourselves.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); GENOCIDE (87%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); FACIAL INJURIES (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (52%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Nicholas D Kristof

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); CHAD (94%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Sudan; Chad; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1086 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 14, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Expert Suggests Milosevic Died In a Drug Ploy

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1324 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 13


A top toxicologist in the Netherlands said Monday that he believed that Slobodan
Milosevic, the former Yugoslav leader, had been manipulating medication to fake
a medical condition, a ploy that contributed to his ill heath and may have
played a role in the heart attack that caused his death.

That theory was advanced by Dr. Donald Uges, professor of clinical and forensic
toxicology at the University of Groningen, who suggested that Mr. Milosevic had
been seeking to demonstrate that Dutch doctors could not cure him and that he
should therefore be allowed to seek treatment, and freedom, in Moscow.

He was imprisoned here on charges of war crimes and crimes against humanity,
including genocide during three Balkan wars in the 1990's.

Dr. Uges based his theory on his detection in Mr. Milosevic's blood of a drug
that had not been prescribed for him and that was not only inappropriate but,
under the circumstances, dangerous. Mr. Milosevic, who had complained days
before that he was being poisoned, was found dead on his bed in his prison cell
on Saturday morning.

The drug at issue is a powerful antibiotic known as rifampicin, used to treat
serious bacterial infections like tuberculosis, leprosy and Legionnaire's
disease. Rifampicin, detected in Mr. Milosevic's blood as recently as two weeks
ago, is known to interfere with medications he was taking for high blood
pressure.

An international team of doctors, including Dutch, Belgian and Serbian forensic
specialists, attended an autopsy on Sunday and said in a preliminary report that
Mr. Milosevic had died of a heart attack. Their toxicology tests are due in the
next few days.

But experts from Moscow want to examine the results and perform their own
autopsy in the belief that the previous one was inconclusive or erroneous, a
plan that could delay Milosevic family plans to take the body to Belgrade for
burial.

Other investigations are still going on. The Dutch police and the United Nations
tribunal where Mr. Milosevic was on trial for four years are carrying on their
own investigations into his abrupt death.

The discovery of the antibiotic in Mr. Milosevic's blood has raised a number of
questions, including who brought it into prison and how it ended up in Mr.
Milosevic's system.

The Dutch police have searched for clues in the three rooms most used by Mr.
Milosevic: his private cell, the small room he used as his office, and the room
where he received visitors. They are also investigating the source of the drug,
which is difficult to obtain in the Netherlands.

All physicians treating Mr. Milosevic have reported that they never prescribed
rifampicin for him, confidential court documents show.

Dr. Uges, in a 90-minute telephone interview on Monday, said he was first
contacted in January by a senior toxicologist in The Hague, Dr. Daan Touw, who
had been consulted by the court about Mr. Milosevic recurrent health problems.

''Milosevic had constant high blood pressure, and the cocktail that always works
was having no effect,'' Dr. Uges said. ''So Touw had concluded that another
medicine was being used to stimulate the liver and to neutralize this cocktail.
He asked me for a report, a counter-expertise, because his own report had been
dismissed by Milosevic's lawyers.''

''We both had the idea there was an unknown drug which broke down his own
medication, and we got the idea that the most efficient was rifampicin,'' he
said. ''I wrote a report about this in January, which was sent to the court.''

''In late February,'' he said, ''I was asked to check a blood sample for
rifampicin and found it,'' he said, adding that he was told only later that it
belonged to Mr. Milosevic.

Dr. Uges said it was an unusual test. ''Normally when you screen for toxic drugs
you never screen for rifampicin because it is specific for tuberculosis and
leprosy, so unless you have a reason, you don't look for it,'' he said.

The side effect of the antibiotic, he said, is that it activates the enzymes in
the liver, so his blood pressure drugs would be quickly broken down, keeping his
pressure high.

As he tried to make sense of the drug's use, he said, he learned that Mr.
Milosevic had been insisting on going to Moscow for treatment.

Discussing the case with colleagues, Dr. Uges said he had concluded: ''There was
one escape for Milosevic out of prison, and that was to Moscow where his wife
and son, and friends were. He wanted to go to Moscow on a one-way trip.

''The only way he could do that was to accuse us, to say that Dutch doctors were
not treating him well.''

Once in Moscow, all Mr. Milosevic would have to do was to stop the rifampicin.

Dr. Uges continued: ''The only reason he could have taken it was to keep his
blood pressure high, so he could say, 'I have to stay in Moscow because The
Hague is too dangerous for me.' ''

He said Mr. Milosevic was getting sophisticated advice.

''The provider had to know what the effect of rifampicin was on other drugs,
that it is not normally detected in toxic screenings, unless you look for it,''
he said. ''He had to know what dose to give, sufficient for it to be effective,
but not too high because you get a so-called red sweat: your saliva becomes
red.''

And someone would have to know how to get it to the patient, he continued,
''because you have to take a capsule of it every day to keep your blood pressure
high.''

''It's like a James Bond story,'' Dr. Uges said.

According to the court records, Mr. Milosevic had high blood pressure readings
for months, but the condition did not respond to medication. He was apparently
preparing his ploy as far back as October, court officials said Tuesday, asking
not to be identified because the investigations are still under way.

In November, at his request, he was examined by three doctors, from France,
Russia and Serbia, who recommended a minimum rest of six weeks because his
condition was ''unstable'' and further complications might arise.

Zdenko Tomanovic, one of his lawyers, said at the time that Mr. Milosevic was
already taking a dozen different medicines, and that he had had a brain scan,
but that he had wanted an independent opinion because he was suffering
increasing pains in his ears and head from high blood pressure.

In mid-December, Mr. Milosevic asked to be released temporarily to visit Moscow,
but prosecutors argued against that, saying it was far from certain he would
return. The judges delayed a decision, but in January, he renewed his requests
to go to Moscow. He repeatedly refused permission for his doctors' reports to be
disclosed.

When prosecutors again asked for his medical reports in January, they said they
had information that he was manipulating his health through medicines. He shot
back in court that the information was private.

Dr. Uges said he believed that the antibiotic taken by Mr. Milosevic had not
been acquired in the Netherlands. He said it was hard to obtain, because in the
Netherlands it was prescribed exclusively for tuberculosis and every
tuberculosis case here had to be reported to the authorities, for such patients
were isolated in separate clinics.

He said it was possible that the antibiotic would not be found in Mr.
Milosevic's autopsy because the drug typically disappears after one or two days.
Mr. Milosevic may well have stopped taking it in the end, because on March 7 he
learned the drug had been found in his blood sample, Dr. Uges said.

Mr. Milosevic wrote a letter, dated March 8, to the Russian government, saying
that on March 7, he received a report that ''an extremely strong drug'' was
found in his blood and that doctors were treating him wrongly to silence him.
His lawyer, Mr. Tomanovic, said Mr. Milosevic feared that he was being poisoned.

Mr. Tomanovic said he had delivered this letter, accompanied by a handwritten
note from Mr. Milosevic, to the Russian Embassy in The Hague on Friday morning.
He was found dead the next morning.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At an organization in Belgrade that urged freedom for Slobodan
Milosevic, a mourner held a vigil yesterday. (Photo by Filip Horvat for The New
York Times)(pg. A10)
 Russian Communists gathered yesterday outside the American Embassy in Moscow to
commemorate Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia. (Photo by Mladen Antonov/Agence
France-Presse -- Getty Images)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); ANTIBIOTICS (91%); FORENSICS (90%);
POISONINGS (90%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); TOXICOLOGY
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); AUTOPSIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); DEATHS (89%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%);
HEART DISEASE (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); JAIL SENTENCING (75%);
PRISONS (75%); CORRECTIONS (75%); TUBERCULOSIS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); HYPERTENSION (73%); BACTERIA (72%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); LEPROSY (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (62%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Rifampicin
(Drug); Poisoning and Poisons; Autopsies

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic; Donald (Dr) Uges

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (88%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (94%); SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); MONTENEGRO
(93%); BELGIUM (91%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Russia; Netherlands; Hague (Netherlands); Serbia
and Montenegro; Belgium; Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1087 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic's Trial Ends but Inquiries Continue

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 1001 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 14


The court convened Tuesday for the last time in the war crimes trial of the
former Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic. The court, said the presiding judge,
Patrick Robinson, had been advised of the death of the accused. ''His death,''
he said, ''terminates these proceedings.''

But questions continue to surround the final days of the man who led three wars
during the 1990's and spent four years in a jail cell here, until his death on
Saturday. What is known is that Mr. Milosevic's body was removed Tuesday from a
suburban forensic institute and taken to Schiphol Airport, outside Amsterdam.

Branko Rakic, a lawyer for Mr. Milosevic, said the body would be flown Wednesday
to Belgrade on a regular Jat Airways flight. The funeral is to take place in
Belgrade at the family's request, although no date was set yet, Mr. Rakic said.

Mr. Milosevic's son Marko went to see the body on Tuesday, as did four Russian
doctors who had come at the family's request from Moscow.

The Russians spent the afternoon at the institute and heard a detailed briefing
on the autopsy, which took place on Sunday, but they did not perform their own
autopsy, as had been discussed, according to an official of the institute,
Astrid Rijsdorp.

The Russian doctors were shown the film and photographs of all the examinations
and were given access to all available documents. Toxicological tests are still
incomplete.

Three investigations are under way: the forensic laboratory tests, an inquiry by
the Dutch police and an investigation ordered by the international war crimes
tribunal and led by a tribunal judge.

Charges and countercharges continued on whether Mr. Milosevic's death in his
cell was precipitated by his doctors' treatment, as his lawyers charged, or by
unauthorized drugs he took secretly, as court officials and two Dutch
toxicologists theorized.

Mr. Milosevic arrived at the United Nations detention center here in 2001,
charged with war crimes and crimes against humanity, including genocide. He
represented himself.

His trial was fraught with delays, most of them instigated by Mr. Milosevic and
many related to his health. Since its start, hearings in the trial have been
suspended more than 20 times.

In 2004, as the trial proceeded in fits and starts, often delayed by Mr.
Milosevic's high blood pressure and heart problems, Geoffrey Nice, the lead
prosecutor, argued that the court should impose a defense lawyer on Mr.
Milosevic to keep the trial on track.

In September of that year, Mr. Nice suggested that Mr. Milosevic's delays were
deliberate, citing reports from three different physicians, including a
toxicologist, that suggested he was not taking his prescribed medicines properly
and was using other drugs. He said again that a defense counsel should take over
because Mr. Milosevic had been ''manipulating'' the tribunal.

Mr. Rakic, the lawyer, said Tuesday that ''tribunal officials have lied several
times and they completely neglected his health by not adjusting the therapy when
needed -- that is why the Russian doctors came.''

On Jan. 16 of this year, after new delays due to Mr. Milosevic's health problems
and with time running out, the prosecution filed a motion requesting that trial
hearings be held in his absence. At the same time, Mr. Milosevic was demanding
to go to Moscow for treatment.

The motion said Mr. Milosevic was evidently aware that the trial would end in a
few months, despite his will to prolong it. His strategy, the text said, ''will
likely be to use every means available to him to obstruct the proceedings and
frustrate the conclusion of the trial.''

A review of confidential tribunal documents and records of past proceedings
showed that numerous warnings were issued that Mr. Milosevic was not taking the
right medicine for his heart disease and his high blood pressure.

These documents and courtroom exchanges show that at least for the past two
years, doctors and court officials were aware that at different times he was not
taking his prescribed medicines properly, or was adding his own medicines
secretly to the mix.

In December and January, as the discussions about his health intensified because
he demanded to be treated in Moscow, the warden of the United Nations detention
center advised the court that he was unable to fully monitor what medication Mr.
Milosevic was taking, court officials said.

The warden reported several times to the court that alcohol and several kinds of
nonprescribed medicines were found in Mr. Milosevic's cell, court officials
said. They spoke anonymously because the investigation is still going on.

The warden cited the relatively relaxed prison procedure, which allowed Mr.
Milosevic to move from his cell to his office and the visitors' room, and to
meet regularly with lawyers, witnesses and others.

Two prison guards, who refused to be identified because they had no
authorization to talk to reporters, said cell doors opened usually at 8 a.m. on
weekdays and were locked by 10 for the night. During the day, the 16 prisoners
typically held on each floor could move about on their own floor and use public
spaces like a common room or a gym.

Video cameras were rarely used in the cells, in spaces for conjugal visits or in
the rooms where inmates met confidentially with their lawyers.

Alexandra Milenov, the tribunal spokesman, said Mr. Milosevic was under normal
surveillance, which meant that cells were checked regularly. ''The results of
cell checks are not something we typically disclose,'' she said.

Ms. Milenov said that visitors to the detention center were normally searched
and that lawyers must put their bags through metal detectors. But guards said
the search of visitors was usually not very strict. ''People may be frisked,''
said Ms. Milenov, ''but to my knowledge they do not have a full body search.''

She said guards routinely stood by when inmates took their medicines, although
one of the guards disagreed, saying medicines were often simply distributed.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marko Milosevic, right, son of the late Serbian leader, and
Zdenko Tomanovic, a lawyer, leaving a Dutch forensic office yesterday. (Photo by
Robin Utrecht/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); LITIGATION (90%); AUTOPSIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
FORENSICS (89%); LAWYERS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TOXICOLOGY (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); JUDGES (89%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(86%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
GENOCIDE (78%); AIRPORTS (74%); MEDICAL & DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES (70%);
PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (62%); HYPERTENSION (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL COURT OF JUSTICE (84%) International
Court of Justice (Un) (World Court)

PERSON: Slobodan Milosevic; Marlise Simons; Marko Milosevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (76%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (70%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (91%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Russia; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Kosovo (Serbia); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1088 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

China Hails a Good Nazi and Makes Japan Take Notice

BYLINE: By Howard W. French

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; LETTER FROM CHINA; Pg. 4

LENGTH: 1060 words

DATELINE: NANJING, China


From the outside it does not look like much: the shell of a two-story brick
building with scaffolding running up its sides and, on a drizzly winter day, a
pair of construction workers kicking around in a courtyard littered with
building materials.

But 69 years ago the courtyard was filled with hundreds of Chinese seeking
refuge from Japanese troops who were rampaging through the city, then China's
capital. The invaders subjected Nanjing to a six-week reign of terror, killing
large numbers of Chinese soldiers who had thrown down their weapons and
murdering and raping thousands of civilians.

The property was the home of John Rabe, a Nazi Party member and employee of
Siemens. In addition to sheltering people in his own compound, Mr. Rabe led a
score of other foreigners in the city to form an international safety zone that
shielded more than 200,000 Chinese from the Japanese.

Despite his heroism, Rabe was for decades all but forgotten here. Even the
location of his house, today all but swallowed up by the sprawling campus of
Nanjing University, was unknown.

But now, amid a political and intellectual cold war with Japan that revolves to
a great extent around the history of China's conquest by its neighbor, this
country is seizing on the memory of a man often called ''the Good Nazi,'' and
even China's Oskar Schindler.

Since the publication of Mr. Rabe's diary in 1997, his story has become a
central theme in narratives of the Nanjing Massacre, much as the massacre story
itself has become an important pillar in China's emerging new nationalism. In
addition to the Rabe museum there is a new, minutely detailed 28-volume history
of the massacre, and academics are rethinking the way the episode is taught in
schools.

Why this sudden interest in an event that took place nearly 70 years ago?
Historians cite two reasons: to refute Japanese denials and to encourage
patriotism among Chinese youth.

''The Japanese right is becoming stronger and stronger, and they have denied
causing the war in Asia,'' said Zhang Xianwen, the editor of the recently
published history and director of the Center for the History of Republican China
at Nanjing University. ''We have decided to fight back and force Japan to admit
its responsibility.''

Yet seven decades after the event there is still serious academic dispute, even
over something so fundamental as the death toll. Estimates range from a few tens
of thousands to more than 300,000, the official Chinese number that is literally
set in concrete above the entranceway to the expansive Nanjing Massacre memorial
here.

China is by no means alone in this. In Japan, denial of the killings -- once
restricted to the far-right fringe -- has entered the mainstream as the
country's politics have shifted rightward. Today, in the face of the best
evidence, many Japanese textbooks minimize the event, playing down suggestions
of Japanese atrocities.

Experts say the fact that there were mass killings is beyond any reasonable
dispute. ''It was not until we toured the city that we learned the extent of the
destruction,'' Mr. Rabe wrote on Dec. 13, 1937, just a day after Japan took
control of the city. ''The bodies of the civilians that I examined had bullet
holes in their backs. These people had presumably been fleeing and were shot
from behind.''

His account is backed up by the few remaining survivors from his courtyard, like
Mu Xifu and Li Shizhen, who fled there for shelter and married each other years
later. ''The Japanese were killing people and raping people,'' said Mr. Mu, who
is 83. ''You could see dead bodies in the river and all over the road.''

But official records tend to be scarce or unreliable. During the war Japan
rigorously counted its own dead but paid little attention to Chinese casualties.
The defeated Japanese military also took care to burn its records in the city.

China's accounting of the incident has been consistently marred by politics.

During the war Nanjing was the capital of the Chinese Nationalist government of
Chiang Kai-shek, which mounted a brief investigation after the Japanese defeat
in 1945. From the time of the Communist takeover in 1949 until the early 1980's,
when disputes over Japanese textbooks first arose, Chinese experts say there was
no serious study of the massacre.

More curious still, there is no record to show that Mao, who died in 1976, ever
spoke publicly about it. Save for a brief mention in a 1960 middle school
textbook, the Nanjing Massacre was not featured in Chinese textbooks until the
early 1980's. As recently as the early 1990's, historians and others who wanted
to organize conferences about the event were barred from doing so.

The decades of silence were owing in part to the government's unwillingness to
recognize the resistance that China's Nationalist armies put up against the
Japanese. Although recently the Nationalists' role has been acknowledged more,
official histories of the war have always credited Mao's Communist armies with
defeating Japan.

There was also a deep sense of humiliation surrounding the fall of the city, in
which scarcely trained Chinese conscripts stripped off their uniforms and fled
the invading Japanese. ''It is a natural Chinese character to be ashamed to
speak of being raped, about being massacred while hardly resisting,'' said Shao
Tzuping, a founder of the Alliance in Memory of the Nanjing Massacre, a private
association.

In recent decades, partly in response to Japan, Beijing has itself looked toward
nationalism as a spur to unity and a way to quell social troubles, especially in
light of Marxism's fading relevance. ''It was in the last 20 years, with the
Japanese denials, that we found it essential to intensify our propaganda, to
make sure that our people remember this better,'' said Zhang Lianhong, a
historian at Nanjing University.

Such efforts mirror those of Japan's new rightists, who say their aim is to
bring an end to what they call a masochistic style of teaching history and make
young people feel proud to be Japanese.

''Both the Japanese and the Chinese have clung to a sense of victimhood: the
Chinese for what happened during the war, the Japanese for what happened
after,'' said David Askew, a professor of law at Ritsumeikan University in
Japan. ''They are not so much interested in Nanjing as their country's place in
the world.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: March 20, 2006



CORRECTION: The Letter From China article on Wednesday, about China's new effort
to educate citizens about the Nanjing Massacre of 1937, in which invading
Japanese soldiers killed many thousands of Chinese, misstated the affiliation of
Zhang Lianhong, a historian who said the campaign was partly a response to
Japan's denials of wartime atrocities. He is at Nanjing Normal University, not
Nanjing University.

The Letter From China article on Wednesday, about China's new effort to educate
citizens about the Nanjing Massacre of 1937, in which invading Japanese soldiers
killed many thousands of Chinese, misstated the affiliation of Zhang Lianhong, a
historian who said the campaign was partly a response to Japan's denials of
wartime atrocities. He is at Nanjing Normal University, not Nanjing University.

GRAPHIC: Photos: The house of John Rabe, who saved many Chinese lives, is being
restored as a museum.
 In the Nanjing Memorial Hall, commemorating the massacre by Japanese troops in
1937, a wall bears victims' names. (Photographs by Ryan Pyle for The New York
Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS & COMPONENTS (78%); HISTORIC DISTRICTS & STRUCTURES
(78%); HISTORY (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%); GENOCIDE (74%);
HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (72%); POLITICS (71%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (70%); MUSEUMS
& GALLERIES (69%) History; Historic Buildings and Sites; War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity; Public Opinion; Restoration and Rehabilitation;
Monuments and Memorials

COMPANY: SIEMENS AG (56%)

ORGANIZATION: Siemens Ag

TICKER: SIN (SWX) (56%); SIE (LSE) (56%); SIE (FRA) (56%); SIE (BIT) (56%)

INDUSTRY: NAICS335110 ELECTRIC LAMP BULB & PART MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS334513
INSTRUMENTS & RELATED PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FOR MEASURING, DISPLAYING &
CONTROLLING INDUSTRIAL PROCESS VARIABLES (56%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR &
RELATED DEVICE MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS334210 TELEPHONE APPARATUS
MANUFACTURING (56%)

PERSON: John Rabe; Howard W French

STATE: JIANGSU, CHINA (93%); EAST CHINA (79%)

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); JAPAN (94%); ASIA (79%)

REGION: China; Nanjing (China)  ; Japan; China

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1090 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 15, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Lawyer Thrust Into Spotlight After Misstep in Terror Case

BYLINE: By STEPHEN LABATON and MATTHEW L. WALD

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; National Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1270 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 14


In a city of lawyers, Carla J. Martin has become the most talked-about lawyer in
town.

Ms. Martin, an obscure official in the counsel's office at the Transportation
Security Administration, now appears to bear responsibility for undercutting the
government's long-running effort to execute the only man tried in an American
courtroom for involvement in the Sept. 11 attacks.

Known among her peers as an aggressive, largely behind-the-scenes courtroom
strategist, she is said by the judge in the case to have committed a potentially
devastating blunder of the sort that law students are routinely warned about:
coaching witnesses.

Dealing a major setback to the government's prosecution of Zacarias Moussaoui,
Judge Leonie M. Brinkema ruled on Tuesday that because of three significant
instances of misbehavior by government lawyers during the trial, most notably
the missteps by Ms. Martin, she was barring the prosecutors from using any
testimony or evidence from a handful of government aviation officials. [Page
A24.]

Ms. Martin has declined to explain her actions in court or to reporters, and
Judge Brinkema said Ms. Martin's lawyer expected his client to invoke her right
against self-incrimination. But e-mail messages made public in the Moussaoui
case this week, along with accounts from colleagues and supervisors, paint a
picture of a lawyer who was often well regarded but also had a reputation for
sometimes pushing too hard.

Ms. Martin, 51, is a former flight attendant at World Airways, where she often
flew between the United States and Germany because she spoke German. She began
working at the Federal Aviation Administration before she completed law school
at American University's Washington College of Law in 1989.

Ms. Martin has almost no experience in criminal prosecutions because most of her
work has involved defending the government in civil lawsuits. She moved to the
Transportation Security Administration when it was created in 2002.

Some lawyers who have worked with Ms. Martin in other cases said they were
stunned by the events in the Moussaoui case.

''She's articulate and forceful and aggressive and smart,'' said Thomas J.
Whalen, an aviation lawyer at Condon & Forsyth who has worked on her side in
some cases and against her in others. ''I'm really surprised about what's
happened. It's more than being tough and aggressive.''

In the Moussaoui case, her communications with witnesses, and new evidence that
surfaced Tuesday that she told some witnesses not to cooperate with defense
lawyers, puts the prosecution in the position of having to investigate and
sharply criticize a government lawyer who has worked on the case.

In a different case, in which Ms. Martin tried to keep vital evidence out of the
hands of a lawyer on the ground that he had been associated with a civil rights
group, she was accused by the other side of overstepping court boundaries and
running roughshod over standard courtroom procedure in a zeal to protect
national security.

Ms. Martin's mother, Jean Martin Lay, said she spoke to her daughter Monday
night.

''She was so devastated,'' Ms. Lay said in a telephone interview from her home
in Knoxville, Tenn. ''She said she just didn't hear the judge.''

Ms. Lay said her daughter was in the courtroom when Judge Brinkema issued the
order on handling witnesses, but was probably concentrating on something else
''instead of being mindful.''

The judge's written order was issued last month, and Ms. Martin's contact with
the witnesses occurred last week, according to e-mail messages made public by
the court. The order was meant to sequester witnesses so their testimony would
not be corrupted. It barred the witnesses from receiving the testimony of other
witnesses or receiving any news accounts of the trial. The e-mail messages and
the recent testimony show that Ms. Martin provided testimony and advice to seven
witnesses.

Ms. Martin's mother said her impression was that her daughter found her work at
the Transportation Security Administration ''not the most satisfying or
rewarding type job'' because it did not involve any big cases. Her current
salary, according to a government employee database, is about $120,000 a year.

Others, some speaking for attribution and others not, said they could see why
Ms. Martin would find herself in trouble.

Claudio Manno, who at the time of the Sept. 11 attack was the assistant
administrator for security at the F.A.A., testified Tuesday that Ms. Martin had
taken up too much time second-guessing him and bombarding him with e-mail
messages and requests.

''She tended to go off target and wasted our time,'' Mr. Manno said. ''We didn't
think it was pertinent.''

A. P. Pishevar, a Maryland lawyer who tangled with Ms. Martin in another case,
said her conduct in that case ''sticks out like a sore thumb.''

According to court records, she led an effort on behalf of the government to try
to intervene in a defamation, discrimination and malicious prosecution lawsuit
brought against Lufthansa by one of Mr. Pishevar's clients. The client was
Kamyar Kalantar-Zadeh, an Iranian-born doctor, now an American citizen and
associate professor of medicine at U.C.L.A. who was arrested and spent a night
in jail after complaining about discriminatory treatment by Lufthansa officials
at Dulles International Airport.

Lufthansa tried to have the case dismissed by filing a secret motion that said
it had detained Mr. Kalantar to follow a secret F.A.A. security directive.
According to court records, Ms. Martin urged Lufthansa to withhold the summary
judgment motion and the security directive from both Mr. Kalantar and his
lawyer, Mr. Pishevar.

Court records show that Ms. Martin said to one Lufthansa lawyer that ordinarily
much of the evidence would be available to lawyers for a plaintiff. But she said
the government sought to keep all the material from Mr. Pishevar, an American
citizen and member of the bar in Washington, Maryland and the United States
Supreme Court, because he had worked for an organization that fights
discrimination in the United States against Iranians.

Judge Henry H. Kennedy Jr. of the Federal District Court in Washington
ultimately denied the effort to dismiss the case and directed the government to
turn over the material, which remains under seal, Mr. Pishevar said. The case
has not yet been set for trial.

Mr. Pishevar said he still felt numb from his experience with Ms. Martin, who he
said was ''from behind the scenes, trying to pull many of the strings.''

Told about the latest developments in the Moussaoui case, Mr. Pishevar paused,
then said, ''Res ipsa loquitur,'' a Latin legal term meaning, ''The thing speaks
for itself.''

Others describe a more positive experience with Ms. Martin.

One of her earliest assignments was to monitor the trial brought by the
survivors of those who died when Pan Am Flight 103 exploded over Lockerbie,
Scotland. Her main job, according to a news account at the time and a lawyer
involved in the case, was to get the judge to close the courtroom any time
sensitive information was to come out.

James P. Kreindler, an aviation lawyer representing the survivors, said he could
not account for what had happened in the Moussaoui trial. ''When one is caught
up in a massive bureaucracy, you may lose part of your perspective,'' Mr.
Kreindler said. ''She may have lost a proper perspective on the proper role for
any attorney involved in either the criminal or the civil justice system.''

''Carla is in my experience certainly not a bad person,'' he added, ''and this
is a very, very unfortunate thing to see happen.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Carla J. Martin is accused of coaching witnesses. (Photo by
Shawn Thew/European Pressphoto Agency)(pg. A1)
 A judge said Carla J. Martin improperly gave parts of trial proceedings to
witnesses yet to testify. (Photo by Shawn Thew/European Pressphoto Agency)(pg.
A24)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: LAWYERS (92%); TERRORISM (91%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%);
AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (89%); WITNESSES
(89%); AVIATION TRANSPORTATION LAW (89%); JUDGES (78%); LITIGATION (78%);
SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(76%); TESTIMONY (76%); HIJACKING (76%); ETHICS (75%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL
SCHOOLS (75%); CIVIL AVIATION (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); ELECTRONIC MAIL (72%); AIRLINES
(72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (66%); MILITARY WEAPONS (62%) Terrorism; World Trade Center
(NYC); Pentagon Building; Airlines and Airplanes; Hijacking; United States
Armament and Defense; Terrorism; Capital Punishment; Sentences (Criminal);
Ethics; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US TRANSPORTATION SECURITY ADMINISTRATION (91%) Transportation
Security Administration

PERSON: Zacarias Moussaoui; Leonie M (Judge) Brinkema; Stephen Labaton; Matthew
L Wald; Carla J Martin

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); GERMANY (71%)

REGION: New York City; Washington (DC)

LOAD-DATE: March 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1092 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Milosevic's Body Taken to Serbia; Funeral a Political Issue

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 15


The body of Slobodan Milosevic was returned to Serbia on Wednesday, providing a
test for a government loath to give its former president anything resembling a
state funeral.

The coffin, transferred by plane from the Netherlands, where Mr. Milosevic had
been held on war crimes charges, sat outdoors in the sleet while paperwork was
completed at the airport.

But as the body was driven slowly out of the airport, the coffin draped with a
Serbian flag, hundreds of supporters gathered to throw roses. Members of the
Socialist Party, which Mr. Milosevic led even while he was facing the war crimes
charges in The Hague, said they hoped to erect a tent in front of the federal
Parliament of Serbia and Montenegro where people could pay their respects.

Party officials said they expected thousands of supporters to gather there
before Saturday, when the funeral will take place in Pozarevac, Mr. Milosevic's
hometown, 30 miles south of Belgrade.

Scenes like that are something the Serbian government is hoping to avoid. For
the last six years Serbia has struggled to convince the West that it wants to
integrate with European and Atlantic institutions after years of war.

The government is also under substantial pressure from the European Union to
hand over the former commander of the Bosnian Serb army, Gen. Ratko Mladic, as a
condition for continuing talks on admitting Serbia to the Union.

A mass outpouring of grief for the man widely blamed for the loss of as many as
250,000 lives and the destruction of Yugoslavia would be the worst message to
the West, in the minds of many government officials. It would seem that in
death, Mr. Milosevic, a onetime Communist Party functionary, is still angering
opponents who blame him for provoking three Balkan wars.

Political analysts here say they fully expect the Socialist Party to try to
capitalize on any pro-Milosevic sentiment, though the party received barely 5
percent of the vote in the latest Serbian parliamentary elections, in 2003,
after dominating the republic throughout the 1990's.

The ultranationalist Radical Party, a former Milosevic ally and now holder of
the largest number of seats in the Serbian Parliament, has also lent its weight
to the funeral preparations. The party's leader in Serbia, Tomislav Nikolic,
called on retired members of the police and army to pay their respects in
uniform.

''They will bring people in from all over Serbia,'' said Bratislav Grubacic, the
editor of the VIP news agency and a political commentator. He added, ''And with
coverage from all the foreign TV networks, we shall look like complete idiots,''
pining for a leader whom a majority of Serbs voted out in 2000.

But on Wednesday evening it was not clear where or even if the government would
allow the body to be displayed in public.

Socialist Party officials warned that there was nothing the government could do
to stop its preparations. ''The government cannot interfere with people freely
expressing their respects for the late president,'' said Vladimir Krsljanin, Mr.
Milosevic's former foreign policy adviser.

The funeral itself has been the subject of debate, with the Milosevic family
vacillating between a burial in Serbia or in Moscow, where his widow and son
live.

Lawyers for the family sought guarantees from the government that it would not
arrest his widow, Mirjana Markovic, who is accused of selling apartments
illegally. Although a warrant for her arrest was temporarily withdrawn on
Tuesday, the requirement that she appear in court was not, but ultimately the
family decided to hold the funeral in Serbia. Ms. Markovic will not attend.

Mr. Milosevic's death appears to have reinforced the already strong hostility on
the part of Serbs to the war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Even Serbia's leading reforming politician, President Boris Tadic, said in an
interview on Tuesday with The Associated Press that he held the court
responsible for the death, although he added that it would not affect the
country's cooperation with the tribunal.

Mr. Tadic's view appears to have gotten some support from Dr. Leo Bokeria, a
Russian heart surgeon reviewing the results of an official autopsy conducted by
Dutch doctors. Dr. Bokeria, director of the Bakulev Center for Cardiovascular
Surgery in Moscow, told reporters in The Hague that Mr. Milosevic's death could
have been prevented.

''That's my opinion, that his death was preventable,'' the doctor said.
''Absolutely. Because he had a pathology which is treated at anyplace in the
world at the moment.''

The Russians, strong allies of the Serbs, agree. In Moscow, the Russian
Parliament passed a declaration dismissing the work of the Hague tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia and requesting that its operations halt immediately.

But Mr. Grubacic, the editor and commentator, said that over time, ''Milosevic's
death won't change the direction of the government.''

''You'll see -- in two weeks' time you will have the same pressure to hand over
Mladic,'' he said. ''Everything will have gone back to normal.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Officials of the Socialist Party were on hand yesterday to meet
the coffin of former President Slobodan Milosevic as it arrived in Belgrade. Mr.
Milosevic's funeral is to be held on Saturday in Pozarevac, his hometown. (Photo
by Ivan Milutinovic/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES
(89%); POLITICS (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
EUROPEAN UNION (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); GENOCIDE (72%) War Crimes, Genocide
and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (98%); SERBIA (97%); NETHERLANDS (93%); MONTENEGRO
(93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Belgrade (Serbia); Pozarevac (Serbia); Serbia and
Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1093 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Some Milosevic Doctors Call Care by Tribunal Inadequate

BYLINE: By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL and MARLISE SIMONS; Elisabeth Rosenthal reported
from Rome for this article, and Marlise Simons from The Hague.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 1312 words

DATELINE: ROME, March 15


Frustrated and filled with skepticism about Slobodan Milosevic's litany of
medical complaints, the tribunal at The Hague at times failed to investigate
them adequately, several doctors who had recently examined Mr. Milosevic, the
former Serbian leader, said this week.

''His medical condition was not good, so we asked for additional tests to
evaluate his cardiac situation,'' said Dr. Florence Leclercq, a French
cardiologist who examined Mr. Milosevic for about three hours in November. ''But
these investigations were never performed, and now that's a problem.'' A
tribunal official said it was not possible to comment while an inquiry was under
way.

For months before his death last weekend, Mr. Milosevic and the United Nations
war crimes tribunal at The Hague had been sparring over his health: was he so
perilously ill that he needed medical evacuation or was he exaggerating the
usual maladies of a 64-year-old man to evade justice? His death ended
prematurely a four-year war crimes trial, suspended more than 20 times because
of his illness, but only deepened the medical mystery.

Preliminary autopsy results said he had died of a heart attack, although doctors
who examined him just months ago said they did not believe he had significant
heart disease. Likewise, tests done before he died detected the presence of a
medicine he had not been prescribed, one that would have put him at grave risk
by reducing the effectiveness of his blood pressure pills.

Court officials and some scientists have been quick to insinuate that Mr.
Milosevic was secretly ingesting the extra medicine to exacerbate his medical
problems, so that he could be transferred to a clinic in Moscow, where his
family now lives.

But some confidants, including doctors who spoke to him in his last weeks of
life, said Mr. Milosevic was alarmed by his poor health and feared that prison
doctors, as well as Dutch special consultants, were providing inadequate
treatment.

Dr. Patrick Barriot, another French doctor who frequently visited Mr. Milosevic,
said he suffered symptoms of increasingly severe high blood pressure in the six
months before his death, including headaches, visual changes and a constant
thrumming noise in his ear. The pressure routinely read 180/110, he said, well
above safe limits.

''Each time I saw him, he was clearly deteriorating, more and more tired,'' said
Dr. Barriot, a former military doctor who came to know Mr. Milosevic when
stationed in what was then Yugoslavia, who has testified as a defense witness.

Although long-term high blood pressure strains the heart and increases the risk
of heart attack, Mr. Milosevic did not have any classic symptoms of heart
disease, like chest pain, Dr. Leclercq said. When she heard the autopsy verdict,
she said she was surprised.

Attempts to make sense of the death are hampered by the fact that reams of
medical exams, a list of the medicines he was taking and details of the autopsy
are regarded as confidential by the court. A toxicology report is expected this
week.

What is clear is that recently Mr. Milosevic's blood pressure -- a problem since
the start of his four-year trial -- became increasingly difficult to control,
and that prison doctors long suspected that he was not taking his medicine, said
Donald Uges, one of two Dutch toxicologists consulted on the case.

After several weeks of sleuthing, the toxicologists recently determined that Mr.
Milosevic ingested the antibiotic rifampicin, which would blunt the effect of
his blood pressure medicine. Dr. Uges, as well as tribunal officials speaking on
condition of anonymity because an investigation is under way, suggested that the
antibiotic was taken intentionally, smuggled in by visitors.

But Dr. Barriot dismissed that charge, saying that Mr. Milosevic had called him
several times recently ''very anxious about his blood pressure'' and about
whether detention center guards were giving him the right medicine, a worry he
also brought up in court.

Dr. Leclercq said that when she and two other doctors examined Mr. Milosevic on
Nov. 4, ''his cardiac situation was extremely difficult to evaluate.''

Prison officials assured her that some cardiac tests, like an ultrasound, had
been done and were ''normal,'' but they could not show her the actual test
results, leaving her to conclude that more was needed, she said from her clinic
at the Arnaud de Villeneuve hospital, in Montpellier.

''What was shocking was that in four years lots of tests and exams on his heart
had never been done,'' said Dr. Vukasin Andric, a Serb who also examined Mr.
Milosevic on Nov. 4.

Alexandra Milenov, a tribunal spokeswoman, said that Mr. Milosevic had been
repeatedly examined by independent specialists and that medicine had to be taken
under supervision, though in court papers the prison warden complained that he
could not properly monitor Mr. Milosevic's medicine intake, because of his
relatively unencumbered access to visitors.

Carla Del Ponte, the tribunal's chief prosecutor, said that she knew Mr.
Milosevic was ill and that she had a folder of 150 motions and reports from
various doctors concerning his health. ''If there was one person who was not
overlooked it was Milosevic,'' she said.

Last fall, because of concerns about his declining health -- notably severe
phantom noise in his ears -- Mr. Milosevic requested a consultation with the
outside doctors, which Dr. Barriot helped to arrange. The experts included Dr.
Leclercq, Dr. Margarita Shumilina, a Russian vascular specialist, and Dr.
Vukasin Andric, an ear specialist.

Dr. Shumilina and Dr. Andric concluded that his hearing problems were ''symptoms
of disordered brain circulation because of hypertension,'' according to a
confidential report, part of which was read to a reporter by a lawyer familiar
with the case.

The team suggested a six-week break in the trial to ''reduce or at least
stabilize'' Mr. Milosevic's symptoms, a suggestion that was met with skepticism
by the court, whose own experts had concluded the hearing problems were not
indicative of serious vascular problems, and that rest would have no effect.
After more than four years of proceedings, the judges were also under some
pressure to complete the trial.

Judge Iain Bonomy said the whole consultation was highly suspect because of
political ties between Dr. Andric and Mr. Milosevic, but the trial was suspended
for one month.

On the day the court was to adjourn last Christmas for a holiday break, Mr.
Milosevic upped the ante, seeking to fly to Moscow for treatment, but he was
turned down.

By January his blood pressure readings became increasingly erratic, with levels
as high as 260/180, Dr. Andric has said in the Serbian press. Irate at charges
that he had not been taking his medicine, Mr. Milosevic agreed to new blood
tests.

It was in part that examination that led prison doctors to suspect foul play,
perhaps by Mr. Milosevic, Dr. Uges said. Was there some substance that would
nullify the blood pressure medicines? ''We realized that the only thing that
could do this was rifampicin,'' he said. A blood sample was found to contain the
compound.

Some experts said rifampicin itself was unlikely to explain Mr. Milosevic's
death, since he did not die of a stroke, a far more common problem with high
blood pressure. Also, its effects on blood pressure could have been counteracted
by increasing the dose of his blood pressure medicines, said Joris Delanghe, a
toxicologist at Ghent University.

Mr. Milosevic, who had a history of smoking and high blood pressure, may well
also have had undetected heart disease, doctors said.

''Refractory hypertension exists, and some patients are hard to treat,'' Dr.
Delanghe said. He added that for Mr. Milosevic, the mental stress of being
imprisoned must have been ''a major cardiovascular risk factor in itself.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Carla Del Ponte, the chief prosecutor at the United Nations
tribunal, said Slobodan Milosevic's health concerns had not been overlooked.
(Photo by Robin Utrecht/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INVESTIGATIONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (90%);
HEART DISEASE (90%); HYPERTENSION (89%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (89%); AUTOPSIES
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); CARDIOLOGY
(77%); WITNESSES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); DEATHS (74%); GENOCIDE
(73%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (72%); TESTIMONY (72%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Elisabeth Rosenthal; Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); MONTENEGRO
(90%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Hague (Netherlands); Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1096 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 16, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Top Muslims Guilty Of Abuses in Bosnia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 226 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 15


United Nations war crimes judges on Wednesday found two former Bosnian Muslim
army commanders guilty of atrocities committed by their troops on Bosnian Croat
and Bosnian Serb civilians during the war in Bosnia, from 1992 to 1995.

Judges at The Hague tribunal sentenced a former general, Enver Hadzihasanovic,
to five years in prison and Amir Kubura, who had the rank of brigadier, to two
and a half years. The judge said time already spent in detention would be taken
into account, meaning that Mr. Kubura would be freed shortly.

The men, among the highest-ranking Bosnian Muslims to stand trial in The Hague,
were found guilty of failing to prevent or punish atrocities by troops under
their command, including foreign Islamic fighters.

The tribunal said prosecutors had failed to convince the court that the men had
full knowledge of the abuses and effective control over the perpetrators, who in
many cases were the foreign fighters.

Many came from North Africa and the Middle East to support their fellow Muslims
during the war in the former Yugoslavia. They moved from giving out food to
local Muslims to fighting alongside their forces.

The two men were charged with commanding army units that killed and abused
Bosnian Serb and Bosnian Croat civilians during Muslim attacks on Croat forces
in central Bosnia between January 1993 and January 1994.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RELIGION (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); VERDICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ARMED FORCES (90%); ARMIES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GENOCIDE (79%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(79%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); SENTENCING
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PRISONS (77%); JAIL SENTENCING
(73%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Decisions and Verdicts;
Sentences (Criminal); Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%)

PERSON: Enver Hadzihasanovic; Amir (Col) Kubura

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (98%); CROATIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);
NETHERLANDS (92%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1097 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2006 Friday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

John Ashcroft Sets Up Shop As Well-Connected Lobbyist

BYLINE: By LESLIE WAYNE

SECTION: Section C; Column 4; Business/Financial Desk; Same Washington,
Different Office; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1613 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


As attorney general, John Ashcroft was a model of moral rectitude to his
conservative supporters. To his liberal detractors, he was overly
self-righteous. Mr. Ashcroft sees himself simply as a man of integrity, and to
him that is worth a lot.

So in the era of the Jack Abramoff scandal, Mr. Ashcroft has become a Washington
lobbyist, setting himself up as something of an anti-Abramoff and marketing his
insider's knowledge of how Washington works.

To do so, he has amassed a staff of Republican insiders and rented fancy
offices. For corporations seeking contracts from the growing homeland security
budget, Mr. Ashcroft promises to draw on his central role in the war on terror
and in helping set up the Department of Homeland Security. For companies in
trouble with regulators, he says his experience in cracking down on corporate
corruption can provide valuable insights.

''Clients would call in an individual who has a reputation for the highest level
of integrity,'' he said in an interview in his office. ''Those who have been in
government should not be forbidden from helping people deal with government,
which is what I see myself doing.'' In the hourlong interview, Mr. Ashcroft used
the word ''integrity'' scores of times.

Since opening his office in September, he has lined up 21 clients, turning down
two for every one accepted, he said.

Still, some critics find his move from the nation's chief law enforcement
officer to K Street, the heart of the lobbying world, to be as undignified as it
is unusual.

Danielle Brian, executive director of the Project on Government Oversight, said
that because Mr. Ashcroft had worked only in government, ''he cannot claim to
have any business expertise.''

''What is he selling,'' Ms. Brian asked, ''other than connections and knowledge
of how to game the system from being attorney general?''

One of Mr. Ashcroft's newest clients is ChoicePoint, a broker of consumer data
that is increasingly being used by the government to keep tabs on people within
the United States. The company received millions of dollars in contracts from
the Justice Department under Mr. Ashcroft as part of the war on terror and has
now hired him to find more.

''The Ashcroft Group contacted us and we initiated a relationship,'' said Chuck
Jones, a ChoicePoint spokesman. ''He's got a lot of knowledge that could benefit
ChoicePoint.''

Before the 9/11 attacks, there were few commercial opportunities at the Justice
Department. Since then, the department has become a major clearinghouse for
large contracts related to homeland security.

Mr. Ashcroft promises to guide companies through the maze, saying, ''I have been
at the heart of the war on terror.''

In 2001, only 15 companies lobbied officials regarding domestic security. By
2004, that number had grown to 861, according to the Center for Public
Integrity, a nonpartisan watchdog group in Washington. Total federal spending
aimed at preventing terrorism and other risks, including Homeland Security and
other agencies, is $54.8 billion and is expected to rise to $58 billion in 2007.

''You want someone who knows the inner workings of homeland security because
it's such a tangled mess,'' said Brian W. Ruttenbur, an industry analyst with
Morgan Keegan, a brokerage firm. ''Knowing somebody who understands the
structure and can make introductions is invaluable. When you are a company
you're focusing on making a product, and marketing it to government is very
different.''

After helping prosecute executives at Enron and WorldCom, Mr. Ashcroft also says
he can counsel troubled companies on how to deal with government regulators and
avoid the fate of Arthur Andersen, the accounting firm that collapsed after it
was indicted in the Enron scandal.

''They need someone who can take threatening circumstances and neutralize
them,'' Mr. Ashcroft said. ''I'll be a lightning rod for people facing serious
challenges.''

Mr. Ashcroft is the only former Bush cabinet member and, by anyone's reckoning,
the only former attorney general to have registered as a lobbyist. Many former
attorneys general have had lucrative careers as political fixers without calling
themselves lobbyists; in that sense, Mr. Ashcroft is being more transparent than
his predecessors.

In a mission statement to prospective clients, he boasts of his connections. Mr.
Ashcroft and ''his talented team,'' the statement says, ''have developed and
cultivated close relationships with leaders in the corporate world as well as
with officials in the top levels of the U.S. Government.''

His staff includes David T. Ayres, his former chief of staff; Juleanna Glover
Weiss, a Republican lobbyist and a former press secretary to Vice President Dick
Cheney; and a Republican fund-raiser, William C. T. Gaynor II, who helped raise
more than $300 million in the 2004 election. He opened his office 10 months
after leaving the Justice Department.

Fellow Republicans praise his venture. ''To have someone around to guide you to
protect the assets of the corporation, it would be John Ashcroft who you would
want at the table,'' said Donald L. Evans, the former commerce secretary. ''Any
C.E.O. in the 21st century would want him.''

After three decades in public office in Missouri and Washington, Mr. Ashcroft,
63, says he has decided to make up for lost time financially. Before joining the
Bush administration, Mr. Ashcroft was a United States senator, and the governor
and attorney general in Missouri.

His most recent federal financial disclosure statement showed Mr. Ashcroft to be
comfortable but not particularly wealthy, with a portfolio valued at $500,000 to
$1.5 million and a state of Missouri pension. He is also eligible for a federal
pension.

So after having a salary that topped out at $175,700 as attorney general, Mr.
Ashcroft is running his firm and hitting the speakers' circuit, speaking nearly
once a week for a $75,000 fee. In addition, Mr. Ashcroft has been given equity
stakes in private companies that have hired him, betting on a future gain should
they go public. The firm did not disclose the companies.

To maintain his conservative ties, Mr. Ashcroft signed up as a visiting law
professor at Regent University, a Christian graduate school founded by Pat
Robertson, the political evangelical broadcaster. And he is writing a book about
his years in the Bush cabinet, to be published by Center Street, an imprint of
Time Warner Books.

One of his first clients was the software giant Oracle, which was seeking
Justice Department approval for a $5.8 billion takeover of Siebel Systems, its
largest competitor. Oracle hired Mr. Ashcroft, although as attorney general he
opposed a $10 billion Oracle-PeopleSoft merger.

Just a month after the Ashcroft Group came on the scene, the Siebel takeover
sailed through. Oracle declined to comment, as did the Justice Department.

While Mr. Ashcroft is prohibited by law from contacting the department directly,
he was able to weigh in with strategic advice for Oracle from the sidelines,
although he would not say what that advice was. Mr. Ashcroft said his only
direct contact with the Justice Department was to attend its Christmas party
last year.

Other clients include eBay, Israel Aircraft Industries International, LTU
Technologies and the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. For
eBay, the Ashcroft group will provide public relations advice for a patent
infringement case to come before the Supreme Court. The Israeli aerospace
company hired Mr. Ashcroft as it seeks $2 billion in military contracts from
South Korea in competition with Boeing.

LTU Technologies, a software company, hired Mr. Ashcroft to find more customers
for its visual imaging technology, which it already sells to the F.B.I. and
customs officials.

Mr. Ashcroft declined to identify his other clients except to say, ''It's not
Billy Bob's car wash in Peoria.''

Mr. Ashcroft first dealt with ChoicePoint after 9/11, when the Justice
Department began to press for increased funds for the products that ChoicePoint
sells; databanks full of details about the financial and personal lives of
Americans.

In the war on terror, the government is increasingly turning to these private
intelligence companies. Software from a ChoicePoint subsidiary was used by the
military to help track down Saddam Hussein.

Today, government contracts represent about 14 percent of ChoicePoint's $1
billion in annual revenue. A further opportunity for Mr. Ashcroft arises from an
investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission into insider trading by
the company's chief executive and chief operating officer.

Chris Jay Hoofnagle, senior counsel at the Electronic Privacy Information
Center, a Washington digital rights group, said Mr. Ashcroft had the inside
edge.

''As attorney general, Ashcroft created the conditions that allow companies like
ChoicePoint to flourish,'' Mr. Hoofnagle said. ''Ashcroft can open doors that
others can't.''

In counseling troubled companies, Mr. Ashcroft is entering a crowded field where
fees can go as high as $900 an hour and where prominent former government
officials, among them Richard L. Thornburgh, a former attorney general, and
Richard C. Breeden, a former S.E.C. chairman, dominate the business.

''Every major law firm is trying to do special investigations,'' said Joseph A.
Grundfest, a former S.E.C. commissioner.

But Mr. Ashcroft brushes away any doubters. ''I've been stunned at how good
people have been to me,'' he said. ''And that kindness has been reflected in
business opportunities. It's been gratifying, and I'm earning significant
multiples of what I've ever earned before.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: April 13, 2006



CORRECTION: A chart on March 17 with an article about the formation of a
Washington lobbying firm by former Attorney General John Ashcroft omitted a
credit. The chart, showing what other former attorneys general have done after
leaving office, was based in part on research by The American Lawyer magazine.

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Ashcroft, the former attorney general, at the offices of
the Ashcroft Group in Washington. (Photo by David Scull for The New York
Times)(pg. C1)
 (pg. C4)Chart: ''Former Attorneys General: Many Hats, But Never A
Lobbyist's''Janet Reno, 67Bill Clinton, 1993-2001Largely retired from public
life but is co-chairwoman of the American Judicature Society's commission on
forensic science and public policy. Lectures on issues of criminal justice
Failed in a 2002 Democratic primary bid for Florida governor.Richard Thornburgh,
73Ronald Reagan and George Bush, 1988-91Counselor in the Washington office of
Kirkpatrick & Lockhart Nicholson Graham. Served on independent panels
investigating the WorldCom bankruptcy and discredited broadcasts by CBS about
President Bush's National Guard service.Edwin Meese III, 74Ronald Reagan,
1985-88Distinguished fellow at the Heritage Foundation and visiting fellow at
the Hoover Institution at Stanford University. Writes and speaks frequently on
homeland security, counterterrorism, civil justice reform and immigration. Sits
on several nonprofit boards promoting conservative causes.Griffin Bell, 87Jimmy
Carter, 1977-79Senior counsel at King & Spalding in Atlanta. Named chief judge
for the Military Commissions Review Panel to oversee military tribunals of
accused enemy combatants. Has defended corporations charged with crimes.Ramsey
Clark, 78Lyndon Johnson, 1967-69Defense lawyer and human rights activist.
Founded International Action Center, a New York nonprofit group. Has advised
David Koresh, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, Slobodan Milosevic and Muammar
el-Qaddafi. Has served on Saddam Hussein's defense team.Benjamin Civiletti,
70Jimmy Carter, 1979-81Chairman of Venable, a Baltimore law firm. Served on
numerous corporate boards and the Teamsters oversight board. Specializes in
white-collar crime and commercial litigation. Currently on MBNA board.Nicholas
Katzenbach, 84Lyndon Johnson, 1965-66Chairman of MCI. Served as I.B.M. general
counsel for 15 years, and appointed to WorldCom board just before its exit from
bankruptcy. Served on civic boards to combat drug use in New York and analyze
computer trading for the N.Y.S.E.(pg. C4)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CONSERVATISM (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); POLITICS (90%); BUDGETS
(90%); LIBERALISM (90%); INTERVIEWS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); SCANDALS (78%); LEGAL SERVICES (78%); CORPORATE
WRONGDOING (77%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (75%); CORRUPTION (72%); WAR & CONFLICT
(70%); EXECUTIVES (68%) United States Politics and Government; Lobbying and
Lobbyists; Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; Computers and the Internet; United
States Politics and Government; Terrorism; Biographical Information; United
States Politics and Government

COMPANY: CHOICEPOINT INC (81%)

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY (91%); STANFORD UNIVERSITY
(59%); AMERICAN JUDICATURE SOCIETY (59%); HOOVER INSTITUTION ON WAR REVOLUTION &
PEACE (59%); THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION (59%) Homeland Security Department;
Choicepoint Inc; Justice Department

INDUSTRY: NAICS561499 ALL OTHER BUSINESS SUPPORT SERVICES (81%); NAICS524298 ALL
OTHER INSURANCE RELATED ACTIVITIES (81%); NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (81%);
SIC7374 COMPUTER PROCESSING & DATA PREPARATION & PROCESSING SERVICES (81%)

PERSON: RONALD REAGAN (92%); BILL CLINTON (77%); JIMMY CARTER (69%); SADDAM
HUSSEIN (54%) John Ashcroft; Jack Abramoff; Leslie Wayne

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1098 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 17, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

For Milosevic Old Guard, Roses and Haunting Memories

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 16


They were his deepest loyalists, only 1,000 or so strong, most of them old and
quietly angry. ''He killed no one,'' insisted Jugoslava Lekic, 73, named for the
nation, now defunct, that she believes Slobodan Milosevic died trying to save.

Ms. Lekic had just paid her respects on Thursday at Mr. Milosevic's coffin,
which was covered with a Serbian flag and red roses as it was put on display in
a museum here for the first of two days before his burial on Saturday.

Whatever fears there were that Mr. Milosevic, in death, would provoke a revived
nationalist outpouring did not come true on Thursday. There were carnations,
candles and free lapel pins displaying Mr. Milosevic's defiant face, but no
overwhelming numbers and, amid the white hair and canes, no unrest.

Still, even in this group of the hardest core, it was possible to find
conflicted feelings about the legacy of Mr. Milosevic -- the allegations that
put him on trial for crimes in Balkan wars that claimed more than 200,000 lives
and the future of a dismantled Serbia in Europe.

''You know, I don't know who is responsible for the wars,'' said Djordje
Rafailovic, 22, refusing to clear Mr. Milosevic.

His father, he said, was a Serbian soldier in Sarajevo in the Bosnian war in the
1990's and had been abandoned, he said, by the Serbian Army in a moment of
crisis. Mr. Milosevic's son, he noted, had not been made to fight there.

Still, he felt that Mr. Milosevic deserved to be honored as a great, if flawed,
Serb leader, and said that he alone could not be blamed for all the horrors in
the Balkans. And so he had waited for hours to see the coffin.

The coffin, which was closed, rested at the Museum of the Revolution in
Belgrade, after much wrangling over the politically tricky question of how to
handle Mr. Milosevic's burial.

Serbia's leaders, negotiating to join the European Union and under much pressure
to produce war crimes suspects, among them the top Serbian general, Ratko
Mladic, had refused to allow Mr. Milosevic a state funeral or burial in the
cemetery reserved for national heroes.

And, in fact, there were no top government officials at the viewing on Thursday,
nor at the airport when the coffin arrived as cargo the day before from The
Hague.

A compromise allowed for the coffin to be displayed at the museum for two days,
before being transferred on Saturday to Mr. Milosevic's hometown, Pozarevac, 30
miles south of Belgrade, for the funeral and burial on the grounds of the family
home.

But from anti-Milosevic leaders, who question any public concessions, even those
arrangements drew criticism, not least from the director of the museum.

''I strongly protest as a director, person and citizen of this country, and call
on the public and the Serbian government to react against a violation of
cultural autonomy and the political use of a cultural institution,'' Ljiljana
Cetinic, the museum director, said in a statement.

Also missing on Thursday were members of Mr. Milosevic's family. But a warrant
for the arrest of his widow, Mirjana Markovic, who lives with her son in Russia,
had been temporarily withdrawn on Tuesday, and on Thursday, leaders of Mr.
Milosevic's Socialist Party here said they expected her to arrive for the
funeral on Saturday.

On Thursday, mourners began being admitted to the cleared exhibition room in the
early afternoon. The line coiled from the outside of the museum and up a set of
stairs to where the coffin rested on a crimson-covered stand.

Mourners prayed, crossed themselves, laid flowers and kissed a photograph of Mr.
Milosevic, who died of a heart attack at 64 in his jail cell in The Hague on
Saturday. One gray-haired man marched with a slow military step to the coffin
and invoked the American-led NATO bombing of Serbia during the conflict over
Kosovo in 1999.

''You promised to defend us and you paid for it with your life,'' the man said.
''But you didn't die.'' He called Mr. Milosevic ''immortal.''

The humble surroundings provoked anger among the mourners, who felt he deserved
the full pomp of a state funeral. There were other grievances: against the war
crimes tribunal, accused of allowing his death, possibly by poisoning; with what
they said was the demonization of Mr. Milosevic and by extension all Serbs;
against the country that bombed them, the United States.

''You have to know that your country can't survive if you bomb everyone who you
would like to bomb,'' Ivana Zigon, a Serbian actress, told an American reporter.

But downtown, which swarmed years ago with Milosevic supporters, then with
crowds who wanted him gone, was calm.

''I am very ashamed,'' said Mirjana Gvozenovic, 20. ''He is a man who killed a
lot of people and brought misery for 10 years to this country.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Slobodan Milosevic's coffin, decorated with a Serbian flag and
roses, in the Museum of Revolution in Belgrade yesterday. Burial will be
tomorrow. (Photo by Darko Vojinovic/Associated Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (87%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (76%); ARMIES (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); WAR
& CONFLICT (71%); GENOCIDE (67%); EUROPEAN UNION (66%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

PERSON: Ian Fisher; Slobodan Milosevic; Mirjana Markovic

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%);
EUROPE (92%); MONTENEGRO (91%); NETHERLANDS (75%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(70%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Belgrade (Serbia); Pozarevac (Serbia); Serbia and
Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: March 17, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1100 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 19, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 416 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-16

U.S. Unit's Abuse of Detainees
Documents and interviews with Defense Department personnel show how an elite
Special Operations unit committed abuses at a top-secret detention center,
helping to belie Pentagon claims that the worst maltreatment of prisoners was
the work of rogue reservists at Abu Ghraib.   1

Threats Surround Belarus Vote


President Aleksandr G. Lukashenko of Belarus has vowed to crush any protests or
demonstrations after an election today.   1

Serbs Flock to Milosevic Wake
More than 50,000 Serbs swamped the central square in Belgrade in a public wake
for Slobodan Milosevic.   10

Labor Protests in France
Protestors took to the streets throughout France in the latest nationwide
protest against a new youth labor law.   16

NATIONAL   18-26

Unwed Fathers Seek Rights
Courts have increasingly found that when birth mothers choose adoption, fathers
have rights, too. But in many states, an unmarried father has no right to
withhold consent for adoption unless he has signed up with a state registry
before an adoption petition is filed.   1

Nonprofit Hospital Scrutiny
Congressional leaders, concerned that many nonprofit hospitals are not providing
enough charity care to justify their tax-exempt status, say they will set
standards for the industry if it does not do so itself.   18

Closely Watched Candidate
The leaders of the Democratic Party have rushed to back L. Tammy Duckworth's bid
for the Democratic Congressional nomination in Illinois, making the contest to
replace Henry Hyde, the Republican incumbent, one of the most closely watched.
20

Harsher Antismoking Laws
One of the toughest antismoking laws in the nation has taken effect in
Calabasas, Calif. The ordinance prohibits smoking in all public places, indoor
or outdoor. Smoking in one's car is allowed, unless the windows are open and
someone nearby might be affected.   18

NEW YORK/REGION   29-33

Growing Pains in the Bronx
The frantic pace of development in the Bronx is creating friction between
residents unaccustomed to change and those looking to bring the troubled borough
into a new future.   1

Protest Marks 3 Years of War
About 1,000 people gathered near Times Square in Manhattan, one of dozens of
energetic and often unfocused rallies held around the world to protest the third
anniversary of the United States invasion of Iraq.   31

OBITUARIES   34-35

Oleg Cassini
The New York-based couturier who designed clothes for some of the world's most
glamorous women, he was 92.   34

Chess   33
Weather   24

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SMOKING BANS (89%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (86%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); PETITIONS (76%); SMOKING
(74%); SINGLE PARENTS (74%); ADOPTION (73%); CHARITIES (72%); ORDINANCES (72%);
MEDICAL CHARITIES (72%); TAX LAW (69%); CHILD LABOR LAWS (69%); ANNIVERSARIES
(68%); HOSPITALS (67%); HAUTE COUTURE (67%); FASHION DESIGNERS (64%); TAX
EXEMPTIONS (51%) Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: TAMMY DUCKWORTH (69%)

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); BELARUS (92%); FRANCE
(90%); SERBIA (79%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1102 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 20, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Spreading Genocide to Chad

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 485 words


After the Holocaust, the world vowed it wouldn't stand back and allow genocide
to happen again. Bosnia, Cambodia and Rwanda showed how empty that promise was.
Darfur was yet another reminder that when it comes to standing up to stop the
slaughter of entire peoples, the nations of the world remain pitifully
inadequate.

And now, as if the hundreds of thousands of Africans killed in Sudan weren't
enough, the Arab militias financed by the government of Sudan to ''cleanse''
Darfur of blacks are moving across the border into neighboring Chad. Our
colleague Nicholas Kristof reports that the janjaweed -- the name given to the
Arab militias -- have unleashed their fury on villages in Chad, riding in and
killing and raping, accompanied by their standard shouting of racial epithets
like ''black slaves.''

Mr. Kristof is one of the few journalists willing to venture into the lawless
region. He took along NBC's Ann Curry of the ''Today'' show on his trip this
month, and wrote about a market town in Chad near the Sudan border called Koloy,
where villagers were actually waiting to be massacred. There was no one to help
them. Chad's government sent a handful of troops, but when the soldiers realized
that they would be facing more than 500 janjaweed armed with heavy machine guns,
they fled. Diplomats don't dare visit because it's not safe. Ditto for United
Nations aid groups. Only one organization, Doctors Without Borders, goes to
Koloy, Mr. Kristof reported, ''sending in a convoy of intrepid doctors three
days a week to pull bullets out of victims.''

Is this really what we have come to? The United Nations has described the
carnage in Darfur as the world's biggest humanitarian crisis but continues to
prove itself completely useless at doing anything to stop it. In the Security
Council, China protects Sudan. Europe, for its part, has been inert.

That leaves the United States, where the Bush administration has made a few
strides. Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick appears to be close to
getting the United Nations to supplement, if not replace, the woefully
ineffective African Union peacekeeping force in the region with United Nations
peacekeepers. The United States should also commit to providing specialized
reconnaissance and air support for the United Nations force. Sudan's government
doesn't like the idea of a multinational peacekeeping force, and has even
organized demonstrations in the capital against the idea, although the
protesters tend to look suspiciously like government military types.

The African Union soldiers have done their best, but they are poorly equipped
for one thing, and low in numbers for another -- there are only 7,000 of them in
an area the size of France. They don't have much in the way of intelligence
capability and they are lightly armed. That's a recipe for stalemate, and
stalemate is the last thing villagers waiting to be massacred need.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); ARMED FORCES (87%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); HOLOCAUST (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HOMICIDE (76%); PROTESTS
& DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); MEDICAL CHARITIES (69%); WRITERS (68%); SLAVERY (68%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (66%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (51%) Editorials; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense; Foreign Aid

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (82%); AFRICAN UNION (59%) United Nations; African
Union

PERSON: ROBERT ZOELLICK (50%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHAD (93%); RWANDA
(92%); CHINA (79%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Chad; Darfur (Sudan); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: March 20, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1103 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 21, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Extraditing Charles Taylor

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 16

LENGTH: 340 words


Last week, Liberia's new president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, called for Nigeria to
extradite the former president and warlord Charles Taylor to face war crimes
charges. Mr. Taylor, who has been living in a Nigerian government guesthouse
since 2003, is wanted on a range of charges relating to his decade-long West
African rampage, which unleashed campaigns of torture, rape and dismemberment in
Ivory Coast and Sierra Leone and on his home turf, Liberia.

In a just world, Mr. Taylor would have already been tried, condemned and sent up
the river.

But the world has never been just, and this case is complicated. When Mr. Taylor
was under siege by rebel forces in 2003, the United States, Britain and Nigeria
arranged for him to get asylum in Nigeria, under the correct assumption that his
quick exile would reduce the bloodshed. Nigeria gave Mr. Taylor a safe harbor on
the condition that he stop sending his minions out to rape, pillage and plunder.

A report last year gave some weight to the argument that Mr. Taylor hadn't
stopped his bad ways. The Coalition for International Justice charges that Mr.
Taylor tried to destabilize Liberia, influence last year's elections and build a
regional army. Specifics are vague, but it is true that Mr. Taylor's ex-wife,
Jewel, was elected to the Liberian legislature in the same elections that swept
Ms. Johnson Sirleaf to power.

There's no law against Jewel Taylor's running for office. And it's tempting to
think that it may be better just to let this sleeping dog lie. After all, Mr.
Taylor still has many loyalists in Liberia with no qualms about taking to the
streets again.

But Ms. Johnson Sirleaf is taking a courageous, very risky step. It is incumbent
upon America and Europe, which say they support justice in West Africa, to make
sure that she and the new Liberian government get the necessary security aid,
including United Nations troops if necessary, to handle any pro-Taylor backlash.

For West Africans, who have endured more than a decade of war, there's no
justice without peace.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION (94%); WAR CRIMES (92%); ELECTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); ARMIES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); TORTURE (78%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(77%); RIOTS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (71%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(71%); ARMED FORCES (66%) Editorials; Extradition  ; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Foreign Aid; Demonstrations and Riots; United States
International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (90%) Ellen (Pres) Johnson Sirleaf; Charles Taylor

COUNTRY: LIBERIA (95%); NIGERIA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (94%); UNITED STATES
(93%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); COTE D'IVOIRE (92%); AFRICA (92%); EUROPE (92%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria  ; Liberia; Europe

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1107 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 22, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

New Scrutiny for Law On Detaining Witnesses

BYLINE: By ADAM LIPTAK

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; National Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 1424 words


A 22-year-old federal law that allows people to be held without charges if they
have information about others' crimes is coming under fresh scrutiny in the
courts, in Congress and within the Justice Department after reports that it has
been abused in terrorism investigations.

The law allows so-called material witnesses to be held long enough to secure
their testimony if there is reason to think they will flee. But lawyers for
people detained as material witnesses say the law has been used to hold people
who the government fears will commit terrorist acts in the future but whom it
lacks probable cause to charge with a crime.

Concerns about how the law has been used have prompted calls from across the
political spectrum for a reassessment. That debate has also ignited a broader
one: whether the United States should join the several Western nations that have
straightforward preventive detention laws.

A bill introduced by Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, would
curtail the use of the material witness law to hold people suspected of plotting
terrorist acts. Representative Jeff Flake, Republican of Arizona, said he would
introduce similar legislation in the House.

''It's being stretched beyond its original purpose,'' Mr. Flake said of the
material witness law. ''Individuals are being indefinitely detained who might be
suspects. If that's the case, they need to be charged.''

But Mr. Flake added that he might be receptive to arguments that federal
prosecutors need tools to hold some people they consider dangerous. ''If you
need something else,'' he said, ''come to us.''

Recent prosecutions, lawsuits and internal investigations by the government have
all focused attention on the potential misuse of the material witness law in
terrorism investigations. The Justice Department, for instance, recently opened
an inquiry into 21 instances of possible misuses of the law, its Office of the
Inspector General said. A Justice Department spokesman would not elaborate on
the inquiry, by the department's Office of Professional Responsibility, or name
the detainees involved.

But in recent court filings in a case brought by a former detainee, the
government argued that courts were powerless to second-guess whether the
prosecutors had acted on improper motives as long as they complied with the
formal requirements of the material witness law.

David Cole, a law professor at Georgetown University and a prominent critic of
the Bush administration's approach to civil liberties, said that the government
had routinely misused the law. But Professor Cole added that there might be a
place for a law that would allow the government to hold dangerous people when it
lacked evidence to charge them.

''One of the problems we saw everywhere after 9/11,'' he said, ''was, in the
absence of any rational, narrowly tailored preventive detention authority, the
administration reached out to exploit a number of other legal and illegal
methods to detain people -- immigration, material witness, enemy combatant. They
were creating preventive detention authority out of statutes that were not meant
to serve as that or out of whole cloth.''

The use of material witness warrants in terrorism investigations continues to be
shrouded in secrecy. In May 2003, the Justice Department told Congress that
fewer than 50 people had been detained as material witnesses ''in the course of
the Sept. 11 investigation.'' About half were held for more than 30 days, the
department said.

A department spokesman did not respond to requests for more current numbers. The
department has for three years refused to give Congress fresher data on material
witness detentions in terrorism investigations.

''They claim that they can't even tell us how many people they have detained''
because of court sealing orders and grand jury secrecy rules, said Julie
Katzman, a lawyer on Senator Leahy's staff.

Even the lawyers who represent material witnesses are often barred from talking
about their clients.

''The Justice Department routinely gets sealing orders,'' said Ricardo J.
Bascuas, a law professor at the University of Miami who has represented material
witnesses. ''These court orders never expire. For instance, I'm perpetually
under court order from the Eastern District of Virginia, a place I've never been
to, not to talk about'' one material witness case.

People who have been arrested as material witnesses say the experience forever
changed their lives, even when they were never called to testify or charged with
a crime.

One of them, Abdullah al Kidd, who was born in Kansas and was a star running
back at the University of Idaho, filed suit last year for what he says was ''a
gross abuse of the government's power'' in arresting him.

Mr. al Kidd, who was known as Lavoni T. Kidd before he converted to Islam, spent
16 days in detention in three states in 2003, some of it shackled hand and foot.
That was followed by 14 months under court supervision. Mr. al Kidd was not
charged with a crime, and he was not called to testify, though a government
affidavit said he had information ''crucial to the prosecution'' of another man.
Mr. al Kidd said in a recent interview that his arrest and detention shattered
his marriage and destroyed his career. He now drives a cab in Las Vegas.

''I call it social assassination, really,'' Mr. al Kidd said. ''It's just
basically taken me out of a lot of opportunities and placed me into a small box.
I'm not doing anything my heart actually desires.''

Mr. al Kidd, who had apparently attracted the government's attention after
pursuing religious studies in Yemen, was interviewed repeatedly by the F.B.I. in
2002. He never missed an appointment, his lawsuit says. Yet, after a six-month
lull and with no warning, he was arrested at Dulles International Airport in
Northern Virginia on March 16, 2003, as he tried to board a flight to Saudi
Arabia to pursue a doctorate in Islamic studies.

Magistrate Judge Mikel H. Williams of the Federal District Court in Boise,
Idaho, authorized the arrest, based on an affidavit from Special Agent Scott
Mace of the F.B.I. ''Kidd is scheduled to take a one-way, first-class flight
(costing about $5,000),'' the affidavit said.

That statement was false in every particular: the ticket was for a round trip,
in coach, costing $1,700.

''If I had submitted an affidavit under penalty of perjury that contained false
information,'' said Scott McKay, who represented the man Mr. al Kidd was said to
have evidence about, ''I would have been prosecuted.'' Mr. Mace, his lawyer and
F.B.I. officials referred questions to a Justice Department spokesman, who
declined to comment beyond referring a reporter to the court papers in the case.

In those papers, the government said the false statements in the affidavit were
immaterial. ''Either way,'' government lawyers wrote in a brief asking that Mr.
al Kidd's case be dismissed, ''there is no dispute that plaintiff purchased an
expensive airline ticket to a foreign country with which the United States did
not have an extradition treaty.''

The government has apologized to 13 of the 70 material witnesses located by the
American Civil Liberties Union and Human Rights Watch, according to a report the
groups issued last year. Mr. al Kidd was not one of them.

''Absolutely no apologies,'' he said.

The proposed legislation would place strict time limits on detentions -- 10 days
for grand jury investigations and 30 days for trials -- and allow them only
where there is clear and convincing evidence that the witness is a flight risk.

Curtailing the authorities' ability to hold potentially dangerous people could
be a devastating mistake, said Andrew C. McCarthy, a former federal prosecutor
who took part in terrorism investigations in New York after the Sept. 11
attacks.

''Terrorism cases present, obviously, the least margin for error that you could
conceivably have,'' Mr. McCarthy, now a senior fellow at the Foundation for the
Defense of Democracies, said. ''If you lose control of people who come up on the
radar screen, you could have massive death.''

Lee Gelernt, a lawyer with the A.C.L.U.'s Immigrants' Rights Project, which
represents Mr. al Kidd, said his client's case ''crystallizes the question of
whether we as a nation are going to allow preventive detention.''

The idea has support, and some view it as inevitable.

''The most confident prediction you can make,'' Professor Cole said, ''is that
after the next attack, a preventive detention statute will be proposed.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abdullah al Kidd has filed a suit accusing the government of
''gross abuse'' of power in arresting him on the ground that he was a material
witness. (Photo by Jamie Rector for The New York Times)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WITNESSES (93%); TERRORISM (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%);
LEGISLATION (90%); PROBABLE CAUSE (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LITIGATION
(89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); EVIDENCE (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
LAW SCHOOLS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (77%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); TESTIMONY (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); LAWYERS (75%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); ARRESTS (73%); INTERNAL
INVESTIGATIONS (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (60%) Terrorism; Law and
Legislation; Preventive Detention; Crime and Criminals; Suits and Litigation;
False Arrests, Convictions and Imprisonments; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (84%) Justice Department

PERSON: JEFF FLAKE (79%); PATRICK LEAHY (57%) Adam Liptak; Abdullah al Kidd;
Patrick J (Sen) Leahy; Jeff (Repr) Flake

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%)

REGION: United States

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1110 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 23, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Bosnian Serb To Serve 40 Years, Not Life

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 86 words


In a complex ruling, a panel of appeals judges for the international war crimes
tribunal upheld the conviction of Milomir Stakic, the former mayor of Prijedor
in northern Bosnia, for overseeing a system of wartime detention camps where
more than 1,500 non-Serbian prisoners died but cut his life sentence to 40 years
in prison. The new sentence, the ruling said, reflected the gravity of the
crimes but corrected mistakes made by the trial judges who improperly made his
sentence more severe than it should have been.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); CORRECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); JUDGES (90%); VERDICTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); PRISONS (87%); GENOCIDE (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(85%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%) Decisions and Verdicts; War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Sentences (Criminal); Prisoners of War

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations

PERSON: Milomir Stakic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%)

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); EUROPE (92%);
NETHERLANDS (74%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Prijedor (Bosnia)

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1111 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 24, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

A Military Raid Frees 3 Hostages Held in Iraq

BYLINE: By KIRK SEMPLE; Sarah Lyall contributed reporting from London for this
article, and Chris Mason from Toronto.

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE FIGHTING;
Pg. 8

LENGTH: 836 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, March 23


Acting on a tip from a detainee, a multinational military force stormed a house
in western Baghdad early Thursday and rescued two Canadians and a Briton who had
been held hostage by a shadowy guerrilla group for four months.

James Loney, 41, and Harmeet Singh Sooden, 32, both from Canada, and Norman
Kember, 74, from Britain, were discovered bound yet unguarded, officials
reported. The three were whisked to the fortified Green Zone and debriefed by
the authorities, officials said, but did not address the news media.

The men, all antiwar advocates working for Christian Peacemaker Teams, had been
captured Nov. 26 along with an American colleague, Tom Fox, 54, of Clear Brook,
Va., whose body was discovered March 9 wrapped in plastic and dumped on a trash
pile in western Baghdad. Mr. Fox had been tortured, handcuffed and shot, the
police said.

Thursday's rescue, by a force that included American and British troops,
represented one of the few times that military action in Iraq has played a
decisive role in a hostage release.

But within hours, a surge of four car bombings, including a suicide attack,
struck Baghdad, killing at least 23 people, wounding at least 48 and tempering
the military's euphoria from the morning's success.

The attacks followed five days in which there had been no incidents in the
capital involving car bombs, or suicide bombs, according to a senior American
military spokesman, who insisted that the relative lull was a result of expanded
security operations.

But the convergence of the devastating attacks, coming in the span of about four
hours, suggested that the guerrillas' ability to operate in the capital remained
unfettered.

''As you're well aware, today he surged,'' acknowledged Maj. Gen. Rick Lynch,
the military spokesman, using his preferred pronoun to describe the amorphous
insurgency. ''He still has that capability.''

Military commanders jealously guarded details of the morning's rescue, saying
they did not want to compromise continuing operations.

General Lynch said a detainee captured Wednesday night had provided the
authorities with information that guided them to the house where the three
hostages were being held. The captives were found unguarded, their kidnappers
having vanished, General Lynch said.

Jack Straw, the British foreign secretary, said that Mr. Kember was in
''reasonable'' condition but that the two Canadians had to be hospitalized.

Prime Minister Stephen Harper of Canada thanked American and British authorities
for their ''exceptional'' role in the rescue. But he refused to confirm reports
that Canadians took part in the operation, citing national security concerns
despite, a statement by Mr. Straw thanking the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and
''other agencies from Canada'' for their role in the mission.

The rescue operation, while unusual, was not unprecedented. Last September,
responding again to a tip from a detainee, American forces rescued two hostages,
an American and an Iraqi, from an isolated farmhouse south of Baghdad. The
American, Roy Hallums, had been working as a contractor for a Saudi company when
he was kidnapped in 2004.

Last June, Iraqi troops raided a house in Baghdad and freed an Australian
hostage, Douglas Wood, from nearly seven weeks of captivity. But according to
some officials, the troops stumbled across Mr. Wood while on a routine search
operation.

The Rev. Alan Betteridge, president of the Baptist Peace Fellowship and a friend
of Mr. Kember's for more than 40 years, told the BBC that ''it's tremendously
good and so unexpected after the killing of Tom Fox a couple of weeks ago, when
we really did fear that each one would be killed eventually.''

Christian Peacemaker Teams -- which is based in Chicago and Toronto and grew out
of a collection of churches, including those of the Mennonites and the Quakers
-- sends groups of Christians to conflict zones to promote peace and human
rights. The four advocates were captured while driving to meet with Sunni Arab
leaders in western Baghdad.

The eruption of car bombings on Thursday began about 9 a.m., when a car exploded
in Karada, an upscale neighborhood, as a police patrol passed by, an official
with the Interior Ministry said. One civilian was wounded.

An hour later, someone set off a charge planted in a vehicle parked in the
predominantly Sunni Arab neighborhood of Adhamiya, the official said. The
explosion, which apparently was aimed at a passing police patrol, killed three
policemen and wounded five others.

Around 11 a.m., a suicide bomber detonated a car packed with explosives at the
entrance to the headquarters of the Interior Ministry's major crimes unit in
central Baghdad, killing 10 policemen and 5 civilians and wounding 32 others,
including policemen and civilians, the ministry official reported.

Five more people were killed and 10 wounded, according to the authorities, when
a second car bomb exploded about 1:15 p.m. near an outdoor market and a Shiite
mosque in western Baghdad.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hostages freed in a military raid on a Baghdad house were James
Loney, top, and Harmeet Singh Sooden, both of Canada, and Norman Kember of
Britain. They had been held four months. (Photo by Reuters)
(Photo by Associated Press)
 (Photo by Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HOSTAGE TAKING (93%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); TERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (89%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); POLICE FORCES (76%); HOMICIDE
(74%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (73%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (72%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (69%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (67%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (64%); PRIME MINISTERS (50%) Hostages; United States
International Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Bombs and
Explosives

ORGANIZATION: Christian Peacemaker Teams (Orgn)

PERSON: STEPHEN HARPER (56%); JACK STRAW (50%) Kirk Semple; Tom Fox; James
Loney; Norman Kember; Harmeet Singh Sooden

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Great Britain; Canada; Baghdad (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: March 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1115 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 29, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Least Surprising Jailbreak Ever

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 346 words


Charles Taylor, the Liberian warlord and former president, has disappeared from
his Nigerian haven, just days after President Olusegun Obasanjo agreed to turn
him over to a war crimes tribunal. The disappearance is a diplomatic disaster
for Mr. Obasanjo, who is scheduled to meet with President Bush today. We hope it
doesn't turn into something worse for West Africa.

The conflicts linked to Mr. Taylor from 1989 to 2003 cost an estimated 500,000
lives and spawned a generation of child soldiers. He supported rebels in Sierra
Leone and Ivory Coast who hacked off the limbs of civilians; he received
diamonds in return, which he used to finance fighting in Liberia. Mr. Obasanjo
did West Africa a favor in 2003 when he took in Mr. Taylor, ending Liberia's
civil war.

For years, Nigeria had resisted the idea of handing over Mr. Taylor, saying it
would give him only to an elected Liberian government. When Liberia's newly
elected president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, requested this month that Mr. Taylor
be turned over to a war crimes tribunal in Sierra Leone, Nigeria replied that
Liberia was free to take him.

Nigerian security forces let Mr. Taylor slip through their fingers on the same
day that a State Department spokesman said it was Nigeria's responsibility to
see that Mr. Taylor was arrested and sent to Sierra Leone.

It's hard to believe the Nigerians did much to stop him. A reporter with Agence
France-Presse who recently visited Mr. Taylor at his plush villa in the
southeastern city of Calabar saw no sign of any Nigerian security on the way in,
and only one policeman on the way out.

Once, in an earlier incarnation, Mr. Taylor sawed his way out of a county jail
in Boston and used a knotted sheet to climb to freedom. If ever there was a
disappearance that could be predicted, this was it. Let's hope that Mr.
Obasanjo's carelessness doesn't lead to a return of Taylor-style ethnic fighting
in West Africa. That is something no one can afford -- including the Nigerian
president, whose country has had some sectarian and ethnic clashes of its own
lately.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); CIVIL WAR
(77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); CHILD SOLDIERS (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(72%); ARRESTS (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (72%); CORRECTIONS (72%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (66%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (54%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (54%)

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (59%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%) Charles G Taylor;
Olusegun (Pres) Obasanjo

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (99%); LIBERIA (95%); SIERRA LEONE (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (94%);
AFRICA (90%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Nigeria  ; Sierra Leone

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1116 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            March 30, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Serbia Promises to Cooperate With Tribunal

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 11

LENGTH: 381 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, March 29


The United Nations chief war crimes prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, was greeted
here on Wednesday with a plea that she show understanding for Serbia's ''complex
political situation'' and avoid urging the European Union to break off talks
with Belgrade.

The Serbian prime minister, Vojislav Kostunica, said after meeting Ms. Del Ponte
that Serbia would fulfill its remaining obligations to the tribunal, which
mainly means handing over the top war-crimes suspect still believed to be in
Serbia, Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb wartime commander.

''The Serbian government is absolutely determined to successfully bring this
issue to the end,'' a statement from the premier's office said.

Ms. Del Ponte is due to report to the European Union on Friday on how well
Serbia is cooperating with the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague.

Rasim Ljajic, who is in charge of the state body responsible for cooperation
with the Hague war crimes court, said in an earlier statement that stalling
Serbia's European Union membership prospects as punishment for its failure to
deliver fugitives would damage Serbia's stability and its prospects for
democratic changes.

Serbia faces the possible loss of the province of Kosovo later this year at the
conclusion of talks between Belgrade and the province's ethnic Albanian
majority.

Serbia's longtime partner, Montenegro, may create a further fracture if it votes
for independence in May.

European Union foreign ministers say Serbia will risk the disruption of talks on
closer links unless it arrests General Mladic, who is charged with genocide.

The union would like General Mladic to be arrested and sent to The Hague before
the next round of talks, set for April 5.

The Serbian president, Boris Tadic, said in a statement after meeting Ms. Del
Ponte that ''even though the credibility of the court has been damaged by the
latest events, Serbia has to complete its cooperation with the tribunal, which
is of vital importance for its European future.''

Ms. Del Ponte expressed her concern that cooperation with the court had been
halted, the statement said.

In 2005, Serbia handed over about a dozen people indicted by the tribunal, which
led to the initiation of the European Union talks, but it has not handed over
anyone since then.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); LITIGATION (78%); ARRESTS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); POLITICS (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(66%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations;
European Union

PERSON: Carla Del Ponte; Ratko (Gen) Mladic; Vojislav (Prime Min) Kostunica

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (93%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); SERBIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (94%); EUROPE
(94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); ALBANIA (79%); MONTENEGRO (79%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Serbia; Hague (Netherlands); Serbia

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1117 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             March 31, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone Asks to Move Liberian's Trial

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN and MARLISE SIMONS; Lydia Polgreen reported from
Freetown for this article, and Marlise Simons from Paris.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 7

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, March 30


The government of Sierra Leone asked the International Criminal Court in the
Netherlands to provide a venue for the trial of Charles G. Taylor, the former
president of Liberia who was arrested Wednesday on longstanding war crimes
charges, officials in the Netherlands said.

Mr. Taylor has many loyalists in the region, so his presence is a potential
threat to the fragile peace that exists here and in Liberia. Secret talks
between the Special Court for Sierra Leone and the Dutch government about
transferring Mr. Taylor to The Hague began several weeks ago.

But on Wednesday, after Mr. Taylor's arrest, the Dutch government received a
formal request from the special court for permission to hold the trial on Dutch
soil, said Dirk-Jan Vermeij, a spokesman for the Dutch Foreign Ministry. He said
the request involved the use of a courtroom at the newly created International
Criminal Court and space in a Dutch jail. A Dutch diplomat said the United
Nations Security Council would have to pass a resolution to create a trial
chamber in The Hague that would serve as an extension of the Sierra Leone court
and use that court's rules.

Other conditions are under discussion between the court and the Dutch
government, including a guarantee that at the end of the trial Mr. Taylor will
leave the Netherlands. ''The court is asking only for physical facilities, the
use of a courtroom and a cell,'' Mr. Vermeij said.

If the plan goes ahead, Mr. Taylor will probably be held at a Dutch
high-security prison complex in The Hague where the International Criminal Court
has leased 12 cells but is using only one.

The plan to move the trial of Mr. Taylor, one of Africa's most notorious
warlords, to Europe underscored the deep ambivalence that many people here have
toward the United Nations-backed court set up here to try defendants accused of
atrocities in Sierra Leone's brutal civil war.

''The ordinary man sees this court as something from the outside that has little
meaning to his life,'' said Charlie Hughes, director of the Forum for Democratic
Initiatives, a nonprofit organization in Freetown. ''Most people see the court
as an expensive waste that won't really change the country in terms of poverty
and other serious problems.''

Indeed, Mr. Taylor may have been the most wanted fugitive in Africa, but for the
moment no one on the continent seems keen on holding him. Ever since Liberia
asked Nigeria to turn him over for prosecution by the special court this month,
a fierce and sometimes desperate diplomatic battle has been waged over what
precisely should be done with him. And with Thursday's announcement by Dutch
officials, it appeared that Mr. Taylor's three-year odyssey had not yet ended.

It began in March 2003, when Mr. Taylor was still president of Liberia, with an
indictment on charges that he backed and traded diamonds with Sierra Leone's
ruthless rebel movement, whose signature tactic was the hacking off of
civilians' arms and legs. But when he went into exile in Nigeria later that
year, Nigeria promised not to turn him over to the court unless an elected
Liberian government requested it.

When Liberia's new president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, asked for Mr. Taylor to be
turned over this month, she made it clear that she did not want him on Liberian
soil, declaring that there were no charges pending against him there. Nigerian
officials repeatedly insisted that Mr. Taylor was not a prisoner in their
country and that it was Liberia's responsibility to collect him. Sierra Leone,
where Mr. Taylor was under indictment, quietly stood by and waited, hardly
clamoring to get the man who caused so much misery here.

Solomon Berewa, Sierra Leone's vice president, said in an interview here that it
would be better to hold the trial somewhere else to spare the nation a long
revisiting of the horrors of the decade-long war, which killed 50,000 people,
left thousands without arms or legs and displaced much of the population.

''We don't want to be reminded of those atrocities every day,'' Mr. Berewa said.
''We want to put it behind us and move forward.''

The International Criminal Court, which is independent from the United Nations,
would have no mandate to try Mr. Taylor because its jurisdiction began on July
1, 2002, while Mr. Taylor's charges date from the 1990's. The court, which is
building new headquarters, at present has one courtroom available. The trial of
the first suspect in its custody, Thomas Lubanga, a former Congolese warlord, is
not expected to begin until later this year.

Mr. Vermeij, the Dutch government spokesman, said that the court in Sierra Leone
had asked for Mr. Taylor's transfer to The Hague, citing security concerns.
''There is a fear that a trial in Sierra Leone could lead to instability and
pose a threat to peace,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian leader, is believed to be
in custody at this compound in Sierra Leone. (Photo by Namvula Rennie/Associated
Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LEGAL VENUE
(89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); CORRECTIONS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%);
PRISONS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (71%) War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) United Nations; Security Council (Un)

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Marlise Simons; Charles G Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (73%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (98%); LIBERIA (98%); NETHERLANDS (94%); AFRICA (92%);
NIGERIA (92%); EUROPE (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone; Nigeria; Hague (Netherlands); Liberia

LOAD-DATE: March 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1119 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Liberia Ex-Leader Faces War-Crimes Court

BYLINE: By HANS NICHOLS and LYDIA POLGREEN; Hans Nichols reported from Freetown
for this article, and Lydia Polgreen from Dakar, Senegal.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, April 3


In his first appearance before an international tribunal that has indicted him
on 11 counts of war crimes, Charles G. Taylor, the former Liberian president,
pleaded not guilty on Monday after refusing to recognize the court's
jurisdiction and accusing it of trying to meddle in the region's affairs.

''I think this is an attempt to divide and rule the people of Liberia and Sierra
Leone, and so most definitely I am not guilty,'' Mr. Taylor said. Security was
tight at the hearing, before the Special Court for Sierra Leone, a United
Nations-backed tribunal.

''I did not and could not have committed these acts against the sister republic
of Sierra Leone,'' said Mr. Taylor, who was arrested last Wednesday while trying
to flee Nigeria and then sent here to face the longstanding charges.

Dressed in a double-breasted blue suit, a white shirt with cufflinks and a red
tie, Mr. Taylor seemed defiant and at times even upbeat, blowing a kiss to
members of his family seated in the packed courtroom and flashing a smile.
During the proceeding he stared down the chief judge, Richard Lussick of Samoa,
forcing him to ask three times if Mr. Taylor understood the charges against him.

Mr. Taylor eventually said he did, and then argued that because he was
''Liberia's 21st president,'' the court held no jurisdiction over him.

Mr. Taylor betrayed no emotion as the nine-page indictment was read to him,
detailing the charges, from terrorizing Sierra Leone's civilian population, to
sexual violence and the recruitment of child soldiers.

The core of the case against Mr. Taylor is that he aided rebels who plunged
Sierra Leone, one of Africa's richest countries at its independence in 1961,
into 10 years of chaos and killing as they sought control of lucrative diamond
fields.

The war, which ended in 2002, left 50,000 dead and thousands maimed as both
rebels and a pro-government militia used torture, rape and amputations to
terrorize civilians. Mr. Taylor joins nine other people indicted; their trials
are under way.

Fears that Mr. Taylor's presence in Sierra Leone, where the last of 17,500
United Nations peacekeepers left three months ago, could destabilize the entire
region has led the court to request transfer of the trial to a courtroom at The
Hague.

The international community seems eager to honor the request by Ellen Johnson
Sirleaf, Liberia's new president, that Mr. Taylor be removed from the region. A
draft resolution is being circulated at the Security Council to authorize the
move and, assuming approval from the United Nations and the Dutch, the transfer
would be a matter of logistics.

But with the court's principal defender, Vincent O. Nmehielle of Nigeria,
serving as his counsel, Mr. Taylor indicated that he would fight any move to
transfer the trial to The Hague, insisting that he could receive a fair trial
only in Sierra Leone.

Even some of Mr. Taylor's former allies have suggested that his presence in
Sierra Leone could have a destabilizing effect.

Jonathan Kposowa, the secretary general of the political wing of the
Revolutionary United Front, a group once allied with Mr. Taylor, said in an
interview that ''the distances are short'' between Liberia and Sierra Leone, and
that Mr. Taylor was still a popular man in some pockets in Liberia.

Indicted in absentia in 2003, Mr. Taylor was then offered asylum in Nigeria
under a peace accord to end Liberia's 14 years of a war that had claimed 250,000
lives and left the country little more than a shell.

Mr. Taylor is believed to have stolen tens of millions of dollars in his years
as a warlord and president of Liberia, but is saying he is indigent in order to
receive free legal assistance.

Mr. Taylor's appearance capped a dramatic nine days that began with Nigeria's
announcement on March 25 that it would honor the request made by Ms. Johnson
Sirleaf to hand him over to international authorities.

But Mr. Taylor fled his plush villa in Calabar, and recriminations flew across
the Atlantic, with some critics accusing the Nigerian president, Olusegun
Obasanjo, of facilitating Mr. Taylor's escape.

K. A. Paul, the Indian-born evangelist who is Mr. Taylor's spiritual adviser,
said that Mr. Taylor had told him in a telephone conversation from his jail cell
here that he had tried to flee Nigeria because Nigerian state security agents
told him to leave, and that he was escorted to a spot in northeastern Nigeria
near the border with Cameroon by government officials.

''They took him and they drove for so many hours,'' Mr. Paul said in a telephone
interview. ''Around 4:30 or 5 in the morning they told him to go and they left
him.'' Mr. Taylor was arrested by border officials in Nigeria around 5 a.m. last
Wednesday.

The Nigerian government denied the accusation, with Femi Fani-Kayode, a
government spokesman, telling The Associated Press that Mr. Paul's account was a
''far-fetched figment of his jaundiced imagination.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: In tight security at Charles Taylor's trial yesterday, his
sister Ann Blake Mote was scanned by a court guard. (Photo by Issouf
Sanogo/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); INDICTMENTS (90%);
JURISDICTION (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(78%); LITIGATION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); LEGAL VENUE (77%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); CHILD SOLDIERS (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); ARRESTS (73%); JUDGES (72%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (57%)

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (58%) hans nichols; Lydia Polgreen; Charles G
Taylor; Ellen Johnson Sirleaf

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (58%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (98%); LIBERIA (98%); NIGERIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
AFRICA (79%); SAMOA (79%)

REGION: Liberia; Sierra Leone; Liberia

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1120 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 4, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Sudan Blocks U.N. Official From Visiting Darfur Region

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 494 words

DATELINE: NAIROBI, Kenya, April 3


The government of Sudan has blocked Jan Egeland, the United Nations' top
emergency aid official, from visiting the western Darfur region this week,
prompting Mr. Egeland to accuse Khartoum of trying to hide the dire conditions
there.

The Sudanese government offered various explanations for its decision not to
allow Mr. Egeland, the under secretary general for humanitarian affairs and the
United Nations' emergency relief coordinator, to visit Khartoum, the capital, or
Darfur beginning Monday.

Jamal Ibrahim, a Foreign Ministry spokesman, said the visit was merely postponed
because it would have coincided with the Prophet Muhammad's birthday. He also
said in an interview with the BBC that it would have been unsafe for Mr.
Egeland, a Norwegian, to visit Sudan given the recent controversy over cartoons
of the Prophet Muhammad published in a Danish newspaper.

But the United Nations said that the trip had been planned in advance and that
the decision by Sudanese authorities not to approve his flight appeared to be
politically motivated.

''They said I'm not welcome,'' Mr. Egeland said in a telephone interview from
Rumbek, in southern Sudan, which operates semi-autonomously and did approve the
visit. ''My interpretation is that they don't want me to see what I was planning
to witness in South and West Darfur, which is renewed attacks on the civilian
population.''

In the latest wave of attacks in Darfur, Mr. Egeland said thousands of people
had been chased from 60 villages by government-backed militias known as the
janjaweed. He said the deteriorating security environment had made it
increasingly difficult to provide assistance to the estimated three million
refugees living in camps in Darfur and across the border in Chad.

Mr. Egeland said the governor of South Darfur, where Mr. Egeland had been
scheduled to visit, had opposed his arrival there and suggested that it might
not be safe for him to visit. In addition, he said that Sudan's representatives
to the United Nations had informed his office in New York that he would not be
welcome in Darfur or Khartoum.

''We are having an endless nightmare of administrative obstacles to our work in
Darfur,'' Mr. Egeland said. ''We have a feeling that the people we are trying to
assist are being increasingly attacked. My feeling is the government should help
us help their people.''

Relations between the Sudanese and the United Nations are particularly delicate
now because of plans for the United Nations later this year to take over running
of the African Union mission now under way in Darfur. Under-financed and limited
in its ability to quell the violence, the 7,000-strong African Union force is
viewed as more neutral by the Sudanese, who oppose the arrival of any Western
troops in Darfur.

Prompted by the government, Sudanese citizens have taken to the streets on
several occasions to protest against a United Nations force, which they often
equate with an American role in Sudan.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (76%); WAR CRIMES (76%); APPROVALS (75%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); REFUGEES (73%); GENOCIDE
(73%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (73%); MAWLID (70%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (69%);
WAR & CONFLICT (64%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: Marc Lacey; Jan Egeland

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (94%); NAIROBI, KENYA (79%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); AFRICA (92%); KENYA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1121 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 5, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Yemenis Freed After Transfer From Secret Prisons, Report Says

BYLINE: By SCOTT SHANE and MARGOT WILLIAMS; Scott Shane reported from Washington
for this article, and Margot Williams from New York.

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 809 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 4


Three Yemeni men who were held for well over a year in secret American prisons
overseas were quietly released last month after being transferred to their home
country, where a court concluded they had no terrorist ties, according to a
report released Tuesday by Amnesty International.

The report says evidence promised by the United States was apparently never
transferred to Yemeni authorities. It also adds other new details to accounts of
the Central Intelligence Agency's program of holding terrorist suspects in
secret detention centers or transferring them to other countries, where some
said they were tortured.

The Yemenis said their American jailers, whom they do not accuse of abusing
them, took great care to keep them from surmising the detention centers'
location, keeping windows covered and removing wrappers and labels from food,
clothing and water bottles, the report says.

In the report -- which includes information on the web of companies the C.I.A.
uses to own and operate its fleet of aircraft for moving the suspects -- Amnesty
International officials call for an end to the C.I.A.'s practice of rendition,
in which suspects are seized and transported without judicial process.

''The bottom line is that secretly sending individuals to unknown locations
where they are likely to be tortured or treated inhumanly is unlawful, and the
C.I.A. must stop,'' said William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty
International U.S.A.

A C.I.A. spokesman declined to comment on the report.

The report came one day after the Pentagon released 2,700 pages of documents
from hearings for detainees held by the United States military at Guantanamo
Bay, Cuba. The new documents, the second major installment released since last
month in response to a lawsuit filed by The Associated Press, are a window on
the frustration of both prisoners who claim they are innocent and the American
military officers who must judge whether they are lying.

''Your story sounds like about 500 others,'' an unidentified colonel declared
while questioning a Guantanamo detainee arrested in Pakistan in December 2001.
''Everybody has their passport stolen; everybody is in Afghanistan and Pakistan
doing charity work.''

American and Afghan soldiers are dying, but according to the detainees' stories,
''nobody is killing them,'' the exasperated officer said. He told the detainee,
''Your story doesn't ring true. Help us help you.''

Amnesty International first described the cases of the Yemeni prisoners --
Muhammad Bashmilah, Salah Ali Qaru and Muhammad al-Assad -- late last year.

Mr. Bashmilah and Mr. Qaru were arrested in Jordan and transferred to American
custody in October 2003, while Mr. Assad was arrested in Tanzania and turned
over to American officials in December 2003, Amnesty International said.

They were kept in at least four secret facilities that likely are situated in at
least three countries, probably including Djibouti, Afghanistan, and somewhere
in Eastern Europe, Amnesty International concluded after studying the men's
descriptions of transfer flights and other data.

After months of interrogation by Americans, they were flown to Yemen in May
2005. ''The U.S. authorities effectively instructed the Yemeni officials to
detain the men, apparently promising to transfer their case files,'' the report
says.

But it says the files never arrived. In February, Yemeni authorities finally
charged the men with forging travel documents, sentenced them to two years and
ruled that they had served their time, the report says.

Mr. Assad was freed March 14, and Mr. Bashmilah and Mr. Qaru on March 27, the
report says.

If American authorities appear to have struggled over whether the three Yemenis
posed a threat, the voluminous transcripts released by the Pentagon suggest
similar difficulties assessing some prisoners held at Guantanamo.

One detainee, Abdul Majid Mohammadi, described himself as an Iranian Christian
-- an anomaly in a counterterrorism campaign usually described as focusing on
Islamist extremism. Swearing by ''Jesus and God,'' he admitted to having been a
drug dealer and having obtained papers to cross the Iran-Afghanistan border from
an Afghan with ties to a pro-Taliban group.

Several detainees from Afghanistan are described as having worked for the Afghan
government under Hamid Karzai, the pro-American politician who led the interim
administration after American-led forces toppled the Taliban and who was elected
president in 2004.

Muhammad Aman, for example, said he was a clerk for the military under the
pro-Soviet Communist government, under the Taliban and finally under Mr. Karzai.
Like other prisoners, he said the Taliban had forced him to work for them.

''All the workers that you see in the current government of Afghanistan worked
for the Taliban too,'' Mr. Aman told the review board.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
TORTURE (90%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); ARRESTS
(89%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%);
LITIGATION (77%); NAVIES (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); EXECUTIVES (64%); ARMED
FORCES (63%); CHARITIES (50%) Terrorism; Prisoners of War; Guantanamo Bay Naval
Base (Cuba); United States Armament and Defense; Terrorism

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (93%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%);
PRISONERS OF WAR (59%) Amnesty International (Orgn); Central Intelligence Agency

PERSON: Scott Shane; margot williams; Muhammad Bashmilah; Salah Ali Qaru;
Muhammad al- Assad

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); YEMEN (96%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); PAKISTAN (92%);
CUBA (90%); JORDAN (50%)

REGION: Yemen

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1124 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 6, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Clashes Steer Kurds and Turkey Back on a Rocky Path

BYLINE: By IAN FISHER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 1157 words

DATELINE: DIYARBAKIR, Turkey, April 5


Violent clashes between Kurds and security forces in Turkey over the past week
have jolted memories here back to an old conflict that remains a dangerous
barrier on the nation's path toward greater prosperity and democracy.

After a decade of calm, at least 15 people have been killed in protests in
recent days, most in the guerrilla battleground of the Kurdish southeast, but
some in cosmopolitan Istanbul. Among the dead were a 6-year-old boy and a
78-year-old man, Halit Sogut, whose relatives asked on Tuesday how such violence
was still possible in a nation that considered its rightful place to be as a
member of the European Union.

''In France, a million and seven hundred thousand people were in the streets,''
said a nephew, Devrim, 25, referring to the mass protests in France over
employment contracts. ''And no one got a nosebleed.'' He predicted that the
protests here would continue until Turkey finally granted full rights to its
Kurdish minority.

A guerrilla insurgency in southern Turkey over Kurdish rights killed more than
30,000 people during the 1980's. After years of relative peace, Kurds seem
conflicted over whether they should return to the use of violence if continued
pressure by the European Union over the prospect of Turkey's membership might
bring change more peacefully.

The roots of the current protests are complicated, primed slowly by low-level
incidents in the past two years after the Kurdistan Workers' Party called off a
unilateral cease-fire that began in 1999. Then, last week, on Tuesday, funerals
here for 14 members of the party killed in combat with Turkish soldiers the
previous weekend swelled into large protests, and last Wednesday they turned
violent.

''I neither want state terror, nor terror of any kind,'' said one of Mr. Sogut's
relatives, who would not give his full name because he is a public employee, and
talking politics could cause him trouble. ''More than 30,000 people died. This
is enough. There should be a solution.''

His comments seemed to reflect a quiet questioning among many Kurds of the
relevance and tactics of the Kurdistan Workers' Party, considered a terrorist
group by the United States and the European Union. Some experts see the current
protests as a way for the group to try to create a role for itself as political
and economic changes continue in Turkey, including some concessions to Kurds.

In recent years, and largely under European pressure, the government lifted
emergency rule in the southeast, began compensating Kurds for losses when
Turkish troops razed villages and granted other cultural rights to the Kurds.

Many Kurds here complain, however, that this has not been enough, considering
the low wages, high unemployment and lack of foreign investment in the
southeast. The Kurds' frustration exploded in the protests that began here last
week.

''So many promises were made and not fulfilled,'' said Cihan Sincar, the mayor
of Kiziltepe, near the Syrian border, where two protesters were killed over the
weekend.

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan has at least acknowledged the problems Kurds
face, something that past prime ministers have been reluctant to do. In
confronting the current crisis, his government's approach has been to offer hope
to Kurds not eager for a resumption of the rebel group's violence.

''While they try to capitalize on hatred and enmity, we will build more roads,
more hospitals, more schools and more workplaces'' in Kurdish areas, Mr. Erdogan
told the Parliament on Tuesday. ''We will bring more freedoms, more democracy,
more welfare, more rights and justice.''

But a more immediate test seems to be whether the government will also engage in
heavy-handed tactics against the Kurdistan Workers' Party that could endanger
the nation's desire to join the European Union and return Turkey to the violence
of a decade ago.

On Tuesday, the foreign minister, Abdullah Gul, talked about ''a thin line'' in
the struggle against terrorism and the need to preserve democracy, even as he
pledged to show no mercy for the rebel group.

At a minimum, there is a sense here that the gains made by Kurds in recent years
may have been reversed in a few short days. ''Since 1994, we haven't seen
anything like this,'' said Tacettin Bahadiroglu, 32, the owner of a jewelry
store in Kiziltepe, as tense, blue-bereted Turkish soldiers in armored personnel
carriers set up in front of the regional governor's office on Monday. ''It has
pushed us 12 years behind.''

As the protests turned violent, shopkeepers rolled down the shutters of their
shops at the urging of a Kurdish satellite station, and gangs of youths began to
clash with soldiers. Three people were killed, including Mr. Sogut, whose own
family could not agree if he had been a bystander or had joined in the protests.

In the following days, the protests spread to the city of Batman to the
southeast, where one person was killed, and to Kiziltepe, home to tens of
thousand of Kurds displaced by the fighting a decade ago, where two others died.
On Sunday, the protests ignited in Istanbul, where protesters hurled homemade
firebombs at a bus, and three people were killed, apparently crushed by the bus.

By early this week, at least 9 people, and possibly 10, were dead in Diyarbakir.
More than 500 people have been detained.

On Wednesday officials said five soldiers had been killed, two by a land mine
while they were on patrol in the Kurdish region and three in an ambush, Agence
France-Presse reported. The report said that a police officer was killed late
Tuesday when rebels opened fire on a police station.

The violence has left a wake of anger and bafflement that Kurds said would not
be quickly healed.

''What is going to be our future?'' asked a 27-year-old man who would give only
his first name, Tolga, because he took part in the protest. He was among the
mourners in Kiziltepe for Mehmet Siddik Onder, who was shot during the
demonstration.

''He was only 22 years old,'' Tolga said. ''He was just back from his military
service. Where are we going?''

The regional administrator, Fecri Fikret Celik, who represents the Turkish
government in Kiziltepe, said the state had not done enough for Kurds but was
genuinely trying, with new roads, four new schools under construction and better
services at hospitals.

He blamed the rebel group, which he contended had organized the protests for its
own reasons. ''What could have been the reason to provoke people?'' he said.

Sezgin Tanrikulu, a human rights lawyer in Diyarbakir, said he believed that
only bold action by both sides could head off more violence, though he said such
steps were unlikely soon. The rebels should give up their arms, he said, and the
government should develop a more aggressive plan to improve Kurds' lives. ''This
is not a random or one-time event,'' he said. ''If we fail to see the graveness
of the problem, we will see worse times in the future.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Turkish soldiers responded to recent Kurdish demonstrations in
Kiziltepe, home to tens of thousands of Kurds displaced in the past decade.
 The graves of some of the Kurdish protesters killed recently in clashes with
the police in Diyarbakir, Turkey. (Photographs by Yoray Liberman for The New
York Times)Map of Turkey highlighting Diyarbakir: Funerals for Kurdish rebels
last week led to protests in Diyarbakir.

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RIOTS (78%); TERRORISM (77%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (76%); EMPLOYMENT CONTRACTS (73%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%);
UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (73%); POLITICS (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (69%); FOREIGN
INVESTMENT (50%) Demonstrations and Riots; Kurds

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); KONGRA-GEL (54%) European Union

PERSON: Ian Fisher

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%)

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE
(92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Turkey; Turkey

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1126 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 6, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: The Hague: Inquiry Shows Milosevic Died A Natural Death

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 114 words


The Dutch inquiry into the death of former President Slobodan Milosevic of
Yugoslavia concluded that he died a natural death as a result of a heart attack
on March 11, dismissing allegations that he was poisoned while in United Nations
custody. In a statement, the district attorney's office in The Hague said
''there are no indications whatsoever'' of foul play. It said that the National
Forensic Institute had corroborated earlier results that found traces of Mr.
Milosevic's prescribed medicines but said there was no poison or toxic level of
any drug that ''might have provoked cardiac arrest.'' The findings were
corroborated by the German Forensic Institute.    MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: FORENSICS (90%); POISONINGS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); DEATHS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); WAR CRIMES (87%); GENOCIDE
(85%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (83%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Slobodan Milosevic

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (91%); EUROPE (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA
(79%); MONTENEGRO (78%); GERMANY (50%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1128 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              April 7, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Serbia: Deadline For Fugitive's Surrender

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 103 words


Serbia has pledged that the former military chief Ratko Mladic will surrender to
the war crimes tribunal in The Hague this month, the office of the chief
prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, announced. Her spokesman, Anton Nikiforov, said she
received the assurances on a visit to President Vojislav Kostunica in Belgrade
last week. General Mladic, who is charged with genocide, has been a fugitive
from the tribunal for a decade, and his surrender is a condition for talks about
Serbian membership in the European Union. News reports have said that General
Mladic is seriously ill and in need of treatment.   MARLISE SIMONS (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); GENOCIDE (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) European Union; United
Nations

PERSON: Marlise Simons; Ratko Mladic; Vojislav (Pres) Kostunica

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); EUROPE (94%); NETHERLANDS
(91%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Europe

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1130 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 10, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

The Saddam Hussein Trials

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 403 words


The crimes committed against the Iraqi people by Saddam Hussein's dictatorship
are so numerous that there is no realistic possibility of trying Mr. Hussein for
all of them. But if there is one particular case for which he must be made to
answer, it is the gruesome military campaign he waged against Iraqi Kurdish
civilians 18 years ago. At least 50,000 civilians were killed and 2,000 villages
destroyed.

Those genocidal attacks, which included the use of deadly poison gas against
thousands of unarmed women and children, stand as a crime against humanity. The
emotional and political scars they left behind continue to distort Iraqi
politics even today and they must be accounted for, fully and publicly, in a
court of law.

The trauma of those attacks -- and the long postponement of justice -- greatly
intensified the conviction of many Kurds that they could never live safely under
Iraqi Arab rule. Since 1991, the Kurdish northeast has had an autonomous Kurdish
government and not much concerned itself with trends in the Arab areas of Iraq,
including the recent drift toward civil war. Had it been otherwise, the Kurds,
who are largely Sunni by faith and relatively secular in their habits, could
have applied a powerful brake to the divisive sectarian policies of the Shiite
fundamentalist parties.

Mr. Hussein's first trial, in which he has now admitted ordering the execution
of 148 men and boys from the Shiite village of Dujail to punish an assassination
attempt, is now moving toward its final stage. If he is convicted and draws the
expected death sentence, the genocide trial may never take place. That would be
perverse.

The Dujail trial has been far too flawed to stand as Mr. Hussein's ultimate
reckoning with the law. And the Kurds have had to wait far too long for the full
measure of justice to which they are entitled, including a full detailing of all
the relevant facts.

The attacks drew protests but, shamefully, no effective international response
at the time they occurred. That was in part because the Reagan administration
and the first Bush administration were torn between revulsion and their
misconceived strategy of building up Iraq as a bulwark against revolutionary
Iran.

This long-delayed genocide trial cannot fully right history's wrongs or bridge
Iraq's dangerous ethnic and religious divisions. But it can help. It needs to
proceed, with Saddam Hussein alive and in the dock.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL
WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); SENTENCING (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (75%); RELIGION (71%);
FUNDAMENTALISM (71%); ASSASSINATION (51%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity; Kurds; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Poison Gases; Biological and Chemical Warfare

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) Saddam (Pres) Hussein

COUNTRY: IRAQ (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Iraq

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1133 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Fiddling While Darfur Burns

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 391 words


It is enormously distressing to watch the sausage-making that passes for the
world's attempt to do something about the carnage in Darfur. The United Nations
is still dawdling over plans to replace the African Union force currently there
with a well-armed U.N. peacekeeping force. An attempt last week by the United
Nations' top official on humanitarian issues, Jan Egeland, to visit Darfur was
rebuffed by the Sudanese government. With all of the raping, murdering and
butchering going on in Darfur, why would Sudan want an eyewitness account from a
high-ranking international diplomat?

While this goes on, Arab militias calling themselves the janjaweed and backed by
the Sudanese government continue to raid villages in Darfur and now across the
border in Chad. Not satisfied with the hundreds of thousands of men, women and
children they've systematically raped and murdered as part of their ethnic
cleansing campaign, the janjaweed are continuing their campaign to eliminate
entire African tribes from the Sudanese countryside.

Where are the Muslims who took to the streets to protest Danish cartoons? Where
are the African leaders who demanded boycotts of South Africa?

The Bush administration, to its credit, has finally stopped dragging its feet
and is now trying to push the United Nations in the right direction. But the
diplomats are moving too slow. For weeks, the Security Council's sanctions
committee has been working on a list of Sudanese responsible for the bloodshed
in Darfur. The State Department spokesman, Sean McCormack, said yesterday that
America is pressing to get out the list, which he called a ''down payment toward
justice.''

We're waiting. But time is one thing that what is left of the Darfur population
doesn't really have. We're glad to see that a rally is planned in Washington on
April 30. We're glad to hear that Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick
invited Darfur refugees to the State Department. Now President Bush needs to do
the same thing. A photo op at the White House with Darfur refugees would go a
long way toward embarrassing the government of Sudan.

That should also embarrass the rest of the Security Council members, like China,
Qatar, Ghana and Tanzania, that continue to give diplomatic cover to Sudan.
Rwanda should have taught us all something; it's tragic that it apparently has
not.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); REFUGEES (89%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); GENOCIDE (77%); ETHNIC GROUPS (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); IMMIGRATION (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); BOYCOTTS (72%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (71%); SEX OFFENSES (70%); TESTIMONY (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (69%);
RELIGION (52%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity;
United States International Relations; Immigration and Refugees; Foreign Aid

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AFRICAN UNION (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (54%) United Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (75%); ROBERT ZOELLICK (70%) George W (Pres) Bush; Robert
B (Deputy Sec) Zoellick

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (93%); RWANDA (79%); GHANA
(79%); CHAD (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1134 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 13, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Sudan: U.S. And Britain Seek Sanctions Against 4
Sudanese Over Darfur

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 105 words


The United States and Britain recommended sanctions against four unidentified
Sudanese individuals -- reportedly a member of the government and fighters from
pro- and anti-government militias -- responsible for committing atrocities and
undermining peace efforts in the Darfur region. The names were circulated to the
15 Security Council members, which must decide by Monday whether to agree to the
measures, which include travel bans and freezing of assets. John R. Bolton, the
United States ambassador, said the four were a ''down payment'' on what he
expected would become a longer list of targeted suspects.    WARREN HOGE (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (87%); GENOCIDE (84%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (83%); PEACE PROCESS
(55%) United States International Relations; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%) United
Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge

COUNTRY: SUDAN (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1135 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 14, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Rwanda: Mayor Gets 15 Years For Role In '94 Genocide

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 74 words


After a plea bargain, a United Nations war crimes court sentenced Paul
Bisengimina, who was the mayor of Gikoro, near the capital, Kigali, in 1994, to
15 years in prison for his role in the slaughter of 1,000 ethnic Tutsi who had
sought refuge in a church. The presiding judge said the guilty plea might
encourage other suspects to come forward and confess their crimes. The mass
killings left an estimated 800,000 Tutsi and moderate Hutu dead.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); GENOCIDE (91%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (90%); SENTENCING
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(88%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%);
GUILTY PLEAS (88%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (88%);
JUDGES (85%) Sentences (Criminal); War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (91%) United Nations

PERSON: Paul Bisengimina

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (92%)

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (90%)

REGION: Rwanda; Gikoro (Rwanda)

LOAD-DATE: April 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1136 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Africa: Chad: Threats On Oil And Refugees Lifted

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY (NYT)

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 121 words


President Idriss Deby, who beat back a rebel incursion in the Chadian capital
last week, backed off on his threats to expel Sudanese refugees from the country
and to shut a major transcontinental oil pipeline. Antonio Guterres, the United
Nations high commissioner for refugees, said Mr. Deby had assured him he would
not order out the 200,000 refugees in eastern Chad who fled the Darfur conflict
in neighboring Sudan. As for the oil dispute, an American deputy assistant
secretary of state, Donald Y. Yamamoto, will visit Chad soon to mediate a
disagreement over revenues between Chad and the World Bank. Mr. Deby has delayed
his order to shut the pipeline unless the bank lifted a freeze on oil revenues.
MARC LACEY (NYT)

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFUGEES (93%); CRUDE OIL PIPELINES (90%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (90%);
PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); IMMIGRATION (88%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (88%); PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (86%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); GENOCIDE
(85%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (85%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(85%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (85%) Oil (Petroleum) and Gasoline; Immigration and
Refugees; Credit; Pipelines; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (92%); INTERNATIONAL
BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION & DEVELOPMENT (59%) International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development

PERSON: Marc Lacey

CITY: NDJAMENA, CHAD (90%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (94%); CHAD (94%); AFRICA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Chad; Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1138 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 18, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy to Expose 4 Sudanese In U.N. Debate About Darfur

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 373 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 17


John R. Bolton, the United States ambassador, said Monday that he intended to
offer a Security Council resolution on Tuesday that would publicly identify four
Sudanese individuals responsible for atrocities in Darfur and possibly force a
vote on whether the panel would impose sanctions on them.

''We've been pushing sanctions for years, and the effort was always to make it
clear to the government in Khartoum that there would be individual
consequences,'' Mr. Bolton said in a telephone interview.

He said he decided on the move after learning that China and Russia had objected
to action against the four individuals. Their names were circulated among
Council members last Thursday under a so-called silence procedure that would
have applied the sanctions unless they met opposition.

On Monday, China said it opposed the sanctions, and Russia said it backed
China's view. Wang Guangya, the Chinese ambassador, said that taking action now
would complicate African Union-sponsored peace talks on the conflicted Darfur
region under way in Abuja, Nigeria. ''At this sensitive moment, to publish the
list of names will have a negative effect on the negotiations there,'' he said.

The four -- including a member of government, as well as fighters from pro- and
anti-government militias -- are charged with committing atrocities and
undermining peace efforts in Darfur. The sanctions include travel bans and
freezes on assets.

Mr. Bolton said he was surprised by the response of China and Russia, despite
the two countries' traditional reluctance to endorse sanctions, because these
were aimed at individuals rather than countries.

''That's the whole idea of targeted sanctions, not to have a broader effect than
necessary,'' he said. ''These are people who are involved in atrocities and
killing people and turning people into refugees.''

Mr. Bolton said he hoped China and Russia would reconsider their opposition,
avoiding a showdown vote. Both countries are permanent members with veto power.

''This will be in effect a test of the Council to see if the sanctions procedure
is going to work at all, and we have moved slowly, unfortunately slowly, but we
certainly have come to the point where it's time for a decision,'' he said.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%);
WAR CRIMES (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (77%); GENOCIDE (73%); VETO (73%); REFUGEES (66%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions; United
States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);
AFRICAN UNION (56%) Security Council (Un); United Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge; John R (Amb) Bolton

CITY: KHARTOUM, SUDAN (92%); ABUJA, NIGERIA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); CHINA (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); NIGERIA (92%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (91%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Russia; China; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 18, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1144 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 25, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Osama's Crusade In Darfur

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 27

LENGTH: 782 words


Those of us who want a more forceful response to genocide in Darfur should be
sobered by Osama bin Laden's latest tape.

In that tape, released on Sunday, Osama rails against the agreement that ended
Sudan's civil war with its Christian and animist south and accuses the U.S. of
plotting to dispatch ''Crusader troops'' to occupy Darfur ''and steal its oil
wealth under the pretext of peacekeeping.'' Osama calls on good Muslims to go to
Sudan and stockpile land mines and rocket-propelled grenades in preparation for
''a long-term war'' against U.N. peacekeepers and other infidels.

Osama's tape underscores the fact that a tougher approach carries real risks.
It's easy for us in the peanut gallery to call for a U.N. force, but what
happens when jihadis start shooting down the U.N. helicopters?

So with a major rally planned for Sunday to call for action to stop the
slaughter in Darfur, let's look at what specific actions the U.S. should take.
One reader, William in Scottsdale, Ariz., wrote to me to say that he had called
Senator John McCain's office to demand more action on Darfur. ''The lady on the
phone asked me for suggestions,'' he said -- and William was short on
suggestions.

The first step to stop the killing is to dispatch a robust U.N. peacekeeping
force of at least 20,000 well-equipped and mobile troops. But because of
precisely the nationalistic sensitivities that Osama is trying to stir, it
shouldn't have U.S. ground troops. Instead, it should be made up mostly of
Turks, Jordanians, Bangladeshis, Pakistanis and other Muslims, and smaller
numbers of European and Asian troops. The U.S. can supply airlifts, and NATO can
provide a short-term bridging force if necessary.

Second, the U.S. and France should enforce a no-fly zone from the French air
base in Abeche, Chad. American military planners say this is practicable,
particularly if it simply involves destroying Sudanese aircraft on the ground
after they have attacked civilians.

Granted, these approaches carry real risks. After we shoot up a Sudanese
military plane, Sudan may orchestrate a ''spontaneous'' popular riot that will
involve lynching a few U.S. aid workers -- or journalists.

But remember that the Sudanese government is hanging on by its fingernails. It
is deeply unpopular, and when it tried to organize demonstrations against the
Danish cartoons, they were a flop.

The coming issue of Foreign Policy magazine publishes a Failed States Index in
which Sudan is ranked the single most unstable country in the entire world. If
we apply enough pressure, Sudan's leaders will back down in Darfur -- just as
they did when they signed a peace deal to end the war with southern Sudan.

A no-fly zone and a U.N. force are among the ways we can apply pressure, but
another essential element is public diplomacy. We should respond to Osama by
shining a spotlight on the Muslim victims of Darfur (many Arabs have
instinctively sided with Sudan's rulers and have no idea that nearly all of the
victims of the genocide are Muslim).

The White House can invite survivors for a photo-op so they themselves can
recount, in Arabic, how their children were beheaded and their mosques
destroyed. We can release atrocity photos, like one I have from an African Union
archive of the body of a 2-year-old boy whose face was beaten into mush.
President Bush can make a major speech about Darfur, while sending Condi Rice
and a planeload of television journalists to a refugee camp in Chad to meet
orphans.

Madeleine Albright helped end the horrors of Sierra Leone simply by going there
and being photographed with maimed children. Those searing photos put Sierra
Leone on the global agenda, and policy makers hammered out solutions. Granted,
it's the fault of the ''CBS Evening News'' that it gave Darfur's genocide only 2
minutes of coverage in all of last year (compared with the 36 minutes that it
gave the Michael Jackson trial), but the administration can help when we in the
media world drop the ball.

The U.S. could organize a summit meeting in Europe or the Arab world to call
attention to Darfur, we could appoint a presidential envoy like Colin Powell,
and we could make the issue much more prominent in our relations with countries
like Egypt, Qatar, Jordan and China.

Americans often ask what they can do about Darfur. These are the kinds of ideas
they can urge on the White House and their members of Congress -- or on
embassies like Egypt's. Many other ideas are at savedarfur.org and at
genocideintervention.net.

When Darfur first came to public attention, there were 70,000 dead. Now there
are perhaps 300,000, maybe 400,000. Soon there may be 1 million. If we don't act
now, when will we?

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
RELIGION (77%); FAILED & FRAGILE STATES (77%); REFUGEES (77%); LANDMINES (77%);
PEACE PROCESS (73%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (72%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (72%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); HELICOPTERS
(67%); WRITERS (66%); JOURNALISM (63%); FOREIGN POLICY (62%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (60%); IMMIGRATION (60%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; News and News Media; Immigration and Refugees

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (93%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (58%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%)
Nicholas D Kristof; Osama Bin Laden; George W (Pres) Bush; Condoleezza (Sec)
Rice

STATE: ARIZONA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); FRANCE (91%); PAKISTAN (79%); DENMARK
(79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Chad; France; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1149 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.N. Council Imposes Sanctions On 4 Men in Darfur War Crimes

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 365 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, April 25


The Security Council passed a resolution on Tuesday imposing the first sanctions
in the violence that has killed more than 200,000 villagers and driven two
million people from their homes in Darfur, in western Sudan.

Twelve members of the 15-nation Council voted in favor of the American-drafted
measure, which will freeze the assets of four Sudanese accused of war crimes and
instructs nations to block their entry. Three countries -- China, Qatar and
Russia -- abstained.

''I think today's sanction resolution shows that the Security Council is
serious, that its resolutions have to be complied with, that it is prepared to
take enforcement steps if they are not complied with,'' said John R. Bolton, the
United States ambassador.

Qatar, the lone Arab nation on the council, said it had not seen ''proof'' to
justify sanctions.

China and Russia, each a permanent member that could have vetoed the proposal,
said the timing was wrong, coming just days before a Sunday deadline set by the
Council for Sudan and the Darfur rebels to reach an agreement to end their
conflict. The peace talks are being held in Abuja, the Nigerian capital.

''In our view, there is the feeling that the adoption of this resolution might
have a negative impact on the prospects for concluding a peace agreement within
the time period,'' said Konstantin Dolgov, the deputy Russian ambassador.

Wang Guangya, the Chinese envoy, said any Security Council action ''should focus
on promoting, assisting and facilitating rather than affecting, and interfering
in, the peace talks.''

Mr. Bolton disagreed, saying, ''Far from interfering in the peace process in
Abuja, it will strengthen that process.''

The resolution identified the four men accused of war crimes as:

Maj. Gen. Gaffar Mohamed Elhassan, a Sudanese Air Force officer accused of
helping the government-backed janjaweed militias commit atrocities; Sheik Musa
Hilal, chief of an Arab tribe and a janjaweed leader; Adam Yacub Shant, a
commander of Sudanese Liberation Army forces that broke a cease-fire to attack
government troops; and Gabril Abdul Kareem Badri, the commander of another rebel
force, which kidnapped and threatened African Union troops.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (92%); PEACE PROCESS (91%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); FINES & PENALTIES (73%); GENOCIDE (73%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (73%); AIR FORCES (71%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International
Relations; Embargoes and Economic Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (94%); UNITED NATIONS (91%) United
Nations

PERSON: Warren Hoge

CITY: ABUJA, NIGERIA (92%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA
(93%); NIGERIA (93%); AFRICA (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Russia; China; Qatar; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1150 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 26, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Europe: Denmark: No Cell For Charles Taylor

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 106 words


Denmark said it would reject a United Nations request to imprison former
President Charles Taylor of Liberia, left, if he is convicted of war crimes,
dealing another blow to efforts to move the trial to The Hague. Sweden and
Austria have also refused to provide a prison cell for Mr. Taylor, who has been
held in Sierra Leone since last month. The Special Court in Sierra Leone has
requested that the trial be moved to The Hague out of concern that Mr. Taylor, a
former warlord, could still set off unrest in West Africa. The Netherlands has
agreed to the trial, but only if Mr. Taylor leaves immediately after, even if he
is acquitted.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); LITIGATION (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CORRECTIONS (88%); PRISONS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%);
ACQUITTAL (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (85%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (85%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%)

PERSON: Charles Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%)

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (94%); LIBERIA (93%); EUROPE (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%);
AUSTRIA (88%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%); AFRICA (78%); DENMARK (59%)

REGION: Liberia; Denmark; Sweden; Austria

LOAD-DATE: April 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1152 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            April 27, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

U.S. Options on Darfur Are Running Out

BYLINE: By JOEL BRINKLEY

SECTION: Section A; Column 4; Foreign Desk; Pg. 8

LENGTH: 1017 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


As the violence in the Darfur region of Sudan grows ever more deadly, Bush
administration officials now acknowledge that they have few if any promising
policy options for containing the carnage.

If there is no agreement by Sunday on a way to resolve the crisis, the
long-running peace talks are to be disbanded. But hopes for an agreement are
low.

One proposal, to send 20,000 United Nations peacekeepers to Sudan, has been
stymied by Khartoum's adamant opposition. Without the government's agreement,
the Bush administration acknowledges, dispatching troops to Darfur would rightly
be viewed as an invasion.

''Sudan policy has run off the road into a ditch,'' said John Prendergast, a
former senior Africa specialist for the government.

This comes as public outrage, sporadic before, is growing over the continuing
bloodshed in Darfur, which the United States characterizes as genocide. States,
including Maine, New Jersey and Illinois, and cities and private groups across
the United States are cutting financial ties to companies that do business with
Sudan.

A coalition of advocacy groups called SaveDarfur.org has organized a large rally
in Washington for this weekend featuring speakers from Congress, the
administration, Hollywood and religious organizations.

An estimated 200,000 people have died in Darfur since the violence began three
years ago, and more than two million others have been driven from their homes.
For the administration, the greatest hope centers on the peace talks in Abuja,
Nigeria, which have limped along for almost two years.

The United Nations and the African Union, sponsor of the talks, have given the
government of Sudan and the Darfur rebels until Sunday to reach agreement on a
draft treaty that the mediators wrote and handed to both parties on Tuesday.

Both sides agreed to look at it but were otherwise noncommittal. While the two
sides have agreed on some issues during previous sessions, the remaining
disagreements are thick with complexity and emotion.

''We will respect the deadline, and if there are no indications that a deal is
possible, we will wind up'' the talks, said Sam Ibok, leader of the African
Union mediating team.

Robert B. Zoellick, the deputy secretary of state, said in an interview on
Wednesday, ''There's a fighting chance'' to reach agreement by Sunday. Jan
Pronk, the chief United Nations envoy in Sudan, said the mediators might be
willing to extend the talks a few days if significant progress was being made,
but probably not much more than that. ''It's now or never,'' he said.

Mr. Zoellick added, ''If there is no peace accord, then it becomes a different
mission.''

The plan to send up to 20,000 United Nations peacekeepers to Darfur, to replace
the 7,000 African Union soldiers stationed there now, presents formidable
obstacles.

The United States and Europe have largely financed the African Union mission,
but both have concluded that it is inadequate for the job. In February, the
Security Council agreed to begin planning to send United Nations troops. The
Bush administration said at the time that it would support the idea of having
NATO take the lead in overseeing an interim African Union force until the
arrival of United Nations troops.

But Sudan has remained opposed, and Khartoum has lobbied other African states,
with some success, to view the idea as an affront to Sudanese sovereignty. Some
of those other states would have to take part in any United Nations mission.

Now the Sudanese government is refusing even to grant visas to the United
Nations team that wants to visit Darfur to assess the possible mission. But
Sudan said it might change its mind if a Darfur peace agreement was reached.

Mr. Zoellick, in a speech this month to the Brookings Institution, said,
''Either you get approval of the government,'' or ''you invade, and that's a
very big, serious challenge.''

In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Pronk said Sudan was even more opposed to
President Bush's NATO proposal.

''Wise diplomacy,'' Mr. Pronk said, means ''you don't talk about NATO. It is
viewed here as intervention, new colonialism.''

What is more, few countries have expressed any willingness to send forces or
equipment as part of the United Nations mission -- and then only if Khartoum
agrees. The State Department says Morocco, Pakistan, Ukraine, Russia and others
have made tentative commitments.

''The United Nations has been flummoxed at every juncture,'' said Mr.
Prendergast, who was director for African affairs in the National Security
Council during the Clinton administration. Now he is a senior adviser for the
International Crisis Group, a nonprofit organization.

The conflict in Darfur began in February 2003, when rebel groups attacked
government positions, accusing the leaders in Khartoum of ignoring their region.
The government struck back with a fury, enlisting local militias to massacre
civilians and destroy entire villages. The world was slow to acknowledge the
problem, but in September 2004, the Bush administration stated that the carnage
constituted genocide.

African Union troops began arriving in Darfur last year, and for a while the
violence diminished. But in recent months it has picked up with new ferocity and
has spread to Chad, where Sudanese militias are raiding Chadian villages along
the border. Sudan, a senior administration official said, had also supplied
weapons to rebels that attacked Ndjamena, the capital of Chad, earlier this
month.

As he gave the warring groups a copy of the draft Darfur agreement on Tuesday
evening, Salim Ahmed Salim, the chief mediator, said: ''This is decision time.
No more procrastination, no more antics, no more delaying tactics. The eyes of
the world are on you.''

But a senior United Nations official noted another serious problem, even if the
parties agreed: the proposed agreement calls for an immediate cease-fire, but
the African Union troops in Darfur have already shown they are incapable of
enforcing a cease-fire.

''If there are violations on the ground,'' the official said, ''the whole thing
could fall apart.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (76%); GENOCIDE (76%); RIOTS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); WAR CRIMES (73%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (71%); INTERVIEWS (65%); RELIGION
(51%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States
International Relations; Demonstrations and Riots; Embargoes and Economic
Sanctions

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (84%) United Nations

PERSON: ROBERT ZOELLICK (58%) Joel Brinkley

CITY: ABUJA, NIGERIA (79%); KHARTOUM, SUDAN (78%)

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); AFRICA (94%); NIGERIA (92%); EUROPE
(79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Washington (DC); Sudan

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1153 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             April 28, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Not in My Backyard

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 22

LENGTH: 367 words


Northern European countries, so quick to congratulate themselves on their
generally good global citizenship, have been falling over one another lately to
make sure that they don't get stuck with Charles Taylor, the former Liberian
president turned indicted war criminal. That's a shocking disappointment, given
the European commitment to making poverty history in Africa. The continent
cannot progress without regional stability and justice for those hurt by
Africa's worst warlords.

Mr. Taylor laid waste not only to his home country, Liberia, but also to Ivory
Coast and Sierra Leone during his 13-year reign of terror. He was finally handed
over last month to the United Nations-backed Special Court, set up in Sierra
Leone to try those bearing the most responsibility for the carnage, which
included terrorizing civilians by chopping off their arms, legs, ears and lips.

Mr. Taylor still has supporters in West Africa, where the affected nations are
trying to maintain a fragile peace. So it's no surprise that Sierra Leone wants
to get him out of Freetown, where the Special Court is based, as soon as
possible. Nor is it a surprise that Liberia's president, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf,
doesn't want him coming home to stand trial either.

The Special Court asked that Mr. Taylor's trial be moved to The Hague, and the
government of the Netherlands agreed, but attached so many strings it might as
well have said no. The Dutch say they will provide the venue only if Mr. Taylor
leaves the country immediately after the trial. That means another country must
agree to imprison him if he is convicted. When asked, Austria and Sweden
declined, and Denmark joined the list of rejecters this week.

The European Union and the United States were the ones to press Ms. Johnson
Sirleaf to ask Nigeria to turn over Charles Taylor to face justice, and there's
a general consensus that America's role in the Special Court is already so great
that any further involvement would be unadvisable. That leaves Europe. Promising
to serve as Mr. Taylor's jailer over the long run would certainly be a burden,
but it's one that any number of nations that profess to be friends of Africa
could easily manage to sustain.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INDICTMENTS (77%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(75%); LEGAL VENUE (74%); EUROPEAN UNION (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); GENOCIDE (69%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and
Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%)

PERSON: ELLEN JOHNSON-SIRLEAF (57%) Charles Taylor

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (77%)

COUNTRY: AFRICA (95%); EUROPE (94%); LIBERIA (94%); SIERRA LEONE (93%); NORTHERN
EUROPE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (90%); COTE D'IVOIRE (79%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); NIGERIA (79%); WESTERN AFRICA (79%); DENMARK
(73%); AUSTRIA (58%)

REGION: Liberia; Hague (Netherlands); Europe

LOAD-DATE: April 28, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1164 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 4, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Europeans Punish Serbia Over Fugitive Still at Large

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS WOOD

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: LJUBLJANA, Slovenia, May 3


Citing the failure of Serbia to arrest its leading war crimes suspect, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the European Union on Wednesday called off talks on closer ties
with Belgrade, prompting the country's leading negotiator on relations with
Europe to resign.

A little more than a month ago, Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, promised
European Union officials that by the end of April he would hand over General
Mladic, the former commander of the Bosnian Serb army who has been on the run
for 10 years. The transfer has not happened, and Olli Rehn, the union's
commissioner for enlargement, said he had no choice but to suspend negotiations.

''It is disappointing that Belgrade has been unable to locate, arrest and
transfer Ratko Mladic to The Hague,'' Mr. Rehn told reporters in Brussels when
he called off negotiations that are a step toward European Union membership.

Just hours later, Miroljub Labus, a Serbian deputy prime minister and head of
its European Union negotiating team, announced his resignation, blaming the
prime minister for the failure to deliver General Mladic, who is accused of
genocide, both in connection with the wartime siege and bombardment of Sarajevo
and the Srebrenica massacre, in which about 8,000 Muslim men and boys were
killed in 1995.

It was not clear whether Mr. Labus's party, G17 Plus, would remain part of the
country's coalition government or withdraw the support of its 31 deputies in
Parliament, a step that would probably lead to the government's collapse because
Mr. Kostunica has a working majority of just five in the legislature.

With General Mladic at large, apparently with at least tacit support from some
elements of the country's security apparatus, the suspension of the talks ends
for now a risky game in which Mr. Kostunica has sought to win closer European
ties while at the same time avoiding a backlash from his country's voluble
nationalist opposition.

Until recently a fervent critic of the tribunal in The Hague, which many Serbs
see as biased against them, Mr. Kostunica recently cooperated to the extent of
encouraging the negotiated surrenders of several war crimes suspects.

Good standing with the tribunal was the crucial condition the European Union
imposed on Serbia for closer ties.

In recent months, the Serbian security services have adopted a more aggressive
policy, arresting known supporters of the network that helps General Mladic to
remain at large and unveiling several apartments in Belgrade once used by the
fugitive.

Mr. Rehn's announcement suggested that neither he nor the tribunal's chief
prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, whose advice he sought shortly before announcing
his decision, were impressed by the efforts.

''The obvious conclusion is that I have been misled when I was told at the end
of March that the arrest of Mladic was a matter of days or weeks,''

Mrs. Del Ponte told a news conference in the Netherlands.

She said she had received reports that the Serbian security services could have
arrested General Mladic in January but declined because the government wanted
him to surrender voluntarily, Reuters reported from The Hague.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EUROPEAN UNION (92%); WAR CRIMES (92%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%); PRESS CONFERENCES (73%); RESIGNATIONS (72%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (68%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%) European Union

PERSON: Nicholas Wood; Ratko (Gen) Mladic; Vojislav (Prime Min) Kostunica;
Miroljub Labus

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (91%); LJUBLJANA, SLOVENIA (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (73%)

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); EUROPE (94%); SLOVENIA (92%); NETHERLANDS
(91%); MONTENEGRO (79%); BELGIUM (73%)

REGION: Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and Montenegro; Srebrenica (Bosnia);
Sarajevo (Bosnia); Europe; Bosnia and Herzegovina

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1165 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 5, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

World Briefing  Asia: Cambodia: Judges Approved To Try Khmer Rouge Leaders

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 61 words


Cambodia's highest judicial body approved 13 United Nations and 17 Cambodian
nominees to be judges for a long-awaited tribunal that is to try surviving
leaders of the Khmer Rouge on war crimes charges. Cambodia and the United
Nations will each also provide one prosecutor and one investigating judge to
lead the investigations. The trials are expected to start next year.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); JUDGES (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (86%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%) War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (93%) United Nations; Khmer Rouge (Cambodia)

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); ASIA (92%)

REGION: Cambodia

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1171 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                               May 8, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

Funds Cut, Gaza Faces a Plague of Health Woes

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1448 words

DATELINE: GAZA, May 4


Hanin al-Hilo was screaming at the nurses at the main Gaza hospital, Al Shifa:
''If I called and said I was the son of Mr. Somebody, some big shot, I'd have a
place!''

But with a third of the hospital's dialysis machines awaiting repair and spare
parts, Mr. Hilo, a policeman, and his father, sitting weakly in a wheelchair,
had to wait in the corridor. Even those using the machines are not being given
the normal dose of hormones and minerals, a nurse explained, because the
hospital has run out. ''Soon they're going to need blood transfusions instead,''
she said.

With a sudden shortage of everything from disposable needles and adhesive tape
to vital drugs, Gaza's once impressive public health system is running down fast
under the dual pressure of aid cutoffs and the closing of the Karni crossing
point with Israel.

Already, says Al Shifa's general director, Dr. Ibrahim al-Habbash, the hospital
can no longer provide chemotherapy for many forms of cancer, has only a few
days' supply of important surgical drugs like atropine, adrenaline, heparin and
lidocaine, and has used up its strategic three-month cache normally kept for a
health crisis.

In addition, armed men have been forcing their way into the hospital demanding
preferential treatment for relatives, clan members or friends, and authorization
to travel outside Gaza for medical treatment.

''We've suffered in the past, of course, but in the last month, the problems
have really increased,'' Dr. Habbash said. ''There are shortages of medications
and disposables in all departments, we're trying to limit the operating list and
people are suffering, even dying, because of these shortages.''

Dr. Habbash hands over his list of urgent needs that he has passed on to the
financially troubled Palestinian Ministry of Health. It includes numerous drugs
and antibiotics, as well as plaster of Paris, syringes, disposable bed sheets
and intravenous solutions, surgical gloves, suture sets and blood-testing
needles.

Mr. Hilo's anger, he admitted later, was increased by the frustration of a
second month without salary, a situation suffered by every employee of the
Palestinian Authority -- Gaza's largest employer -- including the hospital's
1,400 staff members, and many of the families of the patients.

But his anger is a sign of the mounting frustration over the gaps in health care
here, which are a result of a double crisis: the budget deficit in the
Palestinian Authority -- which has worsened significantly since Israel stopped
transferring tax collections, and the United States and the European Union cut
off aid after the Hamas government took over -- and the inability to get goods
into Gaza through the main crossing point at Karni, which the Israelis keep
closing whenever there is a security alert.

Since Jan. 1, Karni has been shut half of the time, according to James D.
Wolfensohn, the former envoy of the international community, and an average of
only 23 truckloads a day have left Gaza in that period, compared with a target
of 150 a day. Produce has rotted, but crucial imports have also been held up.
Though the lack of funds is a significant problem for the Palestinian health
care system, supply shortages are less severe on the West Bank, where cargo
crossings are less of an issue.

The Palestinian Authority is in part the author of these problems, for failing
to stop attempted attacks on Karni, though Israel has been criticized by Mr.
Wolfensohn and the European Union, and more quietly by the United States, for
keeping the crossing closed.

Even before the Hamas victory, the authority was running a debt of $75 million a
month because it raised salaries last summer and hired thousands of young armed
men, causing the World Bank to cut off budget support. After the Hamas victory,
Israel stopped handing over tax payments, and after Hamas took office,
Washington and the Europeans suspended aid because Hamas refuses to recognize
Israel and forswear violence.

Both the United States and the European Union say humanitarian aid will get
through -- but Washington does not consider government salaries to be
humanitarian aid. There has been discussion of a new structure to funnel aid to
health and education departments or individual Palestinians that would somehow
bypass the Hamas government, but nothing has been decided.

The results are severe in Gaza.

A recent internal report by the World Health Organization, provided to The New
York Times, portrays a crisis that is bound to worsen as the economic siege of
the Hamas-run Palestinian Authority continues. The report forecasts a ''rapid
decline of the public health system towards a possible collapse'' and ''no
access or limited access to preventive programs'' like immunization for a large
part of the population.

Although some 70 percent of Gaza's 1.4 million people are refugees or their
descendants, who get primary care from the United Nations Relief and Works
Agency for Palestinian Refugees, the organization runs only clinics, not
hospitals.

According to another report, by Physicians for Human Rights/Israel, the
Palestinian Authority provides 64.5 percent of general health needs, 77 percent
of emergency hospital treatment and 76 percent of the needs of women and
midwives. It also pays for the treatment in Israel and abroad of many difficult
cases like those in pediatric oncology and pediatric heart operations, as well
as various cancer and orthopedic treatments.

''Lack of funding for this system will lead to the deaths of thousands of people
in the short term and extensive morbidity in the long term,'' the report says.
The group, like the European Union, urges Israel to pay the Palestinians the $50
million or so a month it collects in tax receipts for the authority and to ease
''the policy of closure and curfew'' that is undermining the Palestinian ability
to deliver services to people.

Mark Regev, a spokesman for Israel's Foreign Ministry, said there had been no
special restrictions on transferring medical supplies since Hamas took over.
''Israel wants to do all it can to avoid suffering among Palestinians,'' he
said. ''But we have legitimate security concerns with an administration run by
Hamas, which espouses terrorism against Israel.''

The relief and works agency is the second largest employer in Gaza, and although
it is paying salaries, ''We cannot substitute for or replace the Palestinian
Authority,'' said its Gaza director, John Ging. ''We already expect accumulating
strains on our current services,'' as refugees who work for the authority and
have no salary turn to the agency.

''We're concerned about more instability, more insecurity, more poverty and more
dependency'' on the agency, he said. The agency, he added, was trying ''to meet
basic human needs at a subsistence level, but we can't provide the health,
education and security services of the P.A.''

The agency is already paying $78,000 a month for rent on shipping containers
stuck at Karni, because the export blockage in Gaza means that once the limited
cargo allowed into Gaza is unloaded, the empty containers may not return to
Israeli territory, he said. ''We'd rather use the money for food.''

In the dialysis ward of Shifa Hospital, Ahmed Shabat, 51, sits in fraying
clothes. He must come every other day. ''This is my work,'' he says, then shows
the swollen veins on his arms caused by a lack of mineral supplements normally
provided. ''What is the relationship between humanitarian and political aims
here?'' he asked. ''The United States is the mother of democracy. What is
political about salaries to teachers and nurses? Please,'' he said, ''please
don't mix humanitarian help with politics. Please separate the two.''

Ismail Siam is watching over his sister, Asma al-Saidi, 53, who has metastatic
breast cancer. She had radiation therapy, but a Tel Aviv hospital returned her
to Gaza before chemotherapy because the Hamas-run government could not pay for
it. Al Shifa does not have the required drugs, and so provides only analgesics
to ease her pain.

Mr. Siam, who works for the authority, alternates days here with his brother.
Both live in Khan Yunis, farther south in the strip, and they are borrowing the
$10 a day needed to travel here and back. Because the hospital lacks
disposables, they also spend $100 every four days, he said, on laxatives, urine
bags, catheters, anticonvulsives, feeding tubes and adhesive tape for their
sister.

''I borrow from friends and have no more credit at the grocery store,'' Mr. Siam
said. ''Unfortunately, the whole world has chosen to punish us for our vote for
Hamas. And I also blame everyone who calls himself a Muslim and who does not
help us.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: At Al Shifa, Gaza's main hospital, a medical storage room is
nearly empty. The hospital is short of everything from disposable needles to
adhesive tape, and it can no longer provide chemotherapy for many forms of
cancer. Latifa Nimir Tanna, 53, left, is a patient at the hospital, which has
only a few days' supply of important surgical drugs and has used up its
strategic three-month cache of such drugs normally kept for a health crisis.
(Photographs by George Azar for The New York Times)(pg. A12)
 Hanin al-Hilo and his father, who awaited dialysis at a Gaza hospital. (Photo
by George Azar for The New York Times)(pg. A1)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); NURSES & NURSING (90%); HAMAS (89%);
BUDGETS (86%); ANESTHETICS (76%); DRUG SHORTAGES (75%); CANCER DRUGS (75%);
BLOOD TRANSFUSIONS (74%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (74%); CANCER (74%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (73%); ANTIBIOTICS (73%); CHEMOTHERAPY & RADIATION (72%); DIALYSIS
(72%); MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (71%); ANTICOAGULANTS (70%); ANALGESICS
(70%); ADHESIVES & SEALANTS (69%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION (69%);
GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (67%); EUROPEAN UNION (65%); BUDGET DEFICITS (60%); WAGES &
SALARIES (60%) Palestinians; Foreign Aid; United States International Relations;
Finances; Budgets and Budgeting; Security and Warning Systems; Travel
Restrictions

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (59%); EUROPEAN UNION (59%) European Union; Hamas;
Palestinian Authority

PERSON: Steven Erlanger

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES
(92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (90%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; Israel; Karni (Israel)

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1172 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqis Are Close to Filling Several Top Posts, but Roadblocks Remain

BYLINE: By RICHARD A. OPPEL Jr.; Abdul Razzaq al-Saiedi, Sabrina Tavernise and
Khalid al-Ansary contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 12

LENGTH: 642 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 8


Iraqi political leaders made several minor breakthroughs toward forming a new
government on Monday, but they said a number of issues must be resolved before
the prime minister-designate, Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, can announce his cabinet and
assume his role as the first full-term chief executive in the post-invasion
government.

Mr. Maliki, who was a Shiite hard-liner while serving in the national Parliament
but must now become a consensus builder who can bring together Shiites, Kurds
and Sunnis, had vowed to assemble a cabinet by Tuesday. But by late Monday that
appeared unlikely, several political leaders said, and they added that it could
take until next week to form the new government.

A few of the more important jobs appeared to have been filled, said Khalid
al-Atiya, a senior Shiite official and deputy speaker of Parliament.

Mr. Atiya said it appeared that the foreign minister would once again be Hoshyar
Zebari, a Kurd, and that Barham Saleh, another Kurd, would be a deputy prime
minister. The other deputy prime minister would be a member of the largest Sunni
Arab political bloc, the Iraqi Consensus Front, but no one had yet been chosen,
he said.

Meanwhile, violence continued throughout the country, punctuated by two car
bombs in Baghdad that killed at least 7 and wounded 18, Interior Ministry
officials said. Both bombs detonated at about 2:30 p.m.; one struck near a
courthouse and the other exploded at a central square. Other car bombs in the
city wounded 18 Iraqis on Monday.

The military reported that two American soldiers were killed, one on Monday
southeast of Baghdad and the other on Sunday in Tal Afar, in the north.

DynCorp, an American contractor, issued a statement on Monday saying that one of
its employees, a police trainer, was killed by an improvised bomb near the
capital. DynCorp identified the trainer as Rudy Mesa, 56, of Maxwell, Tex., and
said he was killed when the military convoy he was in was struck. He had worked
for DynCorp in Iraq since March 31, and had been with the San Marcos, Tex.,
police force for 11 years.

Two employees of an Iraqi television station were killed after their abduction
by men dressed as police officers, according to the Committee to Protect
Journalists, a nonprofit group in New York. Their bodies were discovered Monday
morning south of Baghdad. Both had been shot in the chest.

At least 10 more bodies were found in Baghdad and in Babel Province, apparently
the latest victims in the continuing sectarian strife, Iraqi officials said.
Witnesses in Baghdad's heavily Sunni district of Adhamiya reported that Iraqi
soldiers had clashed with residents.

In political talks on Monday, crucial negotiating remained over the Interior
Ministry, which controls the police and commandos. Sunni leaders say the
ministry is heavily infiltrated by militiamen who have been complicit in
anti-Sunni death squads. Over the weekend the ministry announced that a police
general had been charged with involvement in killings and kidnappings.

Mr. Atiya, the senior Shiite official, said the dominant Shiite alliance would
select the next interior minister, but that the person would have to be from
outside the Shiite alliance. However, a senior aide to President Jalal Talabani
said he did not believe that the Shiites had agreed to appoint someone outside
their own coalition.

Several politicians also said the Shiite coalition would probably appoint the
minister of finance and that Ahmad Chalabi, the onetime Pentagon favorite, was
in the running.

Amira al-Baldawi, an independent member of the Shiite alliance, said the
alliance would probably get the ministries of higher education, agriculture,
oil, finance, industry, transportation, health and tourism. Within the alliance,
the slate led by Moqtada al-Sadr would likely get agriculture, transportation
and health, she said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Prime Minister-designate Nuri Kamal al-Maliki, left, talked
with President Jalal Talabani yesterday as leaders tried to form a full cabinet
by today. (Photo by Ahmad al-Rubaye/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)
 A car bomb killed three policemen in Baghdad yesterday, as violence continued
across the country. (Photo by Ali Abbas/European Pressphoto Agency)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PRIME MINISTERS (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); BOMBINGS
(89%); TERRORISM (87%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); POLICE FORCES (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (73%);
IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); JOURNALISM (69%);
ARMED FORCES (69%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (66%); SHOOTINGS (66%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (65%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (60%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (50%) Bombs and
Explosives; Politics and Government; United States International Relations;
United States Armament and Defense

PERSON: NOURI AL-MALIKI (94%); JALAL TALABANI (57%) Richard A Jr Oppel; Nuri
Kamal Al- Maliki

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (97%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq)

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1173 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 9, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Angry Darfur Refugees Riot In Demand for U.N. Troops

BYLINE: By LYDIA POLGREEN

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 1133 words

DATELINE: KALMA CAMP, Sudan, May 8


An African Union interpreter was hacked to death on Monday in this vast, squalid
camp by a mob of angry demonstrators within hours of a visit from the top United
Nations aid official.

The United Nations evacuated aid workers and journalists from the camp when a
huge demonstration calling for rapid international intervention in Darfur turned
violent.

The protesters tried to stab a longtime Oxfam worker they suspected of being a
spy for the Sudanese government, and then set upon an African Union compound
where unarmed police officers and a Sudanese interpreter had barricaded
themselves. The outpost was soon overrun and looted, and the interpreter killed.

The violence underscored the tenuousness of the peace deal reached last week in
Nigeria by the government and the main rebel faction, and also illustrated the
barely contained tensions in enormous camps where more than two million refugees
live.

The demonstrators were demanding that a United Nations force replace the African
Union soldiers assigned to protect civilians here. Protesters at another camp,
Zallingei, also attacked an African Union outpost on Monday, but no one was
killed.

Jan Egeland, the United Nations under secretary general for humanitarian
affairs, was investigating deteriorating conditions in Kalma since an aid group
coordinating assistance was evicted last month.

The chaos raised questions about the ability of the African Union force to
oversee this critical period between the signing of the peace agreement, which
it will have to enforce, and the arrival of a much larger United Nations force,
which is many months away.

The 7,000-member African Union force is caught in an ''impossible squeeze,
really, between the exploding expectations of the civilian population of
security, which they have been denied for so long, and on the other side the
simple limitations of their capacity,'' Mr. Egeland said.

With its limited means and the rising frustration it faces from the people it is
trying to protect, the African Union is struggling to police a grim conflict
that has spawned what the United Nations has called the world's greatest
humanitarian crisis and the United States has called genocide.

Mr. Egeland's visit began peacefully. He was greeted by thousands of
demonstrators hoisting banners that read ''No, no rapes and genocide,'' and
chants of ''Welcome, welcome, U.S.A.! Welcome, welcome, international force!''
from a swirling mass of men in white robes and women in a rainbow of shawls.

As the morning wore on, the mood darkened. Conditions have worsened here
recently, and this month residents will get half as much food as before because
the World Food Program is running out of money.

Beyond that, youth groups were angry that their elders had shut them out of a
meeting with Mr. Egeland. And the population of the camp is mostly of the Fur
ethnic group, the same tribe as the leader of a rebel group that refused to sign
the peace agreement.

''We don't want this peace,'' shouted Siddiq Abakar Moussa, one of the menacing
youths who gathered to denounce the peace deal. ''This is not our peace. We need
the United Nations force to protect us.''

One banner denounced the leader of the rebel faction that did sign the
agreement, Minni Arcua Minnawi. ''To the Darfur, Arco Minawi is destroyer,'' it
read, misspelling his name.

As Mr. Egeland's convoy left one part of the camp, a small group of protesters
tried to stab the Oxfam aid worker.

''Janjaweed, janjaweed!'' the crowd shouted, grasping at the worker, who is
Sudanese, as he tried to flee the melee in a car. Janjaweed is the local term
for the Arab militias who have aligned with the government and carried out
brutal attacks on non-Arab villages across the vast arid Darfur, a region in
western Sudan the size of France.

The anger in the swirling crowd was palpable when they set upon the aid worker.
One young man wielded a knife that came so near the worker's flesh it sheared
his shirt. Women tugged at his legs. Boys in filthy white robes wielding sticks
and rocks smashed the windows of the United Nations car in which he was trying
to get away.

Mr. Egeland, appearing shaken by the news of the killing of the African Union
interpreter after his visit to the camp, condemned the violence.

''I have seen for myself how the African Union colleagues courageously assist
the civilian population and the humanitarian community,'' he said. ''It is
totally, totally unacceptable, what happened today in Kalma.''

Conditions have deteriorated in Kalma, one of the oldest and largest camps,
since the Norwegian Refugee Council, an aid group, was evicted by the Sudanese
authorities last month. Government officials say the organization was allowing
the rebels and criminals to flourish in the camp, but crime has increased since
the agency left, people here said.

''We have no food, no safety,'' said Halima Muhammed Abakar, who has lived here
for three desperate years. ''Yesterday four women were raped when they went to
get firewood. We are so afraid.''

The African Union is clearly outmanned. When the mob set upon their compound
here, the small, unarmed force inside was helpless and terrified. An armed
contingent had to be dispatched from the regional capital to rescue them. But
the force did not arrive on time, and the mob broke through their barricades,
Mr. Egeland said.

Before the killing, protesters and camp residents said they were frustrated with
the African Union because it was not doing enough to protect them and demanded
that a United Nations force be sent at once. The United Nations is organizing
such a force and the Sudanese government has said it will accept it now that a
peace accord has been signed, but it will take many months to arrive.

''The African Union are our friends, and we need them in this critical moment,''
Mr. Egeland said. ''We need the population to support and not attack them.''

Mr. Egeland visited Kalma in part because the situation here is emblematic of
the conflict, which has raged for three years, killed 200,000 people and driven
more than two million from their homes. Aid agencies have had enormous trouble
helping the afflicted, and since the Norwegian council was evicted, new arrivals
have been stuck in improvised shelters with no food and little water.

''Since we arrived, we don't have any access to food, to water, to any health
service,'' said Sheik Ahmed Khalil Muhammed, who fled to this camp in March with
160 families from a village nearby. They arrived two days before the council was
expelled, and since then they have been living outside.

''No one has come to check on us,'' Mr. Muhammed told Mr. Egeland. ''We have
become desperate.''

If conditions do not improve soon, Mr. Egeland said, ''Kalma is a powder keg.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Refugees in western Sudan first pleaded for United Nations help
yesterday, then protested a new peace pact. (Photo by Michael Kamber for The New
York Times)Map of Sudan highlighting Kalma Refugee Camp: A United Nations
official calls the Kalma camp ''a powder keg.''

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: RIOTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); PEACE PROCESS
(89%); FOOD CHARITIES (89%); WAR CRIMES (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); ETHNIC
GROUPS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (77%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (77%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (77%); IMMIGRATION (77%); CIVIL WAR (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); YOUTH
CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (72%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (68%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (65%); ETHNICITY (50%) Immigration
and Refugees; Demonstrations and Riots; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Civil War and Guerrilla Warfare

ORGANIZATION: AFRICAN UNION (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%) United Nations

PERSON: Lydia Polgreen; Jan Egeland

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); AFRICA (94%); NIGERIA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); Nigeria; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1174 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 11, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Darfur Needs U.N. Peacekeepers Now

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 36

LENGTH: 394 words


The events of the last week demonstrate just how critical it is to get a
well-armed and well-trained United Nations peacekeeping force on the ground in
the Darfur region of Sudan. President Bush is right to press the U.N. to
expedite the deployment of soldiers to take over the role currently performed by
an ineffectual African Union force. If the United Nations is to have any hope of
repairing its tattered image around the world -- particularly in America -- its
diplomats must quickly eliminate any bureaucratic hurdles in the way of a
peacekeeping mission.

The Security Council agreed in February to plan to replace some 7,000 African
Union soldiers with U.N. forces. But when the Sudanese government objected, the
planning for a peacekeeping force stopped.

Meanwhile, the genocide has spread, as Arab militias who call themselves the
janjaweed and are backed by the government of Sudan have continued to raid
villages in Darfur, and now villages across the border in Chad as well. More
than 200,000 men, women and children have been slaughtered in this conflict, and
women in refugee camps are routinely raped as they do simple chores like
fetching water.

A peace deal reached last week between the government of Sudan and the largest
rebel group is a good first step. But that deal is utterly meaningless without a
strong U.N. force on the ground to back it up.

Any doubt of that should have been dispelled on Monday, when a tour of a Darfur
refugee camp by Jan Egeland, the U.N.'s top humanitarian official, was followed
by riots. The refugees attacked an aid worker in Mr. Egeland's entourage,
believing that he was in the janjaweed. The aid worker escaped, but rioters
later turned on a translator with the African Union force and hacked him to
death. This is yet another reminder of the ineffectiveness of the African Union
force: it was unable to protect its own translator from enraged refugees, just
as it has been unable to protect refugees from the janjaweed.

Sudan's government has indicated that with the peace deal now signed, it no
longer objects to the deployment of a U.N. force. Diplomats should take this and
run with it, straight to Darfur with a contingent of at least 20,000 well-armed
multinational soldiers, from both Arab and African countries. The negotiations
are over, and the peace deal is in effect. Now is the time for action.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (88%); PEACE PROCESS
(88%); GENOCIDE (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(75%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (71%); WORKPLACE VIOLENCE (71%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(71%); RIOTS (64%) Editorials; United States International Relations; War
Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); AFRICAN UNION (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (57%) United Nations; African Union

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (85%) George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); AFRICA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHAD (79%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan)

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1175 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 812 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-22

London Bombing Report Cites Unheeded Threat
British counterterrorism agencies failed to understand the ''development of the
homegrown threat and the radicalization of British citizens'' before the four
bombings in London last July 7, according to a long-awaited parliamentary
report.   A21

Colombia Eases Abortion Ban


Colombia's highest court legalized abortion under extreme circumstances, a
decision that is expected to embolden women's rights groups across Latin America
to use courts to roll back some of the world's most stringent abortion laws.
A14

French Colleges Resist Change
A suburban campus of the University of Paris, with no student center, no
bookstore and no freshman orientation, reflects the crisis of France's archaic
state-owned university system: overcrowded, underfinanced and resistant to
changes.   A1

Fatwa Issued for Palestinian Aid
Religious leaders from a number of Muslim countries issued a joint edict
requiring Muslims to donate money to the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority,
currently boycotted as a terrorist group by the United States and the European
Union.   A8

Jordan's Islamists Eye Politics
Jordan's Islamists, emboldened by the Muslim Brotherhood's electoral gains in
Egypt last year and by the rise to power of Hamas in the Palestinian elections,
are preparing to take part in possible council and parliamentary elections in
their own country.   A10

NATIONAL   A23-30

N.S.A. Report Prompts Uproar on Capitol Hill
Congressional Republicans and Democrats demanded answers from the Bush
administration about a report in USA Today that the National Security Agency has
collected records of millions on domestic phone calls, even as President Bush
told Americans that their privacy is ''fiercely protected.''   A1

Senate Keeps Bush's Tax Cuts
The Senate passed almost $70 billion in tax cuts, most of which will flow to the
nation's wealthiest taxpayers. The action ensured that virtually all of
President Bush's tax cuts will be locked in place until after the next
presidential election.   A1

Appropriations Panel Inquiry
Federal investigators are looking at the activities of members of the House
Appropriations Committee, including Representative Jerry Lewis, the California
Republican and chairman of the panel that wields broad influence over spending,
government officials said.   A30

Priest Guilty in Nun's Killing
The Rev. Gerald Robinson, a Roman Catholic priest, was found guilty of murdering
a nun 26 years ago in what another priest testified was a ritual intended to
defile the nun.   A29

Army Changes Recruit Program
The Army has shaken up a program to heal recruits injured in basic training
after soldiers and their parents said troops injured at Fort Sill were punished
with physical abuse and medical neglect.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Bizarre Details Emerge In Mob Murder Indictment
A racketeering indictment that was unsealed in a federal court in Brooklyn
brought to light a slew of sensational details that depict a bizarre murder for
hire plot as a grisly affair. Among the interesting aspects to the case is that
the victim, Robert McKelvey, proved hard to kill. After an effort to strangle
him failed, he was stabbed, then drowned.   B1

Coping With War Deaths
When 10 U.S. soldiers died in a helicopter plane crash in Afghanistan, the
military base at Fort Drum in upstate New York relied on its close-knit support
structure for families that mirrors the military's organization and provides
soldiers' relatives with the resources to cope with death.   B1

Parents Protest Phone Ban
In the weeks since the Department of Education began surprise searches for
contraband in the public schools, which includes cellular phones, many parents
have organized to protest the ban on phones, which they say are lifelines to
their children. While other parents see the scanning as an issue of civil
liberties.   B1

OBITUARIES   A31

Floyd Patterson
The gentleman boxer who emerged from a troubled boyhood to have a 20-year career
and become the world heavy weight champion twice, knocking out Archie Moore and
Ingemar Johansson, he was 71.   A31

BUSINESS DAY   C1-10

Wal-Mart and Organic Food
Starting this summer, there will be a lot more organic food on supermarket
shelves, and it should cost a lot less. The reason is that Wal-Mart wants to
sell more organic food -- and because of its size and clout, Wal-Mart usually
gets what it wants.   A1

After starting an advocacy group that trumpets the company's contributions to
America, Wal-Mart is now quietly helping to recruit its suppliers to join the
public relations offensive -- a move that some vendors say puts improper
pressure on them.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A32-33

Editorials: An ever-expanding secret; Abe Rosenthal of The Times; Mr. Putin's
state of the union; ''the future -- what's that?''

Column: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E35
TV Listings   E25
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); TAXES & TAXATION (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
HAMAS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TAX LAW (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%);
US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); RELIGION (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); APPROPRIATIONS (89%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (88%); ARMIES (87%); POLITICAL PARTIES (87%); US PRESIDENTS (87%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); ARMED FORCES (83%); POLITICS (77%); INDICTMENTS
(76%); ABORTION (76%); ABORTION LAWS (76%); SUPREME COURTS (76%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); VERDICTS (76%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (75%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (75%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(74%); EUROPEAN UNION (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (71%); WOMEN
(71%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (70%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (69%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (64%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (56%); MURDER (52%) Terms
not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (52%); JERRY LEWIS (50%)

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (94%); PARIS, FRANCE (77%)

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); COLOMBIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); JORDAN (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (79%); FRANCE (79%); EGYPT (79%); EUROPE (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1176 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 12, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Why Insist on The Surrender of Ratko Mladic?

BYLINE: By Timothy William Waters.

Timothy William Waters, a visiting professor of law at the University of
Mississippi, worked in the Office of the Prosecutor at the International
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia from 1999 to 2000.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 33

LENGTH: 794 words

DATELINE: Oxford, Miss.


I DON'T think Europe should insist on arresting Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb
general accused of war crimes. That's hardly the side of the debate one wants to
be assigned, because General Mladic -- described as the engineer of ethnic
cleansing at Srebrenica and Sarajevo in the 1990's -- should be arrested and
handed over to the United Nations' war crimes tribunal. But why might it not be
a good idea for Europe to insist on it?

There are good arguments for linking Serbia's entry into the European Union to
General Mladic's arrest, but the union isn't making them. Instead of having an
open-eyed debate about the benefits and costs of arrest, Europe is making three
lazy assumptions about the role of international justice in transforming
societies.

The first is that arresting a war criminal is a small price to pay for European
integration. But try this out: not arresting a war criminal is a small price to
pay for European integration. The difference is who pays. If Europe wants
integration, it could help Serbia make progress on reforms by not insisting on
linkage.

Linkage might compel General Mladic's arrest and jump-start normal politics in
Serbia, but it also risks backlash and delay; in fact, talks have now been
suspended. How important is General Mladic's arrest balanced against the
integration of 8 million people in a region that badly needs stability? Against
the decisions that must be made regarding independence and constitutional reform
in Montenegro, Kosovo and Bosnia, in which Serbia's role is critical? It is
possible that insisting on ''Mladic or bust'' will make bust more likely.

The second assumption: General Mladic's arrest is necessary to prove that Serbia
is serious about transforming itself. But is extracting General Mladic under
pressure going to change Serbian values?

Rather than linking talks to one arrest, the European Union should ask if a
deeply brutalized society like Serbia's is a worthy partner for integration,
regardless of the disposition of any one war criminal. Making General Mladic a
totem for what Europe really needs -- Serbia's transformation -- stunts the
union's ability to understand and encourage that process.

Fixation on General Mladic is of a piece with the naive thinking behind much
Western foreign policy from the Balkans to Baghdad. Similarly optimistic claims
were made when former President Slobodan Milosevic was arrested, but five years
later, Serbia's politics still haven't advanced enough. Oh -- maybe that's
because we haven't gotten General Mladic.

Then there are the advantages to not insisting. Negotiated reforms could begin
in earnest, and integration might make the Serbs eventually turn their backs on
General Mladic and what he represents. How much better for reconciliation if the
Serbs spit out General Mladic on their own, in shame and disgust, not because
they see his surrender to The Hague as the only way to get their hands on 30
euros of silver.

A third assumption underlies the other two: that Europe's demands are natural
and uncontroversial and only recalcitrant Serbian nationalists don't get it.

But denying the discretionary nature of these demands stifles debate about real
costs. Europe claims that it is Serbia that is choosing isolation and
stagnation, but these costs are determined by Europe. For reasons most Europeans
do not agree with, General Mladic's arrest is controversial in a Serbia
otherwise eager to integrate. Is one war criminal's arrest really worth pushing
Serbia back into the dark? There's no easy formula for deciding where to draw
the line, but the calculation is not helped by soporifically pious
pronouncements about the necessity of linking a nation's fate to one man's, nor
by pretending that Europe is not imposing the terms, however just.

Serbia's integration into Europe is vital, and that is precisely why Europe
needs a rational debate about what it should and should not ask of Serbia. The
effect of the present policy is uncertain: Serbia's normalization might be set
back by General Mladic's arrest or, as has now happened, by a too hasty
insistence on it by outsiders. Precisely because Serbia's integration is vital,
both to Serbia and to Europe, Europe should consider if it really must be
delayed.

The mania for General Mladic partly comes of our need for a war criminal because
the last one, Mr. Milosevic, so recently and inconveniently died. General
Mladic's arrest had already been on the agenda, but the chief Balkan butcher's
departure added a certain frisson to calls for the next-worst-thing's
incarceration. It's not clear what that has to do with changing Serbia, but it's
worth asking what we want General Mladic for.

Because we want a war criminal, badly. And it doesn't matter what it might cost.



URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Drawing by George Bates)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES (94%); EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); FOREIGN POLICY (50%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (83%); UNITED NATIONS (57%) European Union

PERSON: Timothy Williams Waters; Ratko (Gen) Mladic

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%)

STATE: MISSISSIPPI, USA (74%)

COUNTRY: EUROPE (96%); SERBIA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (95%); MONTENEGRO (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%); KOSOVO
(79%); UNITED STATES (74%)

REGION: Serbia and Montenegro; Europe; Bosnia and Herzegovina; Serbia and
Montenegro

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1179 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 15, 2006 Monday
                              Late Edition - Final

America The Fearful

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Editorial Desk; Pg. 21

LENGTH: 768 words


In the dark days of the Depression, Franklin Roosevelt counseled Americans to
avoid fear. George W. Bush is his polar opposite. The public's fear is this
president's most potent political asset. Perhaps his only asset.

Mr. Bush wants ordinary Americans to remain in a perpetual state of fear -- so
terrified, in fact, that they will not object to the steady erosion of their
rights and liberties, and will not notice the many ways in which their fear is
being manipulated to feed an unconscionable expansion of presidential power.

If voters can be kept frightened enough of terrorism, they might even overlook
the monumental incompetence of one of the worst administrations the nation has
ever known.

Four marines drowned Thursday when their 60-ton tank rolled off a bridge and
sank in a canal about 50 miles west of Baghdad. Three American soldiers in Iraq
were killed by roadside bombs the same day. But those tragic and wholly
unnecessary deaths were not the big news. The big news was the latest leak of
yet another presidential power grab: the administration's collection of the
telephone records of tens of millions of American citizens.

The Bush crowd, which gets together each morning to participate in a highly
secret ritual of formalized ineptitude, is trying to get its creepy hands on all
the telephone records of everybody in the entire country. It supposedly wants
these records, which contain crucial documentation of calls for Chinese takeout
in Terre Haute, Ind., and birthday greetings to Grandma in Talladega, Ala., to
help in the search for Osama bin Laden.

Hey, the president has made it clear that when Al Qaeda is calling, he wants to
be listening, and you never know where that lead may turn up.

The problem (besides the fact that the president has been as effective hunting
bin Laden as Dick Cheney was in hunting quail) is that in its fearmongering and
power-grabbing the Bush administration has trampled all over the Constitution,
the democratic process and the hallowed American tradition of government checks
and balances.

Short of having them taken away from us, there is probably no way to fully
appreciate the wonder and the glory of our rights and liberties here in the
United States, including the right to privacy.

The Constitution and the elaborate system of checks and balances were meant to
protect us against the possibility of a clownish gang of small men and women
amassing excessive power and behaving like tyrants or kings. But the normal
safeguards have not been working since the Bush crowd came to power, starting
with the hijacked presidential election in 2000.

After the Sept. 11 attacks, all bets were off. John Kennedy once said, ''The
United States, as the world knows, will never start a war.'' But George W. Bush,
employing an outrageous propaganda campaign (''Shock and awe,'' ''We don't want
the smoking gun to be a mushroom cloud''), started an utterly pointless war in
Iraq that he still doesn't know how to win or how to end.

If you listen to the Bush version of reality, the president is all powerful. In
that version, we are fighting a war against terrorism, which is a war that will
never end. And as long as we are at war (forever), there is no limit to the
war-fighting powers the president can claim as commander in chief.

So we've kidnapped people and sent them off to be tortured in the extraordinary
rendition program; and we've incarcerated people at Guantanamo Bay and elsewhere
without trial or even the right to know the charges against them; and we're
allowing the C.I.A. to operate super-secret prisons where God-knows-what-all is
going on; and we're listening in on the phone calls and reading the e-mail of
innocent Americans without warrants; and on and on and on.

The Bushies will tell you that it is dangerous and even against the law to
inquire into these nefarious activities. We just have to trust the king.

Well, I give you fair warning. This is a road map to totalitarianism. Hallmarks
of totalitarian regimes have always included an excessive reliance on secrecy,
the deliberate stoking of fear in the general population, a preference for
military rather than diplomatic solutions in foreign policy, the promotion of
blind patriotism, the denial of human rights, the curtailment of the rule of
law, hostility to a free press and the systematic invasion of the privacy of
ordinary people.

There are not enough pretty words in all the world to cover up the damage that
George W. Bush has done to his country. If the United States could look at
itself in a mirror, it would be both alarmed and ashamed at what it saw.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); AL-QAEDA
(89%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%);
ELECTIONS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(77%); SEPTEMBER 11 ATTACK (75%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(71%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (70%);
BOMBINGS (70%); ARMED FORCES (69%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (65%); SPORT HUNTING (62%)
Terms not available from NYTimes

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (89%); DICK CHENEY (58%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (54%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (71%); TERRE HAUTE, IN, USA (70%)

STATE: INDIANA, USA (79%); ALABAMA, USA (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAQ (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1182 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Dithering Through Death

BYLINE: By NICHOLAS D. KRISTOF

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 745 words


For those of us who admire the United Nations, there is an uncomfortable reality
to grapple with:

The U.N. has put barely a speed bump in the path to genocide in Darfur. The U.N.
has been just as ineffective there for the last three years as it was during the
slaughter in Rwanda, Bosnia and Cambodia. Once again, it rolled over. It's no
wonder that anti-genocide campaigners have barely bothered protesting at the
U.N. and have instead focused their pressure on the White House.

The sad fact is that the U.N. is a wimp. It publishes fine reports and is
terrific at handing out food and organizing vaccination campaigns, but the
General Assembly and the Security Council routinely doze through crimes against
humanity.

Sure enough, to the extent that there is now a ray of hope in Darfur, what has
changed is not that the U.N. has awakened, but that President Bush has shown
greater initiative.

My guess is that the recent peace deal in Darfur will fall apart. It is fragile
on the rebel side, and Sudan is probably lying once again when it promises to
disarm the janjaweed militia. All that said, this peace agreement is the best
hope we have to end the genocide, and the U.N. needs to back it up by
dispatching an international force to Darfur. If the U.N. fails that test in the
coming weeks, it will have disgraced itself again.

Frankly, the U.N. has regularly failed abysmally in situations like the one in
Darfur, when military intervention is needed but a major power (in this case
China) uses the threat of a veto to block action.

The U.N. has done better in organizing security for elections. The U.N. effort
to help Mozambique out of its civil war in the early 1990's was a huge success,
and the U.N. also helped greatly in the run-up to the birth of East Timor in
2002.

But by and large, victims of war and genocide are served about as well by the
U.N. as earlier generations were by the Kellogg-Briand pact to outlaw war.
Granted, when the U.N. fails, that simply means that its member states fail --
but the upshot is still that when genocide alarm bells go off, the places to
call are Washington, London and Paris, not New York.

Does this mean I buy into the right wing's denunciations of the U.N.?

No, partly because the U.N. agencies do a fine job in humanitarian operations.
The World Food Program and Unicef are first-rate; they jointly run the U.N.
operation I most admire, the school-feeding program. For 19 cents a day per
child, they provide meals in impoverished schools, and those meals hugely
increase school attendance (see www.wfp.org).

And without the World Food Program organizing food shipments to Sudan and Chad,
hundreds of thousands more people would have died. Those U.N. field workers are
heroic -- just this month, a 37-year-old Spanish woman working for Unicef was
shot and critically injured in Chad. People like her redeem the honor of the
U.N.

There's also an ounce of hope that the U.N.'s senior officials will learn how to
use one tool they have neglected: their bully pulpit.

The best example of this approach is the work by Jan Egeland, the U.N.'s under
secretary for humanitarian affairs -- one of the real (and rare) heroes of
Darfur. Mr. Egeland is Norwegian, but I wish he could quickly become an Asian
and thus have a chance to be the next secretary general.

Mr. Egeland has led the way on disasters by being undiplomatic about horrors
like the slaughter in Darfur and the catastrophe in Congo. Perhaps it helps that
Mr. Egeland is so evenhanded that he offends everybody. After the tsunami, he
correctly called many rich countries ''stingy'' with their foreign aid, thus
touching off a useful debate in the U.S. about our aid levels.

If other U.N. officials followed Mr. Egeland's undiplomatic example and spent
more time being offensive, devoting less energy to diplomatic receptions and
more to dragging journalists through the world's hellholes, the globe would be a
better place -- and the U.N. would be more relevant.

John Bolton, now the U.S. ambassador to the U.N., once suggested it wouldn't
matter if the U.N.'s top 10 floors were lopped off. But let's not do that -- the
U.N. is far better than the alternative of having no such institution. But take
it from this disillusioned fan of the U.N. system: let's also be realistic and
drop any fantasy that the U.N. is going to save the day as a genocide unfolds.
In that mission, the U.N. is failing about as badly as the League of Nations
did.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); DISARMAMENT
(78%); VETO (78%); WAR CRIMES (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); ELECTIONS (76%); FOOD
ASSISTANCE (74%); FOOD CHARITIES (74%); SCHOOL MEAL PROGRAMS (70%); PEACE
PROCESS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); SCHOOL ATTENDANCE (60%) War Crimes,
Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity; United States International Relations

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%) United
Nations

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (74%) Nicholas D Kristof; George W (Pres) Bush

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (51%); LONDON, ENGLAND (51%)

COUNTRY: SUDAN (98%); RWANDA (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%);
FRANCE (51%)

REGION: Sudan; Darfur (Sudan); China; Sudan

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1183 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1021 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

U.S. Re-establishes Ties After Libya's Cooperation
The Bush administration announced that it would re-establish full diplomatic
ties with Libya because that nation had abandoned its nuclear and other
nonconventional weapons programs and helped in the campaign against terrorism.
The decision ends more than 25 years of hostility and sends a strong signal to
Iran and North Korea to follow suit.   A1

Hussein Is Formally Indicted


Saddam Hussein was confronted with a formal legal indictment when a five-judge
panel hearing a case that centers on the killing of 148 Shiites in 1982 approved
charges of crimes against humanity against him and seven co-defendants. The
charges carry an almost certain death penalty.   A1

The American military said it killed 25 insurgents in air and ground attacks in
Yusefiya, a city south of Baghdad. Two American airmen died when their
helicopter was shot down, the military said. Two marines were also killed in
Anbar Province, a largely Sunni area west of Baghdad, the military said.   A12

New Incentive for Iran
The European Union said it would offer a new incentive package to Iran,
including technology to build nuclear power plants for civilian energy
production, provided Iran ceased its nuclear-enrichment program.   A3

More Killings in Sri Lanka
In the conflict in Sri Lanka, truce monitors, led by Nordic countries, said they
were investigating the killings of 13 Tamils in the northern Jaffna Peninsula.
A10

Afghan Police and Taliban Clash
Fighting between suspected Taliban fighters and Afghan police officers broke out
in a village near the former southern Taliban stronghold of Kandahar,
Afghanistan, and raged most of the day, leaving five officers and at least six
Taliban dead, officials and residents said.   A12

NATIONAL   A16-22

In Address, Bush Calls For Immigration Compromise
President Bush proposed a plan to place 6,000 National Guard troops along the
border with Mexico for at least the next year but urged the Congress and the
nation to find a middle ground in dealing with illegal immigration.   A1

Medicare Enrollment Ends
After procrastinating for weeks, Medicare beneficiaries flocked to centers for
the elderly around the country and made frantic calls to insurers to beat the
deadline for prescription drug coverage as the initial enrollment period ended.
A19

Thousands Flee Record Floods
After days of record rainfall, rivers in Maine, Massachusetts and New Hampshire
spilled over their banks, causing thousands of residents to flee their homes and
brace for what could be the region's worst flooding in 70 years.   A16

Ruling Favors Clean Water
The Supreme Court ruled that operators of hydroelectric dams must meet a state's
water quality requirements in order to qualify for a federal license. The
decision was the Roberts Court's first ruling in an environmental case and came
as a relief to environmental advocates.   A18

Concern Over Alligator Attacks
While alligator attacks are not everyday occurrences in Florida, three women
have been killed by alligators in the past week.   A18

New Indictment in Rape Case
A third lacrosse player was indicted in the rape investigation that has raised
tensions between Duke University and its hometown.   A16

Displaced Voters Favor Nagin
Thousands of displaced New Orleans residents appear set for a significant role
in Saturday's runoff vote -- and one that could provide a boost for Mayor C. Ray
Nagin.   A17

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Rise in Diabetes Cases Outpaces the Resources
Health care officials who rely on federal money to help stem the growing
epidemic of Type 2 diabetes say they are becoming increasingly alarmed as
federal spending on the disease is falling short of what is needed.   A1

DNA Exonerates Convict
Prosecutors in Rochester are expected today to dismiss the conviction of a man
who has spent 10 years in jail for murdering a community activist. The move
comes after a series of DNA tests linked blood found at the crime scene to
another man.   B1

City Sues 15 Gun Dealers
New York City is suing 15 out-of-state gun shops that it says improperly sold
firearms to teams of private investigators who posed as gun buyers as part of a
novel strategy being used in Mayor Bloomberg's campaign against illegal
firearms.   B3

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-8

A New Maya Epoch
Archaeologists are making discoveries that open expanded vistas of the vibrant
Maya civilization in its formative period, a time reaching back more than 1,000
years before its celebrated Classic epoch.   F1

Health & Fitness   F5

SPORTSTUESDAY   D1-6

Owning Baseball's Numbers
In baseball, statistics convey ideas and images that become inseparable from the
players to whom they belong. Now, a lawsuit between a company that operates
fantasy sports leagues over the Internet and the Internet arm of Major League
Baseball addresses the legal question of whether players own the connection of
name and number when it is used for such a commercial purpose.   A1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Closing Enron Arguments
The government began closing arguments in the Enron fraud trial, with a
prosecutor portraying Jeffrey K. Skilling and Kenneth L. Lay as image-obsessed
chief executives who put their own interests first, while defrauding investors.
C1

China Strengthens Yuan
China allowed its currency to strengthen past the symbolic level of eight to the
dollar, rattling Asian markets already shaken by the dollar's extended slide and
the drop in share prices in the United States.   C1

EBay Patent Case Sent Back
A long-running patent dispute between eBay and MercExchange entered a new and,
quite likely, still not final phase when the Supreme Court sent the case back to
the lower federal courts.   C1

Sales of Lens Cleaner Halted
Bausch & Lomb said it was halting worldwide sales of its ReNu With MoistureLoc
soft contact lens cleaner because tests showed that its misuse could leave users
at risk for a blinding fungal infection.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A24-25

Editorials: Border illusions; extending the Medicare deadline; Turkey, Armenia
and denial.

Columns: John Tierney, Nicholas D. Kristof.

Crossword   E8
Obituaries   A22-23
TV Listings   E9
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: INDICTMENTS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
ELECTRIC POWER PLANTS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); TALIBAN (89%); MEDICARE
(85%); IMMIGRATION (79%); TERRORISM (77%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (77%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); LITIGATION (77%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); ARMED
FORCES (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); POWER PLANTS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (72%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);
ENERGY & UTILITY CONSTRUCTION (72%); COUNTERTERRORISM (72%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER
(71%); HYDROELECTRIC POWER GENERATION (71%); JUDGES (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%);
ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (67%); FLOODS & FLOODING (64%); DAMS & RESERVOIRS (64%);
PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE (61%); SENIOR CITIZENS (61%); HEALTH INSURANCE
(61%); AGING (60%); EUROPEAN UNION (52%); LICENSES & PERMITS (50%); PRESCRIPTION
DRUGS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (70%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%)

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%); NEW HAMPSHIRE, USA (79%); MAINE, USA (77%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LIBYA (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
AFGHANISTAN (93%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); SRI LANKA
(92%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (79%); EUROPE (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (55%)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1184 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein Ruling Seems to Raise Execution Odds

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 5; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1323 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 15


Seven months into a trial he has turned into a theater of defiance, Saddam
Hussein was confronted Monday with a formal legal indictment for crimes against
humanity, an action that appeared to bring him a major step closer to the
gallows.

Since the trial began in October, Mr. Hussein has dominated the proceedings. He
has used the platform afforded him by live television broadcasts across the
Middle East to harangue the judges as stooges of the American occupation, lead
walkouts and a hunger strike, and make long, disjointed speeches encouraging the
insurgents fighting American troops.

His histrionics have put America's presence in Iraq on trial as much as he is.
He has been aided by chaotic events, including the resignation of the original
chief judge after three months, assassinations of a judge and two defense
lawyers, and an air of judicial lassitude and administrative bungling that has
resulted in only 24 days of court sessions so far, an average of fewer than four
a month.

But on Monday, the odds against Mr. Hussein's escaping the death penalty
appeared to narrow when a five-judge panel approved charges of crimes against
humanity against Mr. Hussein, the former Iraqi leader, and seven co-defendants.
The trial centers on the execution of 148 Shiite townspeople in the town of
Dujail after an assassination attempt against Mr. Hussein there in 1982.

The charge carries an almost certain death penalty, most likely by hanging.

Taken together, said the chief judge in the trial, Raouf Abdel-Rahman, the
actions ordered by Mr. Hussein, or taken under his authority, met the standard
in international law for crimes against humanity. The indictment summarized Mr.
Hussein's crimes as amounting to ''a widespread or systematic attack directed
against a civilian population,'' involving murder, deportation, torture,
imprisonment in conditions that violated international norms, disappearance and
''other inhumane acts'' that caused great suffering or physical or mental harm.

Unlike the American legal system, where criminal defendants face formal charges
at a trial's outset, Iraq's system provides for a formal indictment only after
the prosecution's evidence has been tested in court. The indictment Monday,
known as a formal charging document, constituted the judges' initial finding on
the charges they believe the evidence supports.

In effect, the procedure is a preliminary judgment that challenges the
defendants to produce, at the trial's next phase, evidence that exonerates them.
That phase began immediately after the indictment on Monday, with the first
defense witnesses testifying in support of one of the lower-ranking defendants.

Mr. Hussein's witnesses, not expected to appear for several weeks, will include
some high-ranking members of his government who are currently in American
military custody, according to Western legal officials working on the case, who
insisted on anonymity because they were not authorized to speak about the case
for attribution.

In Mr. Hussein's case, the indictment read in court on Monday held him
accountable for every phase of Dujail's suffering after members of a banned
Shiite religious party fired on his motorcade: the bombing and helicopter
strafing that killed nine townspeople immediately after the abortive
assassination attempt; the arrest of hundreds of others, the torture and killing
that ensued at an intelligence headquarters in Baghdad and, later, at Abu Ghraib
prison; and the order to execute 148 men and boys, including 32 who were under
18.

The indictment also cited the deaths of 46 of the 148 while in detention, at
least a year before a revolutionary court ordered them to be hanged; the
banishment of 700 Dujail residents to a remote detention center in Iraq's
southern desert, where still more died; the death under torture of women and
children, as well as men and boys; and the destruction of Dujail's livelihood by
the eradication of date palm groves and fruit orchards, and the razing of
hundreds of homes.

The defense phase of the trial is likely to last two or three months and will be
followed by an adjournment of perhaps another three months while the judges
weigh verdicts and sentences, the Western legal experts said. They said the
earliest that the trial might end would be September.

If Mr. Hussein and the others are sentenced to death, the verdicts would be
automatically appealed to a nine-judge appellate court, which, the experts said,
could take six months to a year to rule on the case. That process could push a
final resolution of the case as far back as 2008. Iraqi law sets a 30-day
deadline for a death sentence to be carried out after an appeal is denied and
leaves little room for postponement.

But the timing for Mr. Hussein could depend on his trial in a second case,
involving the killing of 50,000 Iraqi Kurds in the so-called Anfal campaign of
the late 1980's, when Iraqi forces used chemical weapons against Kurdish
villagers. Iraq's president, Jalal Talabani, a Kurd, has said Kurds will want to
see Mr. Hussein tried in that case before he is hanged.

With only one courtroom in a heavily secured building in the Green Zone in
Baghdad, the judges trying former leaders hope to begin the Anfal case when the
court adjourns to consider verdicts in the Dujail case, possibly as early as
August.

Mr. Hussein, who is 69, greeted his indictment in the Dujail case on Monday with
characteristic contempt, refusing to enter a plea when Judge Abdel-Rahman
demanded that Mr. Hussein stand in the dock to answer guilty or not guilty to
the charges.

''I cannot give you a short answer to a lengthy presentation that disregarded
all the testimony given in this court,'' Mr. Hussein said. ''Whether you or
someone else has written this is of no concern to me, and won't disturb one hair
on my head.'' The riposte alluded to what has been a coda for his outbursts,
that the judges and prosecutors are American puppets.

Mr. Hussein went on to another favorite theme, that he is Iraq's lawful
president and immune to prosecution. ''You are in front of Saddam Hussein, the
president of the Republic of Iraq,'' he said, his voice rising to a shrill
crescendo. Judge Abdel-Rahman shot back, ''You are a defendant!'' prompting a
further rejoinder from Mr. Hussein. ''I am the president of the republic by the
will of Iraqis, and I respect that will,'' he said.

In charging all eight defendants with crimes against humanity, the judges set
aside the possibility of lesser charges against four lower-ranking defendants,
former local officials in Dujail, a mostly Shiite town in the Sunni Arab
heartland, 35 miles north of Baghdad. Now, they join Mr. Hussein and three
high-ranking associates -- Barzan Ibrahim al-Tikriti, his half-brother and
former intelligence chief; Taha Yassin Ramadan, a former vice president and
leader of the Popular Army; and Awad al-Bandar, former chief judge of the
revolutionary court -- in facing a possible death penalty.

All loudly protested their innocence, and, like Mr. Hussein, were entered as
having pleaded not guilty. Judge Abdel-Rahman cautioned Mr. Hussein's former
subordinates that they will not evade conviction by saying they were only
carrying out his orders. Equally, he said, Mr. Hussein and the other
high-ranking defendants will be held to a standard of international law that
makes leaders accountable for actions that they knew about, should have known
about, or failed to prevent.

The court moved through the indictments with the new sense of urgency and order
that have settled on the trial since Judge Abdel-Rahman took charge of the case
in January.

Even Mr. Ibrahim, Mr. Hussein's half-brother, appeared to have toned down his
usual indignant bluster, responding to the charge of crimes against humanity by
acknowledging the likelihood of a death sentence. ''I am not afraid of death,
because that is our destiny,'' he said. ''All I ask is the mercy of God.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Responding to criminal charges yesterday, Saddam Hussein claimed
presidential immunity. (Pool photo by Marco Di Lauro)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (91%); JUDGES (91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
ASSASSINATION (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); WITNESSES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(86%); TESTIMONY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); LAWYERS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(75%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); GENOCIDE (73%); DEPORTATION (73%);
MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (70%);
ARMED FORCES (70%); APPROVALS (69%); CITY LIFE (65%); CITIES (65%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (65%); RANKINGS (65%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; Capital Punishment; United States International Relations; United
States Armament and Defense; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations

COMPANY: AMERICAN LEGAL SYSTEMS CORP (52%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7338 SECRETARIAL & COURT REPORTING SERVICES (52%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (93%) John F Burns; Saddam (Pres) Hussein

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); IRAQ (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1185 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Turkey, Armenia and Denial

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 24

LENGTH: 366 words


Turkey's self-destructive obsession with denying the Armenian genocide seems to
have no limits. The Turks pulled out of a NATO exercise this week because the
Canadian prime minister used the term ''genocide'' in reference to the mass
killings of Armenians in Turkey during and after World War I. Before that, the
Turkish ambassador to France was temporarily recalled to protest a French bill
that would make it illegal to deny that the Armenian genocide occurred. And
before that, a leading Turkish novelist, Orhan Pamuk, was charged with
''insulting Turkish identity'' for referring to the genocide (the charges were
dropped after an international outcry).

Turkey's stance is hard to fathom. Each time the Turks lash out, new questions
arise about Turkey's claim to a place in the European Union, and the Armenian
diaspora becomes even more adamant in demanding a public reckoning over what
happened.

Granted, genocide is a difficult crime for any nation to acknowledge. But it is
absurd to treat any reference to the issue within Turkey as a crime and to
scream ''lie!'' every time someone mentions genocide. By the same token, we do
not see the point of the French law to ban genocide denial. Historical truths
must be established through dispassionate research and debate, not legislation,
even if some of those who question the evidence do so for insidious motives.

But the Turkish government considers even discussion of the issue to be a grave
national insult, and reacts to it with hysteria. Five journalists who criticized
a court's decision to shut down an Istanbul conference on the massacre of
Armenians were arrested for insulting the courts. Charges against four were
subsequently dropped, but a fifth remains on trial.

The preponderance of serious scholarship outside Turkey accepts that more than a
million Armenians perished between 1914 and 1923 in a regime-sponsored campaign.
Turkey's continued refusal to countenance even a discussion of the issue stands
as a major obstacle to restoring relations with neighboring Armenia and to
claiming Turkey's rightful place in Europe and the West. It is time for the
Turks to realize that the greater danger to them is denying history.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Editorial

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: GENOCIDE (91%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%);
PRIME MINISTERS (77%); WORLD WAR I (76%); LEGISLATION (76%); LITIGATION (76%);
ARRESTS (70%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (69%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (65%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (64%) Editorials; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (84%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%)
European Union

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%)

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (97%); TURKEY (97%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (92%); CANADA (92%)

REGION: Turkey; Armenia  ; Europe

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1186 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 16, 2006 Tuesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Foreign Monitors Investigate Killings of 13 Tamils in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA; Shimali Senanayake contributed reporting from
Colombo for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 802 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, May 15


In the worsening conflict in Sri Lanka, truce monitors said Monday that they
were investigating the killings of 13 Tamils near the northern Jaffna Peninsula
over the weekend. Tamil rebels accused the Sri Lankan Navy of ''slaughter.'' The
government blamed the rebels.

''We can't say who's clearly responsible for the killings, as there are still
many questions on who may have been behind it,'' said Helen Olafsdottir,
spokeswoman for the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission. Two children, including an
infant, were among those shot dead on Saturday in Kayts, an islet controlled by
the Sri Lankan Navy.

The latest accusations follow the presentation to the government by the
monitors, led by the Nordic countries, of a dossier of seven earlier cases in
which security forces may have been involved in what the mission called
extrajudicial killings.

The government has not responded publicly to the report. But in a stern
statement last week, its chief negotiator in stalled cease-fire talks, Nimal
Siripala de Silva, said it ''condemns all forms of reprisal attacks against
innocent civilians.''

The monitoring mission's dossier revives the chilling specter of Sri Lanka's
past. By the late 1980's, during the peak years of its 20-year conflict over the
grievances of the Tamil ethnic minority against a government long dominated by
the majority Sinhalese, Sri Lanka had become infamous for government-backed
death squads, disappearances and unsolved killings.

Reports of disappearances and unsolved killings greatly diminished after a
cease-fire was signed by the government and the main rebel group, the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam, in February 2002. But in recent months, with near daily
clashes between the military and the rebels and a swift escalation of distrust
between the warring parties, little seems to be left of the cease-fire.

Neither side has officially broken off the accord. Then again, neither side has
taken responsibility for the grisly killings either. Such abnegation of
responsibility has been a hallmark of the conflict in Sri Lanka.

In an interview last week in his office in the capital, Colombo, Ulf Henricsson,
the retired Swedish major general who commands the monitoring force, said it had
received reports of killings in which the police or soldiers could be
implicated, taking pains to note that it was not the job of his mission to
investigate individual killings, but to present the information to the proper
authorities.

The seven recent cases were all in government-controlled areas. In one case he
cited as an example, the body of a girl who had been shot to death was found 100
yards from an army checkpoint in the country's north. The soldiers who staffed
the checkpoint told the monitors that they had not seen or heard anything. The
victim's family told the monitors that they had called the police, who never
showed up.

''I don't know how the security forces are involved,'' General Henricsson said.
''It could be individuals, it could be lower levels, it could be fundamentalist
elements in the security forces.'' He said the police had promised to
investigate.

At the moment, the monitoring mission's findings are not in the rebels' favor
either. On Friday the rebels sent a letter to the monitors warning that if they
were seen aboard ships and ferries carrying Sri Lankan troops, they, too, would
be targets.

The warning came a day after a rebel boat blew up and sank a Sri Lankan Navy
vessel. A ferry on which a Finnish truce monitor was accompanying navy sailors
was nearby. The rebels accused the military of using the monitors as a shield.
The monitors said the Tigers had no business in the waters, which the cease-fire
clearly spells out as government-controlled.

On Sunday the mission announced that it would temporarily suspend monitoring
activities at sea.

The European Union, long regarded in Sri Lanka as a confidant of the rebels,
issued a stinging rebuke after the latest Tamil Tiger assault at sea. ''The
reckless behavior in the last days,'' the presidency of the European Union said
in a statement, ''can only contribute to a dangerous escalation that results in
growing hostilities and jeopardizes any possibility for future peace talks.''

The European Union is considering listing the Tamil Tigers as a banned terrorist
organization in its member states, which would potentially restrict fund-raising
among the Tamil diaspora in Europe.

In a report issued in March, a United Nations inquiry on extrajudicial killings
criticized both sides.

''Endeavors to achieve peace which do not address human rights issues will fail,
although the parties to the conflict do not appear to fully appreciate this
reality,'' a special envoy, Philip Alston, said in the report, which was based
on a weeklong visit to the country in December.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: After a family in their village was shot to death, these Tamils
looked for a safe place to sleep in Jaffna. (Photo by Anuruddha
Lokuhapuarachchi/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(89%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARMIES (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); INTERVIEWS (72%);
ETHNICITY (50%)

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (91%) Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam

PERSON: Somini Sengupta

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (99%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (56%)

REGION: Sri Lanka; Jaffna (Sri Lanka)

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1196 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 24, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 1034 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-19

A Galaxy of Armed Groups Propel Iraq Towards Chaos
The effort to arm Iraqi soldiers and officers, coupled with a failure to curb
militia gunmen, has created a galaxy of armed groups, each with its own loyalty
and agenda, which American and Iraqi officials fear is accelerating the
country's slide into chaos.   A1

A Defense Department investigation of Pentagon-financed propaganda efforts in
Iraq warns that paying Iraqi journalists to produce positive stories could
damage American credibility, according to a summary of the investigation.

A19

More than 30 Iraqis died in car bombings, drive-by shootings and other attacks,
including 11 killedwhen a bomber detonated his explosives at a falafel stand
near a heavily Sunni area of Baghdad.   A19

Amnesty International assailed the use of military contractors by the United
States to detain prisoners, provide security and gather intelligence in Iraq and
said the behavior of some contractors had diminished America's moral standing.
A16

Fear of a Nurse Exodus
As the United States runs short of nurses, Senators are inserting a little
noticed provision in an immigration bill that would lift the limit on the number
of nurses who can come to the United States and, some fear, drain nurses from
the world's poorest countries.   A1

Bush Supports Israeli Plan
President Bush offered conditional support for Israeli ideas for a substantial
withdrawal of settlers from the West Bank, but insisted that the Israeli prime
minister, Ehud Olmert, first exhaust all possibilities for a negotiated
solution.   A6

The Israeli military arrested the top commander of Hamas's military wing in the
West Bank, describing him as the mastermind of several suicide bombings in
recent years.   A6

Karzai Orders Bombing Inquiry
President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan ordered his security forces to investigate
the American bombing of a village on Sunday that killed at least 16 civilians,
officials said.   A16

Iran Closes Paper Over Cartoon
The government shut down one of its official newspapers for publishing a cartoon
that mocked Iran's Azeri minority and led to riots in northwestern cities.   A10


Saudi Textbooks Criticized
Despite years of work aimed at changing Saudi Arabia's public school curricula,
the country's latest textbooks continue to promote intolerance of other
religions, a new study said.   A10

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Human-to-Human Bird Flu
The World Health Organization said the death of an Indonesian man appeared to be
the first case of the avian flu jumping from human to human to human. But the
agency said that did not necessarily mean the virus had mutated into a strain
that could spark a pandemic.   A10

NATIONAL   A20-25

F.B.I. Raid on Congress Divides G.O.P. Lawmakers
Resentment boiled among senior Republicans three days after the F.B.I. demanded
entry to a congressman's office and spent the night going through his files. The
episode drew cries of constitutional foul from Republicans -- even though the
lawmaker in question is a Democrat.   A1

Data Theft Report Delayed
The Department of Veterans Affairs learned about the theft of electronic data on
26.5 million veterans shortly after it occurred but waited two weeks before
telling law enforcement agencies, officials said.   A22

Bin Laden Releases Tape
In a new videotape, Osama bin Laden reasserted his role as the planner of the
Sept. 11 attacks and declared that Zacarias Moussaoui had played no part in the
plot.   A25

Boaters Hit Hard by Fuel Costs
If motorists are being hit hard by higher fuel prices, boat owners are being hit
even harder. The effects have been greatest on people who make a living on the
water.   A20

A.C.L.U. May Block Criticism
The American Civil Liberties Union is considering standards that would
discourage its board members from publicly criticizing the organization's
policies and administration.   A20

OBITUARIES   C13

Lloyd Bentsen
A former congressman and senator from Texas, onetime secretary of the Treasury
and the Democratic nominee for vice president in 1988, he was 85.   C13

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

City Council to Introduce Stringent Lobbying Rules
The New York City Council is set to approve some of the most restrictive rules
on lobbying in city history, and officials say they will prevent taxpayer
dollars from subsidizing special interests. But civic groups argue that the
reforms contain a loophole that will allow lobbyists to continue drawing on
matching funds as they seek to influence officeholders.   B1

Boy Charged in Bus Death
An 8-year-old Brooklyn boy was charged with criminally negligent homicide after
the police said he released the emergency brake on a parked school bus, sending
it rolling down the street, where it killed an 8-year-old girl.   B1

Club Shooting Leaves 1 Dead
A bouncer at a Chelsea club opened fire, killing one and injuring three of the
club's patrons, the police and witnesses said. The gunman fled the scene.   B4

ARTS   E1-12

New Anchor for ABC News
Less than six months after naming Elizabeth Vargas and Bob Woodruff over Charles
Gibson as the successors to the late Peter Jennings on ''World News Tonight'' on
ABC, the network announced that it was scrapping its dual-host experiment and
installing Mr. Gibson.   A1

Good Night, Dark Prince
The producers of ''Lestat,'' the vampire musical based on books by Anne Rice,
decided that the show, after 39 performances, would close after the Sunday
matinee.   E

BUSINESS DAY   C1-12

Setting Executive Pay
The Home Depot board awarded its chief executive $245 million in his five years
there, while the company's stock slid 12 percent. Some critics believe the panel
exemplifies the close ties among board members and executives at many companies
that can make it harder to restrain executive pay.   A1

Report Blames Fannie Mae
Federal regulators issued a blistering report on the culture and accounting
practices at Fannie Mae, the nation's largest buyer of mortgages, placing blame
on the shoulders of its senior management and board.   C1

Business Digest   C2

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: A sudden taste for the law; searching the congressman's office; an
abortion ruling in Colombia; beat the clock.

Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E7
TV Listings   E11
Weather   D8

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SHOOTINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); NURSES & NURSING
(90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); INFLUENZA (84%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); RIOTS (78%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (76%); WRITERS (76%); DEFENSE CONTRACTING (76%);
VEHICULAR OFFENSES (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); IMMIGRATION (74%);
FALSE IMPRISONMENT (74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); DEFENSE INDUSTRY (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (70%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (70%); RELIGION (69%); CLOSINGS
(67%); TEXTBOOKS (65%); HAMAS (65%); AVIAN INFLUENZA (64%); EPIDEMICS (64%);
PRIME MINISTERS (64%); INFECTIOUS DISEASE (63%); PUBLIC HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
(61%); PUBLIC SCHOOLS (60%); CURRICULA (60%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (56%)

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (58%); EHUD OLMERT (58%); HAMAD KARZAI (50%)

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (78%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); IRAQ (95%); ISRAEL (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); AFGHANISTAN (79%)

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1199 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

Hussein's Former Envoy Gushes With Adulation on Witness Stand

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1261 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, May 24


Nobody in Saddam Hussein's inner circle was more tirelessly reverential toward
him while he was in power than Tariq Aziz, who is said to have been in the habit
of saluting the telephone when Mr. Hussein called.

So it was little surprise on Wednesday when Mr. Aziz, 70, became the first
senior member of the old ruling elite to testify for Mr. Hussein at his trial on
charges of crimes against humanity. Nor did Mr. Aziz depart from form: In an
hour on the witness stand, Mr. Aziz, once Mr. Hussein's principal international
envoy and now an inmate in an American military prison outside Baghdad, offered
extenuating arguments for Mr. Hussein's actions that kept his old boss smiling
genially from the dock.

Mr. Hussein, 69, is charged with directing the persecution of the townspeople of
Dujail, 35 miles north of Baghdad, after a foiled assassination attempt on him
there in July 1982. The indictment says Mr. Hussein's secret police arrested
hundreds of men, women and children; tortured dozens to death; banished more
than 300 others to years of exile in the desert; and ordered a vast acreage of
date palm groves at Dujail plowed under.

Mr. Hussein is accused of signing execution orders for 148 people, including 32
who were under age 18.

On Wednesday, Mr. Aziz wore what appeared to be an open-necked hospital gown,
with a patient's plastic identification tag on his wrist, perhaps to lend
credence to his family's claims that he is too ill from an undisclosed ailment
to remain in prison, and to face what the court has said lies ahead -- a trial
in which Mr. Aziz himself will be among the defendants for other killings under
Mr. Hussein. Though seemingly frail, Mr. Aziz offered as energetic a
commendation for Mr. Hussein as any he offered during his years as a traveling
emissary.

Mr. Hussein, Mr. Aziz said, had done no more than what any president would have
done after an attempt to kill him, and, as ''a man of the law,'' had acted with
laudable restraint in the aftermath of the attack in Dujail, when gunmen fired
at his motorcade from a palm grove on the edge of the town. Mr. Hussein was ''a
brave man, a generous man, who loved his people very much'' and had committed
''no legal or humanitarian errors'' over events at Dujail, Mr. Aziz said.

''All over the world, even in Switzerland, if the president is subjected to an
assassination attempt, he is compelled by law to take the necessary measures and
arrest anyone who has any relationship with the attack,'' Mr. Aziz said. If some
of the Dujail actions, like razing the palm groves, were not sanctioned by
courts at the time, he said, that too, was normal, because any order issued
through the Baath Party's Revolutionary Command Council -- a rubber-stamp body
that Mr. Hussein led, with Mr. Aziz among its members -- ''was the law.''

''It's that simple,'' Mr. Aziz said.

He also argued that punishing the people of Dujail was a legitimate response to
a series of assassination attempts against top officials after Mr. Hussein took
power in 1979, including a grenade attack on Mr. Aziz at Mustansiriya University
in Baghdad in April 1980. Mr. Aziz said that attack, and the one at Dujail, were
organized by an Iranian-backed Shiite religious party, Dawa, which has provided
two of the three Iraqi prime ministers since the toppling of Mr. Hussein --
Ibrahim al-Jaafari, head of the interim government until last weekend, and Nuri
Kamal al-Maliki, who took office at the head of a full-term government on
Saturday.

''I was the victim of a criminal attack by the party that is in power right
now,'' Mr. Aziz said. ''Why don't you put those people on trial? One of their
leaders was the prime minister until recently, and the other is prime minister
now.'' Similarly, he compared the razing of Dujail's palm groves to the American
decision to level palm trees on Baghdad's airport road, part of a series of
security measures that have sharply reduced roadside bombs and suicide attacks
on what was, for much of the past two years, one of Iraq's most hazardous
highways.

''The Americans say they did that to deny the terrorists cover, and it was the
same at Dujail,'' he said.

Under Mr. Hussein, Mr. Aziz, a cigar-smoking, whiskey-drinking Christian from
the Chaldean sect, used his posts as foreign minister and, later, deputy prime
minister, to justify the invasion of Kuwait, the efforts to obscure Mr.
Hussein's program to develop unconventional weapons, the mass killings of Kurds
and Shiites in the late 1980's and early 1990's and the use of chemical weapons
at the Kurdish town of Halabja, among other things. Only weeks before the
American-led invasion in 2003, he had an audience with Pope John Paul II at the
Vatican, one of dozens he had with world leaders.

Two weeks after the fall of Baghdad, Mr. Aziz surrendered to American troops in
his hometown, Mosul, in northern Iraq, apparently for his own safety in the face
of mobs hunting down officials of the ousted government. He was No. 43, and the
eight of spades, on the Pentagon's ''pack of cards'' listing the 55 most wanted
officials of Mr. Hussein's government. At an earlier stage of the trial,
American officials said Mr. Aziz had offered to testify against Mr. Hussein on
the condition that he be released early, a proposition the Iraqi court and its
American advisers say they eventually rejected.

In this second week of defense testimony at the trial, Mr. Aziz was followed to
the witness box by Abid Hamid Mahmud al-Tikriti, Mr. Hussein's distant cousin
and chief bodyguard, who appears in photographs of the Hussein era standing
alone behind Mr. Hussein, pistol strapped to his hip. Mr. Mahmud, No. 4 on the
Pentagon's list, gave an account of the assassination attempt that differed
little from the version that has been known in Iraq for years -- how the gunmen
hit several vehicles in Mr. Hussein's motorcade, then killed members of the
security force pursuing them into the palm grove.

But Mr. Aziz held the court's attention with his encomiums to Mr. Hussein and
the three high-ranking associates standing trial with him -- Barzan Ibrahim
al-Tikriti, the former chief of the Mukhabarat intelligence agency, accused of
overseeing the arrests and torture of the Dujail victims; Taha Yassin Ramadan, a
former vice president, charged with directing the razing of 250,000 acres of
palm groves and orchards; and Awad al-Bandar, former chief judge of the
Revolutionary Court, accused of presiding over a show trial in the case and of
passing death sentences on 46 men and boys who had already died under torture.

Under questioning by the Raouf Abdel-Rahman, the chief judge in Mr. Hussein's
trial, Mr. Aziz admitted that he had no official or personal involvement in the
events at Dujail, and that he had never been there. But he coupled his
insistence on Mr. Hussein's tolerant nature and respect for the law with the
argument that he himself would have known about the brutalities alleged by the
prosecution if they had occurred, because of his close relationship with the
other three defendants.

Mr. Aziz said that he frequently dined with Mr. Ibrahim, the former intelligence
chief, at the time of the events in Dujail and their aftermath, and that he had
heard nothing from him about abuse of the townspeople. ''He was a friend of
mine, as I have told you,'' Mr. Aziz said in an exchange with Jaafar
al-Moussawi, the chief prosecutor. ''So if he was busy for a few days, killing
and slaughtering people in this case, he would have told me. Since he didn't,
it's clear, he cannot have been involved.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: May 27, 2006



CORRECTION: An article on Thursday about testimony at Saddam Hussein's trial by
Tariq Aziz, once Mr. Hussein's principal international envoy, referred
incorrectly to the Chaldean Christian religion Mr. Aziz practices. It is a rite
of the Roman Catholic church, not a sect.

GRAPHIC: Photos: Tariq Aziz, Saddam Hussein's former chief envoy, testified for
him. (Photo by Pool photo by Marco Di Lauro)(pg. A1)
 Abid Hamid Mahmud, Saddam Hussein's distant cousin and chief bodyguard, took
the stand after Tariq Aziz, the former foreign minister. (Photo by Pool photo by
Marco di Lauro)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); WITNESSES
(90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ASSASSINATION (89%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); INDICTMENTS (76%); LITIGATION (76%); ARRESTS (76%); CORRECTIONS
(76%); TORTURE (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); PRISONS (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(74%); GENOCIDE (71%); CITY LIFE (68%); CITIES (68%); SHOOTINGS (67%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (63%); ARMED FORCES (55%) War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against
Humanity; United States International Relations; United States Armament and
Defense

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) John F Burns; Saddam Hussein; Tariq Aziz; Abid
Hamid Mahmud

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (93%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); SWITZERLAND (79%)

REGION: Iraq; Dujail (Iraq); Iraq; Iraq

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1200 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 25, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

News Summary

SECTION: Section A; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk; Pg. 2

LENGTH: 869 words



INTERNATIONAL A3-14

Former Deputy Testifies In Hussein's Defense
Tariq Aziz, Saddam Hussein's former principal international envoy, testified in
defense of Mr. Hussein at his trial on charges of crimes against humanity,
saying his old boss's actions were backed by law.   A1

Rice's Deputy May Resign


Robert B. Zoellick intends to resign as deputy secretary of state, Condoleezza
Rice's second in command, aides and associates said. Mr. Zoellick frequently
remarked that he was finding the adjustment difficult after four years as United
States trade representative.   A14

Debate Over Border Wall
The proposal in the United States to build a wall at its southern border is
gaining traction in Mexico. President Vincente Fox, traveling in the United
States, did not publicly endorse the idea but made clear his government was
prepared to live with increased border security.   A1

Bush Rejects Talks With Iran
The Bush administration rejected calls for a direct dialogue with Iran to defuse
the crisis over its nuclear program and declared that it had taken steps toward
closing differences with the European Union, China and Russia on a package of
incentives and threats of punishments for the Iran government.   A6

Britain Detains Terror Suspects
Eight people suspected of plotting terrorist attacks outside Britain were being
held after a series of raids across England, the authorities said.   A6

Hate Crimes in Russia
The authorities in St. Petersburg announced that they had broken up an extremist
group that had shocked Russia with a string of racially motivated killings.   A9



NATIONAL A16-24

Senate Ready to Pass An Immigration Overhaul
A Senate bill that would toughen border security and put most illegal immigrants
on a path to citizenship emerged intact from more than a week of impassioned
debate, setting up a showdown with the House over the most substantial overhaul
of immigration law in 20 years.   A1

House Demands Seized Files
The clash pitting Congress against the executive branch escalated as the
bipartisan leadership of the House demanded the immediate return of materials
seized by federal agents when they searched the office of a House member who is
under investigation in a corruption case.  A1

New Orleans Levees Repaired
In a breathless finale that has been called one of this generation's greatest
adventures in civil engineering, the Army Corps of Engineers has all but
completed its repairs to New Orleans' ruined levee system.   A1

New Trends in Housing
In a society where so many live alone and where the scattered family is almost a
cultural institution, a new type of housing arrangement with grandparents, adult
children and grandchildren living under the same roof is growing faster than any
other, census records show.  A1

EDUCATION

Science Scores Released
The first nationwide science test administered in five years shows that
achievement among high school seniors has declined across the past decade, even
as scores in science rose among fourth graders and held steady among eighth
graders, the Education Department said.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION B1-10

Man Convicted in Plot To Bomb Subway Station
A federal jury in Brooklyn convicted a Pakistani immigrant in a plot to blow up
the Herald Square subway station in 2004, rejecting his defense that a paid
police informer entrapped him by stoking his rage with images of Muslims abused
at the hands of Americans.  A1

9/11 Memorial Plans
Another group tasked with determining cost estimates for alternative plans for a
ground zero memorial has been created, reflecting the distrust that exists
between the many agencies involved with the memorial.  B1

Bouncer Questioned in Death
The police were questioning a nightclub bouncer who witnesses say unleashed a
flurry of bullets into a group of unruly patrons in Chelsea, killing a New
Jersey man and wounding three others.  B1

ARTS E1-10

Price of Comedy? Too High
It seemed to be a can't-lose movie for 20th Century Fox: a comedy from the
reigning superstars Jim Carrey and Ben Stiller. But this month Fox and its
financing partner, Sony Pictures Entertainment, suddenly pulled the plug on
''Used Guys,'' a futuristic comedy. With a budget that had crept to 112 million,
it stood to be one of the most expensive original comedies ever made.   B1

New Design for Cooper-Hewitt
A year after exploring a 75 million expansion that would create three new floors
underground, the Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum has decided on a
relatively modest 25 million renovation that involves little construction. B1

BUSINESS DAY C1-14

Civil Case for Martha Stewart
A year after her prison release, Martha Stewart must again confront insider
trading accusations in a civil case. A trial would give her the chance to clear
her name. But the move also carries substantial risks.   C1

Vonage Sells At Lower Price
In the first day of trading, shares in Vonage, the Internet phone provider, fell
below the initial offering price.   C1

Business Digest C2

EDITORIAL A26-27

Editorials: A viable Palestinian state; the speaker's decree vs. democracy;
monitoring profit-making colleges; Brent Staples on why American students hate
science.

Columns: David Brooks, Bob Herbert.

Bridge: E4

Crossword: E2

TV Listing: E9

Obituaries: C15

Weather: D7

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Summary

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: BORDER CONTROL (90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); SCHOOL PRINCIPALS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); IMMIGRATION (89%); IMMIGRATION LAW
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); HATE
CRIME (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); LEGISLATION (77%); CITIZENSHIP LAW (77%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (77%); RESIGNATIONS (76%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (75%); US PRESIDENTS
(75%); CONSTRUCTION (74%); ARMIES (73%); CORRUPTION (72%); TERRORISM (71%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (71%); EUROPEAN UNION (71%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (70%); TRENDS
(68%); CIVIL ENGINEERING (65%); MATH & SCIENCE EDUCATION (64%); ENGINEERING
(64%); GRANDCHILDREN (63%); GRANDPARENTS (63%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (62%);
HIGH SCHOOLS (60%); CENSUS (50%) Terms not available from NYTimes

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (55%)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (91%); CONDOLEEZZA RICE (78%); ROBERT ZOELLICK (71%)

CITY: NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (92%); SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (70%)

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (92%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); CHINA (79%); EUROPE (79%); ENGLAND (76%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (70%)

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1201 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Abbas Says Hamas Must Accept Peace Plan or Face Referendum

BYLINE: By GREG MYRE

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1042 words

DATELINE: RAMALLAH, West Bank, May 25


The president of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, said Thursday that he
would call a referendum on a proposal for a Palestinian state that would
recognize Israel, if the governing Hamas party failed to accept the plan within
10 days.

In laying down his challenge, Mr. Abbas seems to be gambling that he can force
his Fatah party, Hamas and some smaller factions to agree on a broad framework
for dealing with Israel, which Hamas now refuses to recognize. But he runs the
risk of provoking a political showdown at a moment when the Palestinians are
already plagued by infighting and a worsening financial crisis.

''We differ, it is true,'' Mr. Abbas said in Ramallah at a conference intended
to put an end to internal Palestinian quarreling. ''We see things differently,
but we need to find middle-of-the-road solutions.''

Several Hamas figures said Thursday that they did not object to a referendum, at
least in principle.

''We are not afraid of a referendum,'' said a Hamas legislator, Salah Bardawil.
''The election was a referendum, and the majority of the people chose us.'' He
was referring to the vote in January in which Fatah, which previously dominated
Palestinian politics, lost its parliamentary majority and Hamas, a radical
Islamic group, came to power.

Like the Palestinians, Israel appeared caught off guard by Mr. Abbas's
announcement and had little to say about it. Mark Regev, a spokesman for
Israel's Foreign Ministry, described it as an internal Palestinian matter.

In the past Israel has strongly rejected two of the plan's provisions: returning
to pre-1967 borders and giving Palestinian refugees the right to return to lands
they left in 1948.

The proposal, based on a plan drafted earlier this month by prominent
Palestinian prisoners from Hamas and Fatah, calls for a Palestinian state and a
negotiated peace settlement with Israel, if it withdraws to the borders that
existed before the Arab-Israeli war of 1967. The Palestinian state would include
all of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, with its capital in East Jerusalem.

Marwan Barghouti, a leading Fatah figure serving five life terms in Israel's
Hadarim Prison, is credited as the driving force behind the prisoners' document,
though imprisoned members of Hamas also endorsed it.

''We must rise to the level of responsibility,'' said Mr. Abbas, whose Fatah
movement has supported plans along those lines for years. ''If within 10 days
you don't reach results through dialogue, I will take the prisoners' document to
a popular referendum'' within 40 days.

The referendum can be authorized either by a decree from Mr. Abbas or by
Parliament, Amar Dwik, the head of the Palestinian election commission, told The
Associated Press.

In recent years Palestinian polls have generally shown strong public support for
a Palestinian state with the 1967 borders. But Hamas has refused to moderate its
hard-line policies despite a cutoff in Western assistance that has left the
Palestinian government financially crippled.

The Palestinian conference was held simultaneously in Ramallah and Gaza City and
connected by video because Israel does not permit Hamas members to travel
between the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.

Until Mr. Abbas spoke, the talks were expected to focus on the almost daily
clashes in Gaza between Hamas and Fatah.

''Our meeting today aims to cement our national unity,'' said Ismail Haniya, the
Palestinian prime minister and a Hamas leader, who spoke in Gaza City before Mr.
Abbas's remarks in Ramallah. ''Our difference is with the Israeli occupation.''

The factional violence in Gaza continued Thursday with a shootout involving
Fatah and Hamas forces in Gaza City. About a dozen people were wounded, the
Palestinian security forces said. Amid growing concerns about Mr. Abbas's
safety, Israel took the unusual step of allowing his presidential guard to
receive additional weapons and ammunition from abroad, Reuters reported.
Israel's Defense Ministry did not say which countries would be sending the
weapons.

Even if the Palestinian factions agree on the prisoners' plan, or if it is
approved in a referendum, it will not necessarily lead to peace talks with
Israel. Full-fledged negotiations collapsed in 2001, shortly after the
Palestinian uprising known as the second intifada began.

But Ephraim Halevy, a former head of the Mossad, Israel's intelligence agency,
told Israel radio, ''I think this is a signal we must carefully examine, as we
all know Hamas gained power in a sudden manner and neither the Hamas nor others
expected to see them come to power.''

Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, who was in Washington this week, has said he is
willing to have diplomatic contacts with the Palestinians. But if there is no
progress, he says, he is prepared to act unilaterally to set Israel's borders
within four years.

Israel's foreign minister, Tzipi Livni, met with Mr. Abbas on Sunday at a
conference in Egypt, the highest-level contact between the sides since Hamas's
election victory. Mr. Olmert is considering a meeting with Mr. Abbas, though it
could be a month or more away, according to an Israeli official who traveled
with the prime minister.

But Israel refuses to deal with Hamas, which it labels a terrorist group. Israel
says Hamas must recognize Israel, renounce violence and accept previous
agreements before there can be a possibility of dialogue.

Mr. Olmert has said he wants to keep the large Jewish settlement blocs in the
West Bank, where most settlers live. Without saying precisely where he wants to
set a border, he said the basis would be the separation barrier that Israel is
building in the West Bank. The current route would put about 10 percent of the
West Bank on the Israeli side.

The Palestinian prisoners' plan says that resistance to Israeli occupation,
while ''a Palestinian right,'' should be ''limited only to land occupied by
Israel since 1967.'' That effectively endorses attacks against Israelis in the
West Bank, where Israeli soldiers and settlers are present, but not inside the
borders Israel had before the 1967 war.

The document was signed by Mr. Barghouti, who was convicted in 2004 of
orchestrating the killings of five people, and a prominent Hamas prisoner, Abdel
Khaleq Natche.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photos: Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, top, spoke yesterday
in Ramallah. Above, Palestinians gathered in Al Amari refugee camp in Ramallah
with the body of a man killed in a clash with Israeli soldiers. (Photo by Rina
Castelnuovo for The New York Times)
(Photo by Muhammad Muheisen/Associated Press)(pg. A8)Chart/Map: ''Palestinian
vs. Palestinian''In an attempt to end the recent clashes between Hamas and
Fatah, the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, said he would call for a
national referendum on a proposal for a Palestinian state that would recognize
Israel, if Hamas did not accept the plan in 10 days.Recent ViolenceMAY 8 --
Three killed and 10 wounded in shootout in southern Gaza Strip.MAY 17 -- Hamas
militant killed in a drive-by shooting Gaza City.MAY 18 -- One man killed in a
shooting by Hamas group in Jabaliya.MAY 20 -- Bomb wounded Fatah senior
intelligence official and killed a bodyguard in Gaza City.MAY 21 -- Large bomb
found on private road used by chief of Fatah-led security services.MAY 22 -- A
policeman and a driver for a Jordanian diplomat killed during a Hamas-Fatah gun
battle in Gaza City.MAY 24 -- Another Fatah security chief killed by a bomb in
central Gaza.MAY 24 -- One Hamas member killed in Khan Yunis.Reaction to the
ViolenceA poll released yesterday reveals strong popular support for a plan
drafted earlier this month by Palestinian prisoners jailed in Israel. The plan
calls for a Palestinian state alongside Israel, based on pre-1967 borders.Do you
support or oppose the plan proposed by jailed Palestinians?SUPPORT: 80%OPPOSE:
20%Do you think a civil war is likely?UNLIKELY: 55%LIKELY: 45%Do you believe the
current security crisis in the Gaza Strip will spread to the West Bank?NO:
56%YES: 44%Map of the Gaza Strip highlighting Gaza City, Khan Yunis, and
Jabaliya.(Sources by Palestinian Human Right Monitoring Group
 Near East Consulting)(pg. A8)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: REFERENDUMS (94%); HAMAS (91%); AL FATAH (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%);
ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); VOTERS &
VOTING (78%); POLITICS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); BANKING & FINANCE
(75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); ISRAELI-PALESTINIAN CONFLICTS (73%); ECONOMIC
CRISIS (70%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (66%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(64%); REFUGEES (64%); RELIGION (50%) Palestinians; Elections; Referendums;
Election Issues

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (94%) Hamas; Fatah

PERSON: MAHMOUD ABBAS (94%) Mahmoud (Pres) Abbas; Greg Myre

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%)

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (99%); ISRAEL (98%); JORDAN (79%)

REGION: Israel; Gaza Strip; West Bank; Israel; Jerusalem; Israel

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1202 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              May 26, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Karzai Visits Site of Battle Where Many Civilians Died

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL; Sultan M. Munadi and Ruhullah Khapalwak contributed
reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; Pg. 6

LENGTH: 761 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, May 25


President Hamid Karzai made a surprise visit on Thursday to Kandahar, his
hometown in the south, to visit civilians wounded in an American bombing nearby
on Sunday.

Thousands of villagers have fled their homes and sought refuge in Kandahar
because of the airstrikes and some of the most intense fighting in Afghanistan
since the American invasion in 2001.

The president's visit was fleeting, and security was heavy. (He narrowly
survived an assassination attempt there in 2002.) Speaking to a gathering of
Pashtun tribal elders, he promised he would bring security to the region.

''He told us not to be worried about the situation, that let's wait and see, and
that we will bring security,'' said Hajji Agha Lalai Dastagiri, a member of the
newly elected provincial council in Kandahar who was present at the meeting.

''He promised the people that he would build Afghanistan, that God would rebuild
it, that the international community was with us, and they would build
Afghanistan and bring security to this region,'' Mr. Dastagiri said. ''People
were telling him we really need security, but that we do not need foreign troops
and helicopters and tanks anymore: we Afghans should take care of it.''

Taliban insurgents have appeared in force in recent weeks across southern
Afghanistan, apparently in an effort to derail the deployment by NATO as it
prepares to take over from American forces in the region. Some of the heaviest
fighting has taken place in Kandahar Province and neighboring Helmand, and
scores of Taliban fighters and police officers have been killed.

But it was the bombing on Sunday night in which civilians were killed that has
turned the fighting into a political crisis for Mr. Karzai and caused thousands
of civilians to flee.

Two thousand to 3,000 people have left a ring of five villages where the
fighting has been raging this week and have arrived in trucks and tractors in
Kandahar City, said Rahilla Zafar, a press officer for the International
Organization for Migration. ''The Taliban are taking over village communities,
and the people are scared,'' she said.

Her office, which is closing down its operations for displaced people this week
for lack of funds, has suddenly found 156 families in a refugee camp nearby who
are appealing for urgent assistance to move out of the region, she said.

Fighting continued Wednesday in the Panjwai district, just west of Kandahar, and
coalition forces bombed the area again, the United States-led force in Kandahar
said in a statement. Two suspected Taliban insurgents were detained.

In the evening, troops clashed with a ''sizable force of Taliban, who retreated
into a house and continued fighting,'' the statement said. ''Artillery and air
support was used to destroy the enemy. Sporadic fighting continued through the
night. We have no assessment of Taliban killed or wounded.''

The estimate of the civilian casualties Sunday continued to rise.

Abdul Qadar Noorzai, the head of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission
in Kandahar, who has been compiling numbers from families arriving at his
office, said at least 33 civilians were killed when American planes bombarded
Tolokan on Sunday. That would be double the number first reported.

According to the villagers' accounts, 24 members of one family who lived in a
large mud-walled compound died and 8 were wounded in the first bombing attack,
Mr. Noorzai said. In a second bombing, of a religious school, nine civilians
were killed and three wounded, he said.

Villagers also reported that they had buried 35 Taliban fighters who were killed
in the attack, he said.

The broader humanitarian crisis also seems to be worsening.

The United Nations World Food Program warned Thursday that 2.5 million Afghans
would go hungry this winter if donors did not finance a program for the most
vulnerable communities suffering from poor harvests and drought. A lack of funds
has already forced the organization to cut some supplies, and it may have to
close its winter program entirely, ending food assistance to 450,000
schoolchildren and their families, said Anthony Banbury, the regional director
for Asia.

He warned at a news briefing that failure to keep the program could turn the
people against the government and the international community, and push them
into the arms of insurgents.

''If people are going hungry, if parents cannot feed their children, they
obviously are going to be very dissatisfied with the current situation,'' he
said. ''And they may be tempted or even forced to take extreme measures.''


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan speaking yesterday at a
council of elders in Kandahar about the deteriorating security situation there.
(Photo by Hamed Zalmy/Agence France-Presse -- Getty Images)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: WAR & CONFLICT (95%); BOMBINGS (90%); TALIBAN (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (88%); MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (79%); FOOD CHARITIES (79%); REFUGEES (78%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (74%); ASSASSINATION (74%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (73%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(70%); FAMINE (68%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (66%); FOOD ASSISTANCE (64%); REFUGEE
& RELIEF CAMPS (60%); HELICOPTERS (51%) United States Armament and Defense;
United States International Relations; Food; Famine

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS WORLD
FOOD PROGRAMME (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%) Taliban; United Nations World Food
Program; North Atlantic Treaty Organization

PERSON: HAMAD KARZAI (92%) Hamid (Pres) Karzai; Carlotta Gall

CITY: KANDAHAR, AFGHANISTAN (95%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%)

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (98%); UNITED STATES (96%)

REGION: Afghanistan; Kandahar (Afghanistan); Afghanistan

LOAD-DATE: May 26, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1206 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             May 31, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hurdle for U.S. In Getting Data On Passengers

BYLINE: By NICOLA CLARK and MATTHEW L. WALD; Nicola Clark reported from Paris
for this article, and Matthew L. Wald from Washington.

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1343 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 30


The European Union's highest court ruled Tuesday that the Union had overstepped
its authority by agreeing to give the United States personal details about
airline passengers on flights to America in an effort to fight terrorism.

The decision will force the two sides to renegotiate the deal at a time of
heightened concerns about possible infringements of civil liberties by the Bush
administration in its campaign against terrorism, and the extent to which
European governments have cooperated.

The ruling gave both sides four months to approve a new agreement, and American
officials expressed optimism that one could be reached. But without an
agreement, the United States could take punitive action, in theory even denying
landing rights to airlines that withhold the information.

That could cause major disruptions in trans-Atlantic air travel, which accounts
for nearly half of all foreign air travel to the United States.

The European Court of Justice, based in Luxembourg, found that the European
Commission and the European Council lacked the authority to make the deal, which
was reached in May 2004.

Specifically, the court said passenger records were collected by airlines for
their own commercial use, so the European Union could not legally agree to
provide them to the American authorities, even for the purposes of public
security or law enforcement.

The agreement, which took 18 months to negotiate and was to last through 2007,
gave the American authorities access to 34 categories of information about
passengers on all flights from the 25 nations in the union. The data is made
available as passengers board in Europe.

But the European Parliament challenged the agreement in court on two points: The
parliament was not consulted when the accord was reached, under intense pressure
from the Bush administration, and it objected to the extent of personal data to
be turned over -- including names, addresses, phone numbers, itineraries and
payment information, including credit card numbers.

Privacy advocates said the agreement violated civil rights, but the United
States said the information helped identify the patterns of suspicious
travelers. The court did not rule on the privacy question, focusing instead on
the scope of European Union's authority.

''The European Court is saying, yes, the European Parliament was right, that the
data transfer agreement is illegal,'' said Graham Watson, a British member of
the parliament and chairman of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for
Europe. ''What will now be needed is some pretty tough talking to get a new
agreement in which our concerns about privacy are properly addressed.''

In Washington, Jarrod Agen, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security,
said privacy was not really the issue, because his department could obtain the
same information by questioning the passengers on arrival.

But, he added, security would be strengthened by having the information provided
in advance.

For now, he said, ''the planes will continue to fly and the security data will
continue to be exchanged.''

''There won't be any lowering of the data protection standards, or effect on
passengers, or disruption to air traffic in the near term,'' he added.

In the past, the United States has warned that European airlines could be fined
or lose American landing rights if they failed to make the data available.

But an American official in Brussels, who spoke only on condition of anonymity
because he was not authorized to discuss the matter, said Washington would seek
a diplomatic arrangement with the European Union that respected the ruling
without disrupting air travel.

A spokesman for the European Commission, Johannes Laitenberger, told reporters
in Brussels that the European Union remained ''committed to the fight against
terrorism, while respecting fundamental human rights such as the right to
privacy.''

Europeans are by far the largest single class of visitors to the United States.
In 2004, the most recent data available, 9.6 million European Union citizens
entered the United States, according to a Department of Commerce survey.

In the nearly five years since terrorists hijacked American passenger planes and
crashed them into the World Trade Center and the Pentagon, governments on both
sides of the Atlantic have expanded their powers of surveillance, tipping the
balance of civil liberties in favor of safeguarding against attacks, at the
expense of protecting individual privacy rights.

But critics of the deal to share passenger data said rights violations -- from
Iraqi prisons and Guantanamo Bay, to secret C.I.A. flights of terrorism suspects
over Europe -- have tainted other antiterrorism efforts.

Last month, for instance, investigators for the European Parliament said several
European countries had been aware of, perhaps even complicit in the practice
known as rendition, in which the Central Intelligence Agency abducted terrorism
suspects and took them to countries that use torture.

''People are very much concerned about the direction that the Bush
administration has been taking in these matters,'' Mr. Watson said.

European civil liberties groups were outraged when the European Union signed the
accord two years ago, arguing that it did not ensure the privacy protection that
exists under current laws in the Union.

The United States did agree to restrict access to the data to certain American
agencies, and limited the time such data could be stored to three and a half
years. But European civil libertarians say Washington has failed to safeguard
such information against misuse.

Opponents cited Congressional testimony in February by the director of the
United States Transportation Security Administration, Kip Hawley, who said his
agency could not guarantee that the privacy of passengers' personal information
was fully protected.

A recent episode involving the theft of names and Social Security numbers of
26.5 million American veterans from the home of a Veterans Affairs employee has
raised further doubts about the care with which the government treats personal
data.

Sophie in 't Veld, a Dutch member of the European Parliament and a vocal
opponent of handing over the passenger data, said that the first evaluation of
the agreement's effectiveness in fighting terrorism was completed in March but
that the report had been kept confidential by the European Union and the United
States government.

''The one question that has never been answered is, does it actually work?''
said Ms. in 't Veld. ''How many terrorists did they catch? How many
international criminals? How many attacks did they prevent? And how many
mistakes were made? We do not know because this information has never been made
public. It is outrageous.''

European legislators said they were disappointed that the European Court did not
direct the Commission and the Council to give the parliament joint oversight in
approving any new accord. But they hoped that their concerns would be brought
out in the new negotiations.

European airlines reacted with caution to the ruling. Though the accord
officially remains in effect for the next four months, some said they were
seeking advice from their governments on how to proceed.

''This is an extraordinary situation to be in,'' Paul Charles, a spokesman for
Virgin Atlantic Airways, told Bloomberg News.

Air France-KLM, Europe's largest airline, said it would continue to provide the
American authorities with the passenger records. ''We will still operate under
the current situation for now,'' said a spokesman, Samuel Coulon.

Peter Hustinx, who oversees privacy issues for the European Union, said that
until a new agreement was reached, airlines were facing some legal uncertainty
if they continued to send passenger data to the American authorities.

''I expect the U.S. government will continue to want the data, and airlines will
want to share,'' Mr. Hustinx said. ''But they may face challenges by individual
citizens or even from national data-protection authorities.''

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: AIRLINES (92%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); TRAVELER SAFETY & SECURITY
(90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
PRIVACY RIGHTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); WAR ON TERROR (77%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (77%); COUNTERTERRORISM (77%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (76%); APPROVALS (73%); APPEALS (73%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (73%); CREDIT CARDS (62%) Airlines and Airplanes; Security and
Warning Systems; Privacy; Terrorism; Airlines and Airplanes

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION (94%); EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT (59%); EUROPEAN
COMMISSION (56%); EUROPEAN COURT OF JUSTICE (56%) European Union; European
Parliament

PERSON: Nicola Clark; Matthew L Wald; George W (Pres) Bush

COUNTRY: EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (99%); EUROPE (99%); UNITED STATES (98%);
LUXEMBOURG (79%)

REGION: Europe

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1208 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 1, 2006 Thursday
                              Late Edition - Final

Hidden in Brothels, Slavery by Another Name

BYLINE: By BOB HERBERT

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Editorial Desk; Pg. 25

LENGTH: 783 words


The word spread that there was a new girl at the brothel in Queens, and the
johns began lining up.

''I was crying all night,'' said Kika Cerpa in an interview last week. ''One by
one they came in.''

That first night, she said, ''I had sex with 19 men.''

Afterward, she took a shower, and then the man who had forced her into the sex
trade demanded his turn with her. When she refused (saying, ''I can't have sex
with nobody -- I feel like I'm dead''), he beat her up.

Ms. Cerpa came to the U.S. from Venezuela in 1992. A man she thought of as a
boyfriend convinced her to follow him to New York. Ms. Cerpa reluctantly agreed,
believing that she could get work as a nanny.

When she got here, her ''boyfriend'' and another woman took her passport and
demanded that Ms. Cerpa become a prostitute to work off debts that they said the
boyfriend had incurred. Threatened with bodily harm, and completely intimidated,
she complied.

''They took me to a house, and I sat in a room with other girls,'' she said.
''Men would come in, and I kept my head down the entire time.''

There was nothing unusual about the predicament that confronted Ms. Cerpa -- not
then, when she was 20, and not now. The demand for prostitutes (here in New York
and elsewhere) is much greater than the supply of women who want to be
prostitutes. So trafficking, the coercion of women and young girls into the sex
trade, is a flourishing industry.

The toll that trafficking takes is often horrific. In addition to the forced
prostitution, the women and children who are the victims of trafficking become
part of a landscape in which drug addiction, disease, mental health problems,
beatings and violent death are commonplace.

The worst moment in Ms. Cerpa's three-year entrapment in the hell of
prostitution occurred when a prostitute she had befriended declined to go with a
customer. The john became enraged and shot the woman. Ms. Cerpa ran to her
friend. ''She was dead, lying there with her eyes open,'' she said.

It may seem peculiar, but there is no law against sex trafficking in the state
of New York -- or most other states, for that matter. Many thousands of women
and children are coerced into the sex trade each year, and the pimps, madams and
other lowlifes who trap them are seldom subject to legal sanctions commensurate
with the severity of their crimes.

A bill has been introduced in the State Assembly that would create two new
crimes in New York: trafficking a person for sexual servitude and trafficking a
person for labor servitude. But that bill, which has overwhelming support in the
Assembly (including more than 100 co-sponsors), has been stuck for some time in
the Codes Committee.

This seems inexplicable, because you will find very few legislators lining up
(publicly, at least) with the soft-on-sex-traffickers crowd. I talked yesterday
to the Democratic speaker of the Assembly, Sheldon Silver, and asked what was
up.

He said that some of the language in the bill needed to be refined, and that his
staffers would be working on it later in the day. He said he thought the
Assembly would be able to pass the bill ''within the next two weeks.'' It would
then go on to the Senate.

I hope so. The bill is a good one. It emphasizes the coercive aspect of
trafficking, which is really about human beings being bought and sold as
commodities -- not just in the commercial sex trade, but also in exploitive
labor situations on farms and in factories and sweatshops.

Trafficking is much more widespread than most people realize. As the advocacy
group Sanctuary for Families has pointed out, ''In our backyards and
communities, a slave trade is flourishing that makes a mockery of our belief in
civil and human rights.''

The Assembly bill, whose primary sponsor is Jeffrey Dinowitz, a Bronx Democrat,
would make trafficking a felony, with penalties ranging from probation for a
first-time offender to a maximum of 15 years in prison. It would modestly raise
the penalties for patronizing a prostitute, making it easier to jail chronic
offenders. And it would provide a defense against arrest for women who were
coerced into prostitution.

Jane Manning, an attorney with the international women's rights organization
Equality Now, said of the trafficked women, ''More often than not they are the
ones who are arrested and end up with criminal convictions that follow them for
the rest of their lives.''

After seeing her friend murdered, Kika Cerpa cooperated with the police and
helped put the killer behind bars. After a long struggle, and with help from
Sanctuary for Families, she has managed to free herself from the pimps and
madams who had controlled her life, and still control so many others.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Op-Ed

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); SEX
TRAFFICKING (89%); SLAVERY (89%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (89%); CHILD TRAFFICKING
(78%); INTERVIEWS (77%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (74%); REFUGEES (74%); LABOR
TRAFFICKING (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (71%); LEGISLATION (71%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (66%); MENTAL ILLNESS (66%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (63%); US STATE
GOVERNMENT (63%); MENTAL HEALTH (50%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (50%) Prostitution;
Immigration and Refugees; Illegal Immigrants; Law and Legislation; Fines
(Penalties); Women; Prostitution

PERSON: Bob Herbert; Jeffrey (Assemblyman) Dinowitz

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (58%)

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%)

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: New York State; New York State

LOAD-DATE: June 1, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1209 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 11, 2006 Sunday
                              Late Edition - Final

WORLD CUP BORDELLOS

SECTION: Section 5; Column 5; Travel Desk; Pg. 3

LENGTH: 355 words



To the Editor: In ''A World-Class Party'' (May 28), Jeff Z. Klein describes all
of the merriment and excitement that will surround the soccer competition in
Germany. Of all the venues in Germany, Mr. Klein selects Cologne as his choice
because of its ''smart hotels'' and ''culturally sophisticated attractions.'' He
singles out one of those attractions, Pascha, described as a ''10-story
bordello'' where soccer fans from all over the world are already being welcomed.
To add a bit of humor, Mr. Klein mentions that this brothel is ''on the aptly
named Hornstrasse.'' I suppose we are all meant to chuckle and wink at this
point. It's too bad it's not victimless fun.

Many groups fighting human trafficking have been bringing attention to the
plight of young women and girls who will inevitably be brought into Germany to
''service'' the merry soccer fans during this monthlong competition.

According to C.A.T.W. (Coalition Against Trafficking in Women) and the
newsletter Stop Trafficking!, sponsored by the Sisters of the Divine Savior, the
demand for prostitutes is expected to rise sharply. In Berlin, wooden
''performance boxes'' that look like toilets have been built right next to the
main World Cup venue. Condoms and showers as well as parking will be provided.

Berlin is also home to Artemis, which has been dubbed the ''World Cup Brothel.''
A 20-minute walk from Olympic Stadium, it will have a spa, Jacuzzi, sauna,
Turkish bath, movie theater and a 24-hour buffet. The services of the women are
extra and go by the half-hour. It is estimated that there will be room for 100
sex workers and 600 clients. I urge you to look at www.catwinternational.org and
www.sistersofthedivinesavior.org for more information.

Germany earns huge revenues from its sex industry. Although government officials
try to explain legalized prostitution as a means to protect the women and
control the spread of sexually transmitted diseases, this is just nonsense. The
only people the government is interested in protecting are the men who buy sex.
It's all about money and a total disregard for human rights.

Peggy Sakow
Zieglerville, Pa.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photo by Rolf Vennenbernd/Sipa Press)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

DOCUMENT-TYPE: Letter

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (91%); SOCCER (91%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS
(91%); DESTINATIONS & ATTRACTIONS (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING (90%); SPORTS &
RECREATION (90%); WOMEN (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (90%); FIFA
WORLD CUP (89%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (77%); SPORTS FANS (77%); OLYMPICS (77%);
CHILD TRAFFICKING (74%); SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASE (73%); DISEASES &
DISORDERS (68%); DECRIMINALIZATION (68%) Travel and Vacations; Prostitution;
Soccer; World Cup (Soccer)

COMPANY: A MANZONI & C SPA (66%)

INDUSTRY: SIC7319 ADVERTISING, NEC (66%)

PERSON: Jeff Z Klein; peggy sakow

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (92%)

COUNTRY: GERMANY (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%)

REGION: Germany

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1210 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                            June 14, 2006 Wednesday
                              Late Edition - Final

Muslim Shot in London Terror Case Says Police Offered No ID or Warning

BYLINE: By ALAN COWELL

SECTION: Section A; Column 2; Foreign Desk; Pg. 10

LENGTH: 579 words

DATELINE: LONDON, June 13


A 23-year-old Muslim man who was shot and wounded during what the police have
described as a counterterrorism operation said Tuesday that the officers had not
identified themselves and had given no warning before opening fire at close
range and beating him.

The account of the raid by the man, Muhammed Abdul Kahar, was the first detailed
version of events offered to the public since officers on June 2 burst into the
East London row house he shares with his family. Some 250 officers had
surrounded the house, and the police operation was presented by the authorities
as a major strike against terrorism suspects thought to be building some form of
chemical bomb.

Mr. Kahar and his 20-year-old brother, Abul Koyair, were arrested and held for a
week. But their release without charge further dented confidence in the police
among some British Muslims and prompted fresh calls for the London police
commissioner, Sir Ian Blair, to resign.

''I apologize for the hurt we have caused,'' Andy Hayman, a Metropolitan Police
assistant commissioner, said in a statement.

''Given the nature of the threat, I understand that some communities may be
feeling confused, or indeed angry, with how the police are trying to ensure all
our safety,'' he said, but insisted, ''We had no choice but to mount a robust
operation, which required a fast armed response.''

In the shooting, Mr. Kahar said at a news conference near his home in Forest
Gate, his brother's screams woke him at 4 a.m. and he assumed the house was
being robbed. He and his brother descended the stairs and came upon intruders,
one of whom opened fire.

''He looked at me straight away and shot me,'' Mr. Kahar said. ''We both had eye
contact. He shot me straight away,'' he said, estimating that the officer fired
from two to three feet away. Mr. Kahar said he had looked at his chest and ''saw
blood coming down my chest and saw the hole in my chest.''

''At that moment I knew I was shot,'' he continued. ''But the first thing I was
thinking was an armed robbery was taking place.''

''At that moment I still did not know they were the police,'' Mr. Kahar said.
''They never said a word about police. I just thought they were going to kill
us.''

During the news conference, he denied being a supporter of violence or
terrorism, describing himself as a postal van driver and part-time supermarket
worker who ''just wanted to work to please my family, to support my mum and
dad.''

His account could add to sentiment among some of Britain's 1.6 million Muslims
that, in the words of Massoud Shajareh of the Islamic Human Rights Commission
last weekend, ''they were shot because they were Muslim or perceived to be
Muslim.''

''There is a huge amount of fear and anxiety now in the community,'' Mr.
Shajareh said. ''People are feeling they are going to be next.''

Coming after the fatal shooting of a Brazilian electrician mistaken for a
suicide bomber after last July's London bombings, the episode has prompted
questions anew about the demarcation between counterterrorism and
heavy-handedness.

Last weekend, Damian Hockney, a member of the Metropolitan Police Authority, a
police oversight agency, said Sir Ian was ''the wrong person'' in charge. ''We
need courageous and strong leadership at the moment, and he might have been the
person to provide it some time ago, but not now,'' Mr. Hockney told BBC radio.

Since then, both Prime Minister Tony Blair and Mayor Ken Livingstone have said
they support Sir Ian.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

GRAPHIC: Photo: Muhammed Abdul Kahar, right, with his brother Abul Koyair, was
shot in his home in a police raid. (Photo by Paul Hackett/Reuters)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: TERRORISM (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); RELIGION (90%); SHOOTINGS
(90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%);
ROBBERY (77%); ARRESTS (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(69%); MISCONDUCT (67%) Terrorism; Islam; Police Brutality and Misconduct

PERSON: Muhammed Kahar; Abul Koyair; Ian (Sir) Blair

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%)

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (93%)

REGION: Great Britain; London (Eng); Great Britain

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1215 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                             June 22, 2006 Thursday
                              Correction Appended
                              Late Edition - Final

HUSSEIN LAWYER SEIZED AND SLAIN IN BAGHDAD RAID

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Reporting for this article was contributed by Sabrina
Tavernise, Mona Mahmoud, Razzaq al-Saiedy and Khalidal-Ansary.

SECTION: Section A; Column 6; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE TRIAL;
Pg. 1

LENGTH: 1335 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 21


Saddam Hussein's trial on crimes against humanity was struck by new violence on
Wednesday when a senior lawyer on his defense team was abducted, beaten and shot
to death. The defense lawyer was the third to be killed since the trial began in
October, and the 10th person associated with the court trying Mr. Hussein to be
killed in the last 18 months.

According to his widow, the lawyer, Khamis al-Obeidi, 39, was asleep when at
least 10 gunmen in civilian clothes stormed their home in the mostly Sunni Arab
district of Slaikh at 7 a.m. and pulled him from bed within view of his three
school-age children.

Witnesses said men linked to a Shiite militia, the Mahdi Army, drove the lawyer
through the streets of the Shiite slum of Sadr City shouting, ''Terrorist!''
before shooting him on a stretch of wasteland, then gathered around his corpse
shouting, ''Let Saddam save him now if he can!'' and, ''This is the fate of
those who defend Saddam Hussein!''

The killing raised new questions about the viability of conducting fair trials
for Mr. Hussein and his associates in a country racked by insurgent and
sectarian violence. This week has seen new levels of brutality in the
39-month-old conflict, battering the brief spike in confidence, at least among
American military commanders, after the bombing raid two weeks ago that killed
Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, Al Qaeda's leader in Iraq.

On Tuesday, the American command said it had found the bodies of two soldiers
believed to be the members of the 101st Airborne Division who were abducted
Friday outside Baghdad. Their bodies, ringed with homemade bombs that took
American troops 12 hours to defuse, were so badly mutilated that identification
was withheld pending DNA tests.

Only hours after Mr. Obeidi's killing, an Islamic militant group said in a Web
posting that it had killed four kidnapped Russian Embassy workers. The
Mujahedeen Shura, or Council of Holy Warriors, a group that says it represents
Al Qaeda in Mesopotamia and other insurgent groups in Iraq, said its Islamic
court had ''carried out God's judgment'' and executed the men. Rita Katz,
director of the SITE Institute, a Washington-based group that tracks Islamic
militant Web sites, said the posting was characteristic of previous Qaeda
announcements in Iraq and appeared authentic.

Also on Wednesday, as many as 50 armed men, some wearing police uniforms,
abducted between 50 and 100 workers as they ended their day's work at a
government-run industrial zone at Taji, a town on Baghdad's northwestern
outskirts that is the site of a major American military base and an area where
Qaeda groups have been active.

But major questions hung over the militants' claims that they had killed the
Russians, as well as over the events at Taji, and whether they were in some way
linked to a government-ordered crackdown. Because the Web posting on the
Russians carried no photographs and no video of any killings, in the manner of
many past Qaeda-linked killings, it was impossible to tell whether the missing
embassy personnel -- two guards, a driver, and a cook -- were indeed dead.

A fifth Russian was killed at the time of the kidnapping, about a block from the
embassy, on June 3. If the killings of the four other men are confirmed, they
will join dozens of other foreigners, including diplomats from a number of Arab
states, who have been kidnapped and murdered by Qaeda-linked groups.

On Monday, the kidnappers issued a Web site warning that they would kill their
Russian captives unless Russia removed its forces from Chechnya, the breakaway
Muslim republic in southern Russia. On Saturday, Russia announced that its
forces had killed Abdul Khalim Saidullayev , the Chechen rebel leader.

Although insurgent groups have abducted and killed busloads of army recruits,
policemen and civilians in previous attacks, concern for the Taji factory
workers was tempered by an incident earlier this month in the Salhiya district
of Baghdad, when 24 people, including bus drivers, bus company owners and kebab
sellers, were seized by uniformed men. Two of the abducted men surfaced later,
saying the operation had been carried out by government forces, suggesting that
what occurred was a raid on a suspected insurgent stronghold, not a kidnapping.
The whereabouts of the other men taken in the raid are uncertain.

In a rare case of government troops striking back at the Shiite death squads
that have been terrorizing Sunni communities in Baghdad, the American military
command said Wednesday that Iraqi soldiers had captured a man that the command
identified as the leader of a death squad operating out of the Shiite
neighborhood of Kadamiya. The man, named as Noori Abu Hayder al-Oqabi, was the
leader of a '' 'punishment committee' that executes vigilante judgment on
perceived enemies,'' the command said, adding that he and his followers were
responsible for a wave of kidnapping, torture and murder that included the
deaths of 14 Iraqi soldiers in May.

The killing of Mr. Obeidi appeared to have sectarian overtones. Sadr City, where
his body was dumped, is home to about 2.5 million Shiites, who with Iraqi Kurds
were the principal victims of Mr. Hussein's years of terror. The slum is the
main power center of the Mahdi Army, commanded by Moktada al-Sadr, a volatile
Shiite cleric. Mr. Obeidi, like all of Mr. Hussein's Arabic-speaking lawyers,
was a Sunni Arab.

Witnesses said the killers had driven the lawyer five miles from his home to an
area known as Hamidiya, a mile beyond Sadr City, shot him in the head and chest,
then dumped his body in the slum. Photographs of the body taken with a mobile
phone camera showed Mr. Obeidi's face to be badly bruised and swollen,
suggesting he had been beaten.

Mr. Hussein's trial is the first of several that the former Iraqi leader is
expected to face for the widespread killing during his 24-year rule. The trial
centers on the persecution of Shiite residents of the town of Dujail after what
Mr. Hussein and his associates say was an assassination attempt against him
there in 1982. The court adjourned Monday until July 10, when Mr. Obeidi and a
dozen other defense lawyers, most representing other defendants, were scheduled
to present closing arguments.

A statement issued after the killing by a Jordan-based defense committee for Mr.
Hussein that has links to his daughter, Raghad, demanded that the trial be
stopped because ''it lacks the ability to provide security'' to defense lawyers
and witnesses, and because, the group said, it ''lacks the international
standards of a fair trial.'' But Iraqi and American officials in Baghdad said
the trial would resume on schedule. Without Mr. Obeidi, Mr. Hussein's defense
will rest mainly on Khalil al-Dulaimi, his chief defense lawyer, who has shared
much of the defense work in court with Mr. Obeidi.

''We are saddened by the death of Khamis al-Obeidi,'' the American Embassy said
in a statement. But it added, ''This criminal act will not prevent the
defendants before the tribunal from continuing to receive a full and fair
defense, or halt the tribunal's efforts to restore justice and the rule of law
for the Iraqi people.''

An American official said Mr. Obeidi had refused offers of safe accommodation
for himself and his family in the fortified Green Zone compound, and had
rejected an offer of Interior Ministry bodyguards. One of the court's judges and
his son, also a court employee, were killed last spring, and five other court
officials have been killed. No arrests have beenmade.

The American official, who spoke on condition that he not be named because he
was not authorized to speak for the record, said Mr. Obeidi had chosen guards
from his family, who had been paid with Interior Ministry funds. It was unclear
where they were at the time of his abduction.

Raid Juhi, chief investigative judge for the court, said in a telephone
interview that Mr. Obeidi's killing was ''a cowardly act.''

''This terrorist action will not stop the trial process,'' he said.


URL: http://www.nytimes.com

CORRECTION-DATE: June 23, 2006



CORRECTION: A front-page article yesterday about the abduction and killing of
Khamis al-Obeidi, a defense lawyer for Saddam Hussein at his war-crimes trial in
Baghdad, misstated the lawyer's age. He was 49, not 39.

GRAPHIC: Photo: A policeman with a photo of the body of Khamis al-Obeidi, the
third defense lawyer for Saddam Hussein to be killed since the trial began.
(Photo by Namir Noor-Eldeen/Reuters)(pg. A12)

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); LAWYERS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); RELIGION (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
ARMED FORCES (89%); AL-QAEDA (88%); ARMIES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); EYEWITNESSES
(78%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); CHILDREN (75%);
GENOCIDE (73%); DNA (62%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (61%); DNA TESTING (50%)
Kidnapping; Terrorism; United States International Relations; United States
Armament and Defense; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes Against Humanity

ORGANIZATION: AL-QAEDA (54%) Mujahedeen Shura (Iraqi Group)

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (94%) John F Burns; Sabrina Tavernise; Mona Mahmoud;
Razzaq Al- Saiedy; Khalid Al-Ansary; Saddam (Pres) Hussein; Khamis Al- Obeidi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (96%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%)

REGION: Iraq; Iraq; Russia; Baghdad (Iraq); Taji (Iraq); Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 22, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company


                             1217 of 1217 DOCUMENTS


                               The New York Times

                              June 23, 2006 Friday
                              Late Edition - Final

Iraqi Police Free 17 Held by Insurgents; U.S. Military Reports 5 Deaths

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS; Sabrina Tavernise, Mona Mahmoud and Khalid al-Ansary
contributed reporting for this article.

SECTION: Section A; Column 1; Foreign Desk; THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: VIOLENCE; Pg.
8

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: BAGHDAD, Iraq, June 22


A day after a large group of gunmen seized scores of Iraqis from a factory, a
police raid freed 17 of them, but 34 hostages remained unaccounted for, the
industry minister said Thursday.

The abduction, involving 40 or 50 gunmen, some wearing police uniforms,
represented a sharp intensification of a tactic that has become increasingly
common.

The gunmen arrived at the factory, in northwestern Baghdad, in a large number of
minibuses, then herded workers and their family members onto buses owned by the
company, according to Iraqi officials and a bus driver who escaped. The buses
were normally used to take the workers to Shiite neighborhoods around Baghdad.

Almost immediately, the gunmen released 50 hostages, mostly women and children.

An hour after the abduction, two bodies were found nearby, said the industry
minister, Fawzi al-Hariri.

The rest of the hostages were taken to a poultry farm north of Baghdad, a
released man told The Associated Press. The man, a Shiite, said that the
kidnappers had sorted the hostages by ethnicity and that he was let go because
he had forged papers saying he is a Sunni.

''One of the gunmen told us to stand in one line and then asked the Sunnis to
get out of the line,'' he said. ''That's what I did. They asked me to prove that
I am a Sunni, so I showed the forged ID and three others did the same. They
released us.''

He said the two captives whose bodies were found had been killed while trying to
escape.

The American military also announced Thursday that four marines had been killed
Tuesday by a roadside bomb in Anbar Province, and that a soldier had died
Tuesday after his vehicle hit a roadside bomb south of Baghdad.

And in a predawn raid on Thursday in Basra, in the south, 20 gunmen dressed in
commando camouflage and black masks stormed a police station and freed three
prisoners who had been charged with killing police officers, Iraqi officials
said.

The prisoners were described as members of the Tharallah Party, one of the
numerous armed Shiite groups contending for power in Basra. They were being held
on charges of attacking police officers in reprisal killings after clashes
outside the home of the group's leader.

Police officials in Mosul, Iraq's third-largest city, said Thursday that at
least 25 people, mostly thought to be Kurds, were killed there in
execution-style shootings in the past week, The Associated Press reported. The
police have found the bodies, left alone or in pairs, around the city.

Mosul, in the north, has a mixed population, largely Kurds and Sunni Arabs, and
tension often flares into violence. Police officials said they were not sure
whether the killers were Sunni Arab insurgents, sectarian death squads or common
criminals.

Defendants in Saddam Hussein's trial continued Thursday with a hunger strike to
protest the killing of one of his top lawyers, according to the head of his
legal team, Khalil al-Dulaimi.

Mr. Dulaimi said Mr. Hussein was among those who had refused food on Wednesday
night and Thursday. But an American military spokesman told Agence France-Presse
that Mr. Hussein was not taking part.

The hunger strike was prompted by the abduction, beating and murder of Khamis
al-Obeidi. Mr. Obeidi, a defense lawyer, was the third member of Mr. Hussein's
legal team to be killed since the trial began in October, and the 10th person
associated with the case to be killed in the past 18 months.

URL: http://www.nytimes.com

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

PUBLICATION-TYPE: Newspaper

SUBJECT: MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); HOSTAGE TAKING (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%);
MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); BOMBINGS (86%); WAR CRIMES
(85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (82%); ASSASSINATION (78%); FAMILY (76%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (72%); POULTRY (72%); IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (69%); HOMICIDE
(69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (66%); GENOCIDE (63%) United States International
Relations; United States Armament and Defense; Hostages; Attacks on Police;
Bombs and Explosives; Kurds; Hunger Strikes; War Crimes, Genocide and Crimes
Against Humanity; Assassinations and Attempted Assassinations

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (56%) John F Burns; Saddam Hussein; Khamis Al- Obeidi

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (95%)

COUNTRY: IRAQ (95%); UNITED STATES (94%)

REGION: Iraq; Baghdad (Iraq); Mosul (Iraq); Basra (Iraq); Anbar Province (Iraq);
Iraq

LOAD-DATE: June 23, 2006


                   Copyright 2006 The New York Times Company
