
                              1 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

An 'Untouchable' Says Caste Is Truly a Human Rights Issue

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 608 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Nov. 15


A leader of India's Dalits, the "untouchable" underclass of more than 160
million people whose campaign for an end to discrimination is rarely heard in
the West, is being honored this month by two major American human rights
organizations seeking to raise awareness of the issue.

On Tuesday in New York, Martin Macwan, a lawyer who founded the National
Campaign on Dalit Human Rights, was named by Human Rights Watch as one of five
outstanding human rights defenders around the world this year. And in Washington
on Nov. 21, Mr. Macwan will receive the 2000 Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights
Award.

Last year, Human Rights Watch published the first book-length report on the
conditions of the Dalits and the organization is now also lobbying to put the
cause on the agenda of the United Nations' first international conference on
racism and discrimination next summer.

"The fact that we're honoring a Martin from India reminds us of yet another
Martin from the U.S. who fought racial discrimination in this country," said
Stephen Rickard, director of the R.F.K. Center for Human Rights, which will give
Mr. Macwan his award in Washington.

In an interview today, Mr. Macwan, 41, described the lives of people who are
deprived of land ownership, required to drink and eat from separate utensils,
barred from wells and temples, forced into bonded labor and made to clean
latrines with their bare hands and carry human waste away from the homes of
caste Hindus.

The untouchables, literally outcasts, are also vulnerable to violence at the
hands of upper-caste Hindus and the police, he said.

Dalits who convert to other religions, to escape the Hindu caste system, face
double jeopardy in an era of Hindu nationalism, said Mr. Macwan, who is a
Christian.

Mr. Macwan, who was born into a Dalit family in Gujarat, said in an interview
today that as a student he watched the beatings and sometimes the killings of
fellow untouchables, and decided to establish an organization to help them. He
called it the Navsarjan (New Creation) Trust. More recently, he formed the
National Campaign on Dalit Human Rights, linking similar organizations in 14
Indian states.

India has given opportunities to Dalits -- the country's president, K. R.
Narayanan, was born an untouchable. It also has laws forbidding discrimination,
and has introduced affirmative action programs to bring Dalits into politics and
educational institutions. But for a majority of the most disadvantaged, abuses
continue.

"The Indian government has been very successful at manufacturing an image as the
world's largest democracy with a very progressive constitution and many
progressive laws on the books," said Smita Narula, who wrote the 1999 Human
Rights Watch report, "Broken People: Caste Violence Against India's
'Untouchables."

"We don't dispute any of this," she said, "but none of the laws are implemented
and the Constitution is not enforced."

Mr. Macwan described caste discrimination as an "institutionalized" system that
has allowed, for example, the highest Brahmin caste, with 3.5 percent of the
population, to hold 78 percent of judicial positions and about half of
parliamentary seats.

He said the Indian government has argued that caste -- a complex division of
society with religious, cultural and economic roots -- is a domestic issue. Mr.
Macwan disagrees.

"We say that India did support the U.S. civil rights movement in the 1960's, and
also the anti-apartheid struggle in South Africa," he said. "In this era of the
globalization of markets and of human rights, no country can claim that it's a
domestic matter. It's a universal concern."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDIA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); GUJARAT, INDIA (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; KENNEDY, ROBERT F, CENTER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS  ROBERT
F KENNEDY MEDICAL CENTER (68%);   HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(91%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (59%); UNITED NATIONS

 (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; KENNEDY, ROBERT F, CENTER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN
(59%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (59%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);



GEOGRAPHIC: INDIA;   INDIA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);
GUJARAT, INDIA (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; DISCRIMINATION  HUMAN RIGHTS (94%);
DISCRIMINATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (86%); RELIGION
(86%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (76%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (53%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (78%); FORCED LABOR (72%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; MACWAN, MARTIN  MARTIN MACWAN (95%);

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Martin Macwan, the founder of a human rights campaign for
Dalits. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              2 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.S. Report Harshly Criticizes China for Deterioration of Human Rights; Russia
Also Faulted

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A;Page 8;Column 1;Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 25


Using the toughest terms since the pro-democracy movement was crushed in Beijing
more than a decade ago, the United States sharply criticized China today for
what it called a marked deterioration in human rights.

The annual report on human rights released by the State Department dealt
separately with more than 180 countries. But much of the focus was on China,
where the Clinton administration's relations have grown even more tense this
week, and on Russia, where the administration is intent on developing a
relationship with the new leadership despite the Russian crackdown in Chechnya.

For the first time, there was also considerable focus on Colombia, in part
because of Washington's decision to assist the military there in the fight
against a leftist insurgency and the narcotics trade.

On virtually every count, from crackdowns against organized dissent to
conditions in prisons, the report on China was harsh.

China's "poor human rights record deteriorated markedly throughout the year, as
the government intensified efforts to suppress dissent, particularly organized
dissent," the report said.

After noting actions against Falun Gong, the spiritual movement whose top
leaders were sentenced to long terms in prison in December, the report charged
that China "continued to commit widespread and well-documented human rights
abuses in violation of internationally accepted norms," adding, "These abuses
stemmed form the authorities' extremely limited tolerance of public dissent
aimed at the government, fear of unrest, and the limited scope or inadequate
implementation of laws protecting basic freedoms."

In previous years, a fairly sharp debate in the administration on how tough to
be on China has often shaped the tone of the language.

But this time, officials said, the incontrovertible evidence that the Beijing
government had increased its crackdown on dissenters, in particular the Falun
Gong, had made it much easier for consensus. The Falun Gong was banned last
October.

The report's release came as the Clinton administration's relationship with
Beijing has faced renewed pressure. Beijing this week announced a more
belligerent policy toward Taiwan, a development that made it harder for the
administration to win congressional approval of a permanent trading relationship
with China. But some members of Congress suggest that the tough language in the
rights report offers the administration some cover in that fight.

The tougher language and the detail of today's report on China were warmly
received by human rights groups and members of Congress who have complained in
the past that the State Department's annual report was not sufficiently critical
of rights abuses in China.

Human Rights Watch, a New York based group, called the assessment "refreshingly
candid about the dramatic deterioration" of human rights.

The government in Beijing usually dismisses the human rights report as a
political document and traditionally inveighs against it. But this year the
report was released as the administration tried to garner support in Europe for
a resolution condemning China's human rights practices at the United Nations
Human Rights Commission's annual conference in Geneva.

In documenting the problems with Beijing's human rights record in the last year,
the report said the government had tightened restrictions on freedom of speech
and the press and increased controls on the Internet. It said that independent
nongovernmental organizations were banned from monitoring human rights
conditions, that forced labor in prisons remained a serious problem and that
child labor persisted.

On Tibet and Xinjiang, two regions where the government has cracked down on
minority populations, the report said restrictions on "religion and other
fundamental freedoms intensified."

In its assessment of Russia's human rights record, the report basically repeated
what senior administration officials have said since the Chechnya conflict
intensified last fall.

"Government forces killed numerous civilians through the use of indiscriminate
force in Chechnya, and security officials' beatings resulted in numerous
deaths," the report said. It added that Russian officials had acknowledged that
law enforcement officials had tortured and severely beat detainees and inmates.

The report also took note of prison conditions in Russia, saying that according
to human rights groups, between 10,000 and 20,000 detainees and inmates die in
jails annually.

Asked today about the reports of atrocities by Russian troops against Chechen
citizens, President Clinton said it was "imperative" for the Russians to allow
the "appropriate international agencies unfettered access to do the right
inquiries."

The administration has been asking the Russian government for such access since
the summit meeting in Turkey last fall of the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe, but so far Moscow has resisted the request.

In contrast to its favorable critique of the China report, Human Rights Watch
said the report on Russia was not stern enough. The administration alluded only
to "allegations" of killings by Russian forces in one Chechen city and played
down the "deep complicity" of Russian forces in widespread executions in
Chechnya, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, Kenneth Roth, said.

On Colombia, the administration said the government's human rights record
remained poor. "Government forces continued to commit numerous, serious abuses,
including extrajudicial killings, at a level roughly similar to that of 1998,'
the report said. It added that the authorities "rarely" brought to justice
security and police officers charged with human rights offenses.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); EUROPE
(79%); TAIWAN (79%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%);

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (92%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); EUROPE
(79%); TAIWAN (79%);   NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (91%);   BEIJING, CHINA (92%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes. from NYTimes.   HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ANNUAL REPORTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); CULTS & SECTS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LIBERALISM (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (70%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (69%); SENTENCING (68%); APPROVALS (65%);

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (84%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (84%);

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 6, 2000, Monday

CORRECTION:

An article on Feb. 26 about criticism of China in the State Department's annual
report on human rights misstated the month last year in which the Chinese
government banned the Falun Gong spiritual movement. It was July, not October.


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              4 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

An African Dictator Faces Trial in His Place of Refuge

BYLINE: By NORIMITSU ONISHI

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1424 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, Feb. 29


In a human rights case that was inspired by the one against Augusto Pinochet,
the former president of Chad is expected to stand trial later this year on
charges of torture.

The case against the former president, Hissene Habre, is being watched closely
in Africa, where brutal rulers have engaged in widespread human rights
violations with impunity. The accusations against Mr. Habre are already
resonating across a continent where laws are applied inconsistently to the
powerful and powerless.

"This is a message to other African leaders that nothing will be the same any
longer," said Delphine Djiraibe, president of a human rights group working on
the case. "It shows that Africa can also play a role in the fight for human
rights and can fight on its own soil."

The case against Mr. Habre, 57, who has lived in exile in Dakar since being
toppled from power in 1990, has also stirred some impassioned comments among
African intellectuals. Some of them defend Mr. Habre, arguing that guilt cannot
be assigned to African leaders of his generation because they were merely
creations and pawns of cold war superpowers.

But several human rights organizations have worked quietly for months to collect
evidence against Mr. Habre, drawing on the legal precedent established in the
Pinochet case: that a person can be tried for crimes against humanity in any
country and that former heads of state in particular are not immune. The
violators are brought to trial on the basis of "universal jurisdiction" for such
crimes.

In the case of Mr. Habre, the human rights groups say they have documented 97
cases of political killings, 142 cases of torture and 100 cases of people who
have disappeared in Chad, an impoverished, desert nation in central Africa.

Still, it was considered an extraordinary sight when the former president
appeared in a Senegalese court on Feb. 3. He has been in Dakar under house
arrest since being indicted on torture charges by the court.

And perhaps even more startling had been the testimony, a few days earlier in
the same court, of a half-dozen ordinary Chadians who told of being arrested and
tortured during Mr. Habre's rule.

One of the prisoners, Souleyman Guengueng, was a civil servant who was arrested
in August 1988 by the notorious security and documentation squad and accused of
being an opponent of the government. Mr. Guengueng, who was still recovering
from an operation he had undergone just days before the arrest, said he spent
the next two years being tortured.

Mr. Guengueng said he lost consciousness for so long on three occasions that his
fellow prisoners left him for dead. Up to 10 men were kept in one cell built for
a single prisoner, and their legs eventually became paralyzed. And he said three
to four people died every day from malaria, flea infestation, lack of food,
suffocation or sheer heat.

He also recalled how 300 of their fellow prisoners had been jammed into one
small cell; the guards would pour water into the cell from the ceiling, forcing
the men to lick the floor or their bodies so they would not die of thirst.

Mr. Guengueng, reached by telephone in Ndjamena, the capital of Chad, said he
still has trouble walking and has poor vision because of a powerful light that,
at one point during his incarceration, was directed continuously at him from a
close distance. "My joy was great in that courtroom," he said. "Hissene Habre
never thought that one day he would be brought to justice."

In Chad, the "untouchable" are the elite who gravitate to the president and are
above the law, said Ms. Djiraibe, president of the Chadian Association for the
Promotion and Defense of Human Rights. Those who engage in the "politics of the
belly" are political opponents who make enough noise to earn some money and find
some protection under the law. The rest of society cannot count on the law to
protect them, she said.

Although the terms may change, inequality before the law is a given elsewhere in
Africa. In the Ivory Coast, fo example, the three classes described by Ms.
Djiraibe are sometimes described as officials of steel, wood and cotton. That is
the reason why the case against Mr. Habre -- who as a former head of state was
the ultimate untouchable -- carries great significance in Africa, human rights
officials said.

Senegal is regarded as having one of the few independent judiciaries in Africa,
and that is one of the main reasons that international human rights
organizations, including Human Rights Watch and the International Federation of
Human Rights, have joined in the case against Mr. Habre.

"This is now showing that there are African countries in which you can put these
principles of human rights in practice," said Reed Brody, advocacy director of
the New York-based Human Rights Watch. "The case has profound implications in a
way that it would not if it were being held in a European country, particularly
a colonial country. That's one of the things that Latin Americans were saying
about the Pinochet case -- that it was Europe imposing its laws." Spain is
seeking the extradition of General Pinochet, the former Chilean dictator, so he
can stand trial on charges of torture, but doctors in Britain, where he has been
under house arrest, have declared him medically unfit.

Mr. Brody pointed out that while several other African dictators are in exile --
for instance, Idi Amin of Uganda is in Saudi Arabia, and Mengistu Haile Mariam
of Ethiopia is in Zimbabwe -- the courts in those countries are not free enough
to pursue a similar case.

Chad, a creation of French colonial mapmakers who threw together different
populations into a desolate patch of land twice the size of Texas, has
experienced continual war since gaining independence in 1960. In 1982, Mr.
Habre, a rebel chieftain, seized power and ingratiated himself with France and
the United States for being a staunch opponent of Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi of
Libya.

During Mr. Habre's eight-year reign, his American and French backers often
portrayed him positively, describing him as a charismatic leader and
intellectual who genuinely cared about issues facing the developing world. But
the French eventually tired of Mr. Habre, who was increasingly being criticized
by human rights monitors, just as President Francois Mitterrand talked of
openness and democracy in a post-cold-war Africa. And in December 1990, after a
French-supported invasion from Sudan, Idriss Deby -- who had been Mr. Habre's
military commander and the country's No. 2 leader -- overthrew Mr. Habre and
sent him into exile.

In Dakar, several Senegalese intellectuals said it was hypocritical of Western
human rights organizations to pursue Mr. Habre now, given their governments'
previous support.  "Hissene Habre was received and honored in Paris as a head of
state and ally," said Babacar Sine, one of Senegal's most famous intellectuals.
"France never regarded him as a dictator."

Mr. Sine, who has known Mr. Habre for 40 years, added: "This case is much more
complex than the role of Habre. There is the role of France that supported him.
There is the role of the United States that supported him. If we are to judge
Hissene Habre, we have to also judge those who supported him."

Another complicating factor is that Mr. Deby is still president of Chad, where
human rights monitors say arbitrary killings by the security forces, torture,
beatings and other forms of abuse remain common. Human rights organizations
behind the case are pushing for the trial to take place in Senegal. If Mr. Habre
were extradited to Chad, they say, a fair trial would be unlikely because his
testimony would implicate members of the current government, including President
Deby.

Madicke Niang, a Senegalese lawyer defending Mr. Habre, said his client
acknowledged that human rights abuses had occurred under his rule, but denied
the scale.

"He denies the acts he is accused of," Mr. Niang said. "And if these acts did
occur, he denies having had any knowledge of them. It is Idriss Deby who should
be held responsible for those acts because he was Hissene Habre's military
commander."

It is impossible to determine the exact scale of the abuse under Mr. Habre
because the only extensive report was made by a truth commission set up by Mr.
Deby. The commission said that the Habre government carried out 40,000 political
killings and 200,000 cases of torture, and that Mr. Habre gave direct orders to
single out certain groups or people. Mr. Habre is said to have fled Chad with
more than $11 million.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFRICA (96%); SENEGAL (95%); CHAD (94%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (92%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (66%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (66%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHAD; DAKAR (SENEGAL); SENEGAL;   AFRICA (96%); SENEGAL (95%); CHAD
(94%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);   DAKAR, SENEGAL (92%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN
RIGHTS (93%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); JURISDICTION
(78%); POLITICS (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); HOUSE ARREST (77%); MALARIA (72%); CIVIL
SERVICES (60%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: ONISHI, NORIMITSU; HABRE, HISSENE  HISSENE HABRE (93%);

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The case of Hissene Habre, the former president of Chad, is
being watched closely across Africa, which has a history of abusive
dictatorships. Mr. Habre, left, leaving a courtroom in Dakar, Senegal, last
month. (Doudou Diop Sall/Walfadjri)

Map of Senegal showing the location of Dakar: Hissene Habre will be tried in
Dakar, where he lives in exile.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              5 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Colombians Tell of Massacre, as Army Stood By

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2435 words

DATELINE: EL SALADO, Colombia


The armed men, more than 300 of them, marched into this tiny village early on a
Friday. They went straight to the basketball court that doubles as the main
square, residents said, announced themselves as members of Colombia's most
feared right-wing paramilitary group, and with a list of names began summoning
residents for judgment.

A table and chairs were taken from a house, and after the death squad leader had
made himself comfortable, the basketball court was turned into a court of
execution, villagers said. The paramilitary troops ordered liquor and music, and
then embarked on a calculated rampage of torture, rape and killing.

"To them, it was like a big party," said one of a dozen survivors who described
the scene in interviews this month. "They drank and danced and cheered as they
butchered us like hogs."

By the time they left, late the following Sunday afternoon, they had killed at
least 36 people whom they accused of collaborating with the enemy, left-wing
guerrillas who have long been a presence in the area. The victims, for the most
part, were men, but others ranged from a 6-year-old girl to an elderly woman. As
music blared, some of the victims were shot after being tortured; others were
stabbed or beaten to death, and several more were strangled.

Yet during the three days of killing last February, military and police units
just a few miles away made no effort to stop the slaughter, witnesses said. At
one point, they said, the paramilitaries had a helicopter flown in to rescue a
fighter who had been injured trying to drag some victims from their home.

Instead of fighting back, the armed forces set up a roadblock on the way to the
village shortly after the rampage began, and prevented human rights and relief
groups from entering and rescuing residents.

While the Colombian military has opened three investigations into what happened
here and has made some arrests of paramilitaries, top military officials insist
that fighting was under way in the village between guerrillas and paramilitary
forces -- not a series of executions. They also insist that the colonel in
charge of the region has been persecuted by government prosecutors and human
rights groups. Last month he was promoted to general, even though examinations
of the incidents are pending.

What happened in El Salado last February -- at the same time that President
Clinton was pushing an aid package to step up antidrug efforts here -- goes to
the heart of the debate over the growing American backing of the Colombian
military. For years the United States government and human rights groups have
had reservations about the Colombian military leadership, its human rights
record and its collaboration with paramilitary units.

The Colombian Armed Forces and police are the principal beneficiaries of a new
$1.3 billion aid package from Washington. The Colombian government says it has
been working hard to sever the remnants of ties between the armed forces and the
paramilitaries and has been training its soldiers to observe international human
rights conventions even during combat.

"The paramilitaries are some of the worst of the terrorists who profit from
drugs in Colombia, and in no way can anyone justify their human rights
violations," said Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the White House drug policy director.
But he said "the Colombian military is making dramatic improvements in its human
rights record," and noted that the aid package includes "significant money, $46
million, for human rights training and implementation."

But human rights groups, pointing to incidents like the massacre here, say these
links still exist and that mechanisms to monitor and punish commanders and units
have had limited success at best.

"El Salado was the worst recorded massacre yet this year," said Andrew Miller, a
Latin American specialist for Amnesty International USA, who spent the past year
as an observer near here. "The Colombian Armed Forces, specifically the marines,
were at best criminally negligent by not responding sooner to the attack. At
worst, they were knowledgeable and complicit."

The paramilitary attack on El Salado killed more people and lasted longer than
any other in Colombia this year. But in most other respects it was an operation
so typical of the 5,500-member right-wing death squad that goes by the name of
the Peasant Self-Defense of Colombia that the Colombian press treated it as just
another atrocity.

The paramilitary groups were founded in the early 1980's, mostly funded by
agricultural interests to protect them from extortion and kidnapping by the
left-wing guerrillas. The paramilitary groups were declared illegal over a
decade ago, but have continued to operate, often with clandestine military
support and intelligence, and in recent years have become increasingly involved
in drug trafficking.

Over the past 18 months, more than 2,500 people, most of them unarmed peasants
in rural areas like this village in northern Colombia, have died in more than
500 attacks by what the Colombian government calls "illegal armed groups"
involved in the country's 35-year-old civil conflict. And according to the
government, right-wing paramilitary groups are responsible for most of those
killings.

Since the El Salado massacre, nearly 3,000 residents of the area have fled to
nearby towns, including El Carmen de Bolivar and Ovejas, as well as the
provincial capital, Cartagena. Early this month, more than a dozen of the
survivors were interviewed in the towns where they have taken refuge under the
protection of human rights groups or the Roman Catholic Church.

Despite efforts to protect them, however, some have recently been killed in
individual attacks or have disappeared, actions for which the same paramilitary
group that attacked their village has been blamed. As a result, all of the
survivors interviewed for this story spoke on condition that their names not be
used.

Their accounts, however, coincide with investigations conducted by the Colombian
government prosecutor's office and by the Colombia office of the United Nations
high commissioner for human rights.

Members of a paramilitary unit had attacked this village in 1997, killing five
people and warning that they would eventually come back. Many residents fled
then, but returned after a few months believing that they were safe until the
death squad suddenly reappeared on the morning of Feb. 18.

"I looked up at the hills, and could see armed men everywhere, blocking every
possible exit," a farmer recalled. "They had surrounded the town, and almost as
soon as they came down, they began firing their guns and shouting, 'Death to the
guerrillas.' "

The death squad troops, almost all dressed in military-style uniforms with a
blue patch, made their way to the basketball court at the center of the village.
They took tables and chairs from a nearby building, pulled out a list of names
and began the search for victims.

"Some people were shot, but a lot of them were beaten with clubs and then
stabbed with knives or sliced up with machetes," one witness said. "A few people
were beheaded, or strangled with metal wires, while others had their throats
cut."

The list of those to be executed was supplied by two men, one of whom was
wearing a ski mask. Paramilitary leaders, who have acknowledged the attack on El
Salado but describe it as combat with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, known as the FARC, later said that the two men were FARC deserters who
had dealt with local people and knew who had been guerrilla sympathizers.

"It was all done very methodically," one witness said. "Some people were brought
to the basketball court, but were saved because someone would say, 'Not that
one,' and they would be allowed to leave. But I saw a woman neighbor of mine,
who I know had nothing at all to do with the guerrillas, knocked down with clubs
and then stabbed to death."

While some paramilitaries searched for people to kill, others were breaking into
shops and stealing beer, rum and whiskey. Before long, a macabre party
atmosphere prevailed, with the paramilitaries setting up radios with dance music
and ordering a local guitarist and accordionist to play.

In addition, a young waitress from a cantina adjoining the basketball court was
ordered to keep a steady supply of liquor flowing. As the armed men grew drunk
and rowdy, they repeatedly raped her, along with several other women, according
to residents and human rights groups.

As night fell, some residents fled to the wooded hills above town. Others,
however, stayed in their homes, afraid of being caught if they tried to escape,
unable to move because they had small children, or convinced that they would not
be harmed.

Saturday was more of the same. "All day long we could hear occasional bursts of
gunfire, along with the screams and cries of those who were being tortured and
killed," said a woman who had taken refuge in the hills with her small children.

Of the 36 people killed in town, 16 were executed at the basketball court. An
additional 18 people were killed in the countryside, residents and human rights
workers said, and 17 more are still missing, making for a death toll that could
be as high as 71.

By Friday afternoon, however, news of the slaughter had spread to El Carmen de
Bolivar, about 15 miles away. Relatives of El Salado residents rushed to local
police and military posts, but were rebuffed.

"We made a scandal and nearly caused a riot, we were so insistent," said a
40-year-old-man who had left El Salado early on Friday because he had business
in town. "But they did nothing to help us."

Besides not coming to the aid of villagers here, the armed forces and the police
set up roadblocks that prevented others from entering the town to help. Anyone
seeking to enter the area was told the road was unsafe because it had been mined
and that combat was going on between guerrilla and paramilitary units.

In a telephone interview, three Colombian Navy admirals said that residents of
El Salado were accusing the military of complicity in the massacre because they
had been coerced by guerrillas." The roadblock was set up, they said, to prevent
more deaths or injuries to civilians.

"At no point was there collaboration on our part, nor would we have permitted
their passage" through the area, Adm. William Porras, the second in command of
the Colombian Navy, said of the death squad unit.  "We never at any point were
covering up for them or helping them, as all the subsequent investigations have
shown."

But local residents, Colombian prosecutors investigating the massacre and human
rights groups say there was no combat. Villagers say that the armed forces had
not been in the center of El Salado recently, and that they had left the
outlying areas a day before. Residents also say they had passed over the dirt
road that Friday morning and there were no mines.

"The army was on patrol for two or three days before the massacre took place,
and then suddenly they disappeared," recalled a 43-year-old tobacco farmer. "It
can't be explained, and it seems very curious to me."

What has been established is that the villagers were simple peasants, and not
the guerrillas the paramilitary leader says his troops were fighting. "It is
quite clear that these were defenseless people and that what they were subjected
to was not combat, but abuse and torture," said a foreign diplomat who has been
investigating.

Residents said the paramilitaries felt so certain that government security
forces would stay away that late on Friday they had a helicopter flown in. It
landed in front of a church and picked up a death squad fighter who was injured
when a family he was trying to drag out of their house to be taken to the
basketball court resisted.

In a report published last February, Human Rights Watch found "detailed,
abundant and compelling evidence of continuing close ties between the Colombian
Army and paramilitary groups responsible for gross human rights violations." All
told, "half of Colombia's 18 brigade-level units have documented links to
paramilitary activity," the report concluded.

"Far from moving decisively to sever ties to paramilitaries, Human Rights
Watch's evidence strongly suggests that Colombia's military high command has yet
to take the necessary steps to accomplish this goal," the report stated.

At the time of the El Salado massacre, the senior military officer in this
region was Col. Rodrigo Quinones Cardenas, commander of the First Navy Brigade,
who has since been promoted to general. As director of Naval Intelligence in the
early 1990's, he was identified by Colombian prosecutors as the organizer of a
paramilitary network responsible for the killings of 57 trade unionists, human
rights workers and members of a left-wing political party.

In 1994, Colonel Quinones and seven other soldiers were charged with "conspiring
to form or collaborate with armed groups." But after the main witness against
him was killed in a maximum security prison and the case was moved from a
civilian court to a military tribunal, the colonel was acquitted.

According to the same investigation by Colombian prosecutors, one of Colonel
Quinones's closest associates in that paramilitary network was Harold Mantilla,
a colonel in the Colombian Marines.

Today, Colonel Mantilla is commander of the Fifth Marine Battalion, which
operates in the area around El Salado and is one of the units said by residents
and human rights workers to have failed to respond to appeals for help.

After the paramilitary unit left El Salado, the police captured 11
paramilitaries northeast of here on the ranch of a drug trafficker who is in
prison in Bogota. Along with four others who were arrested separately, they are
facing murder charges, but their leaders and most of the others who carried out
the killings remain free.

More than four months after the massacre, El Salado is virtually deserted. Only
one of the town's 1,330 original residents was present when a reporter and human
rights workers visited early this month, and he said the village remains as it
was the day the death squad left, except for the two mass graves on a rise near
the basketball court where the bodies were buried and later exhumed for
investigators.

The tables and chairs used by the paramilitary "judges," smashed or overturned
as they left, are still strewn across the basketball court.

"I don't know if the people are ever going to want to come back again," the
resident said. "What happened here was just too terrible to bear, and we didn't
deserve it."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; EL SALADO (COLOMBIA);   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES
(94%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; SEX
CRIMES; TORTURE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%);
BASKETBALL (90%); ARMIES (90%); TORTURE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); EYEWITNESSES (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
HOMICIDE (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); SEX OFFENSES (75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%);
LIBERALISM (72%); POLICE FORCES (69%); DRUG POLICY (50%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; QUINONES CARDENAS, RODRIGO (GEN)  BILL CLINTON (51%);
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (51%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (51%);

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: With most villagers having fled to nearby towns, a lone
resident remained in El Salado recently. (Larry Rohter/The New York Times)(pg.
A1); Pieces of a table used by members of a death squad and other reminders
remain scattered on a basketball court where residents of El Salado were
summoned, judged and executed. During three days in February, survivors say,
members of the right-wing paramilitary group executed people accused of helping
left-wing guerrillas. (Larry Rohter/The New York Times)(pg. A10)

Map of Colombia highlighting El Salado: El Salado, a town of more than 1,300
people, is virtually deserted now. (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              6 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. RIGHTS GROUP FOILS U.S. EFFORT TO CONDEMN CHINA

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


In an embarrassing defeat for the Clinton administration, the principal United
Nations body on human rights voted in Geneva today not to act on a United States
resolution criticizing China's human rights record.

The vote came after the State Department released one of its most withering
annual reports on human rights in China and after Secretary of State Madeleine
K. Albright, made a rushed overnight trip to Geneva from India last month to
make an impassioned speech to the group, the United Nations Commission on Human
Rights. It was the first appearance by a secretary of state before the body,
officials have said.

The commission voted 22 to 18 to back a Chinese motion for no action on the
United States-sponsored resolution; 12 nations abstained. In effect, the vote
prevented discussion on the substance of the resolution.

The State Department made an extra effort this year to have China's human rights
practices condemned in what has become an annual test of Washington's desire to
criticize Beijing. The resolution also failed last year, but the United States
committed less lobbying power then.

By announcing its intention in January to sponsor a critical resolution, earlier
than usual, the administration signaled to Congress that it was paying as much
attention to rights abuses as to Beijing's desired entry into the World Trade
Organization.

At the White House today, a spokesman for the National Security Council, P. J.
Crowley, said the administration was disappointed. He noted that the vote today
was closer -- a difference of four votes compared with five last year.

In Geneva, the assistant secretary for human rights, Harold H. Koh, who led the
lobbying campaign among delegates, tried to put a positive face on the vote.
"The basic message we sent to the Chinese was that the United States will stand
up for the Chinese people," he said.

In contrast, the senior Chinese official at the vote today, Qiao Zonghuai,
denounced the resolution as "an anti-China political farce directed by the
United States alone."

The State Department's human rights report this year described China's "poor
human rights record" as having "deteriorated markedly" throughout 1999 and
specifically referred to actions against Falun Gong, the spiritual movement
whose top leaders were sentenced to long terms in prison in December.

The report also cited Beijing's "extremely limited tolerance of public dissent
aimed at the government, fear of unrest and the limited scope or inadequate
implementation of laws protecting basic freedoms."

The resolution itself rebuked China for "severe measures taken to restrict the
peaceful activities" of Buddhists, Muslims, Christians and the Falun Gong.

The Beijing government takes the 53-member United Nations human rights body
seriously and has worked hard in the last several years to thwart Washington's
efforts to criticize its record in such a public forum.

In assessing the defeat for the administration, the executive director of Human
Rights Watch, Ken Roth, applauded the State Department's efforts but said they
were not adequately backed by the White House.  "This never became a White House
issue," Mr. Roth said.

In response, an administration official said the national security adviser,
Samuel R. Berger, had brought the issue up with counterparts in other countries.

In reviewing the vote, Mr. Roth said it was clear that among countries that
abstained there were at least seven that could have been persuaded, with a White
House campaign, to vote in favor of the United States. Among those he cited were
South Korea, Rwanda, Argentina, Ecuador and Chile.

Four votes needed to be changed from abstentions into votes against the Chinese
motion for a substantive discussion of the United State resolution to move
ahead. A tie would have allowed discussions at the commission to proceed.

In preparing for the vote, the State Department was publicly upbeat. Mr. Koh
told reporters last month that Washington had the "best chance since 1995" to
defeat the Chinese motion to block discussion.

Mr. Koh commended Dr. Albright at the time, saying that she was "more committed
to the issues of democracy, human rights and labor than anyone I've known." He
added, "She is the leader of our team, and she is in charge of putting forward
and advancing our entire commission agenda."

But behind the scenes, the State Department had a fairly difficult task. Its
prime goal was to persuade the European Union to sponsor the resolution with
Washington, to put up a more united front against the Chinese and to encourage
smaller countries to stand up to the concerted efforts of Beijing to block the
resolution.

According to a State Department official's account of Washington's efforts to
build unity within the European Union, France and Belgium remained holdouts.

"The European Union adopted a sub-optimal approach -- that they would vote with
us on the no-action but wouldn't co-sponsor," the official said.

Today the European Union was against the Chinese motion to block discussion.

But the official acknowledged that leaders of those European Union countries in
favor of co-sponsoring the resolution, including Britain, did not go out of
their way to lobby other countries for sponsorship.

"The European Union's commitments on these human rights issues are concerned
with how their relationship plays with Beijing," the official said.

In its efforts to get co-sponsorship, the United States encountered a recently
developed tactic of the Beijing government in which China offers countries
"dialogue not confrontation." Under this rubric, China holds closed-door
meetings with governments who say they are concerned about Beijing's rights
record.

Australia and Canada are among those that conduct such a dialogue with China.
Neither co-sponsored the United States resolution.

The United States also held a human rights dialogue with the Chinese in 1999 but
the Chinese canceled the dialogue for 2000 -- a visit by Chinese officials to
meet with administration officials -- after the bombing of their Belgrade
embassy in the Kosovo war.

In 1998, the year of the summit meeting between the Chinese leader, Jiang Zemin,
and President Clinton, Washington did not submit a resolution to the human
rights commission, saying there were improvements in the record.

In 1995, the United States succeeded for the only time in defeating the Chinese
government's procedural vote to block discussion.

Those countries voting with China were Bangladesh, Bhutan, Botswana, Burundi,
Congo, Cuba, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Morocco, Nepal, Niger, Nigeria,
Pakistan, Peru, Qatar, Russia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Venezuela and Zambia.

Those voting with the United States were Britain, Canada, Colombia, Czech
Republic, El Salvador, France, Guatemala, Germany, Italy, Japan, Latvia,
Luxembourg, Norway, Portugal, Poland, Spain and Swaziland.

The countries that abstained were Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, Liberia,
Mauritius, Mexico, Philippines, South Korea, Rwanda, Senegal and Tunisia.

The Romanian delegate walked out.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (92%); SWITZERLAND (90%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%);

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (90%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (UN); STATE DEPARTMENT  UNITED
NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION  (54%);

 WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION (54%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (UN); STATE DEPARTMENT
UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER
FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (57%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION  (54%); WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION (54%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL
(54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); INDIA (92%); SWITZERLAND
(90%);   NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (93%);   BEIJING, CHINA (90%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CHINA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); RELIGION (87%); CULTS & SECTS
(84%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); LOBBYING (78%); ANNUAL REPORTS (77%);
TRADE DEVELOPMENT (70%); PRISONS (69%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (66%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (65%); SENTENCING (60%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (60%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (60%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: PERLEZ, JANE; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); ALBRIGHT, MADELEINE K (SEC); KOH,
HAROLD H (ASST SEC)  BILL CLINTON (59%);

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              7 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Colombian Army Still Aiding Paramilitary Forces, Report Says

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 570 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 23


Units of the Colombian Army continue to work closely with right-wing
paramilitary forces that are involved in killings of civilians and threats
against government human rights investigators, according to a report made public
today.

The report, by the New York-based Human Rights Watch, says that army brigades in
Colombia's three largest cities, including the capital, Bogota, have continued
to sponsor and collaborate with the outlaw paramilitaries in the last three
years, even as military leaders have made some progress in curbing abuses by
their own troops.

The problem remains so intractable, Human Rights Watch officials said, that only
by putting new human rights conditions on its aid to Colombia is the United
States likely to bring significant reform. "What must be done is to use the
engagement of the United States in Colombia now to force the army to break its
links to these paramilitary groups," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, the executive
director of the Americas Division of Human Rights Watch.

The report was made public as the Clinton administration is intensifying its
push in Congress for $1.3 billion in new aid for Colombia over the next year and
a half. Most of the aid would go to the Colombian security forces to help them
push into remote areas of the country where drug production is thriving and
leftist guerrillas generally hold sway.

In a statment tonight, Colombia's vice president, Gustavo Bell Lemus, denied any
institutional tie between government forces and the paramilitaries, and asserted
that Human Rights Watch sought through the report to obstruct the approval of
American aid.

Mr. Bell noted that the report was based largely on information gathered from
Colombian government investigators. He cited this as proof that government
judicial agencies "are carrying out their work in an adequate and efficient
way."

Clinton administration officials say they are aware of the Colombian military's
human rights problems, but they argue that President Andres Pastrana is
determined to curb official abuses and that American aid will help him to
succeed.

Mr. Vivanco, other human rights advocates and some members of Congress say such
assurances are not enough. Expecting the aid package to be approved, they have
begun lobbying for amendments to it that would bar the Pentagon and the C.I.A.
from sharing intelligence information with Colombian units that are known to
have supported paramilitary groups and would cut off American aid to units that
persist in helping the paramilitaries.

Human rights advocates in Colombia have asserted for several years that while
abuses by army forces were dropping precipitously, military units were
effectively handing over their dirty work to the well-organized and
well-financed rightist armies.

The Human Rights Watch study cited "compelling" information suggesting that the
army's Third Brigade in Cali secretly worked with the country's most notorious
paramilitary leader, Carlos Castano, to form a new paramilitary group after
leftist guerrillas abducted 140 worshipers from a Cali church last May.

The report said the new force, called the Calima Front, was formed by
active-duty and reserve officers of the Third Brigade.

The Calima Front was subsequently linked to at least 40 killings and the forced
displacement of about 2,000 people from their homes in the conflict zone, the
report said, quoting local officials.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (90%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(94%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; BOGOTA (COLOMBIA);   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (96%);
   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (90%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FOREIGN AID; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);

 LIBERALISM (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (89%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); LOBBYING (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); APPROVALS (75%); EXECUTIVES (75%);

PERSON: GOLDEN, TIM; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (69%);

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              8 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rights in Guatemala: At Risk Still

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1290 words

DATELINE: GUATEMALA CITY


Celso Balan travels to remote villages armed with nothing more than legal papers
and reams of testimony to help people unearth the remains of relatives and
friends who were among the 200,000 killed during this country's 36-year war.

Lately, however, Mr. Balan has been more preoccupied with uncovering the
identities of the two men who abducted him last August, interrogating and
beating him before they drugged him and dumped him at a cemetery.

"They asked me how could we tell if someone had been shot by a guerrilla or a
soldier," said Mr. Balan, who works for the Legal Action Center for Human
Rights. "They kept on asking me where do we keep the bones we found."

The nature of those questions, and his own work in trying to bring killers of
the past to justice, suggest to Mr. Balan that someone in the Guatemalan
military ordered his abduction to intimidate him.

Robberies, assaults and death threats have set back many of Guatemala's human
rights groups in the months since several of them filed lawsuits here and in
Spain that charged former military leaders with genocide. Human rights advocates
fear that after many years of trying to hold the military accountable for past
abuses, they have gotten dangerously close to officers past and present who
still wield power and influence over the government of President Alfonso
Portillo.

The police insist that abductions and other incidents -- most of them unsolved
-- are merely part of a general increase in crime. But human rights advocates
noted that in many of the break-ins, for example, thieves left valuables
untouched while taking only computers and documents containing testimony and
research related to exhumations and genocide lawsuits.

"I stopped believing in coincidences a long time ago, and the human rights
situation has everything to do with the current political context," said Carla
Villagran, dean of political science at Rafael Landivar University in Guatemala
City. "There is still the danger of the classic cold war mentality that resorts
to repression and is still present in this government. They have been present
since the beginning, and they are gaining space with giant steps."

Threats and assaults against human rights groups, journalists and
nongovernmental organizations increased this year, although the overall number
of human rights violations went down, according to the United Nations mission
that monitors adherence to the 1996 peace accords that ended Guatemala's war.

The mission, in a report, also said that the judicial system had been slow in
resolving crimes linked to the military and that the military itself had
obstructed prosecutions.

October itself ended on a violent note: a lawyer active in the women's movement
was killed by heavily armed men who summoned her to the door of her home; women
at another nongovernmental organization were forced to strip by intruders, who
raped one of them repeatedly; a student who belonged to a group that acted as an
advocate for refugees and peasants was kidnapped and strangled.

Local and international human rights groups and local newspapers earlier
reported that in one community that had filed a genocide case against former
officers, its cooperative's store burned down and children were stopped and
questioned by the police. Two people active in the land reform movement were
shot dead; another leader of recent protests against the government survived
unscathed when gunmen fired on his car and shot out its windows.

Mr. Portillo, a leftist who won a huge mandate last year promising military
reform and an end to impunity, has proved either unwilling or unable to act. He
faces a defiant Congress, and his security and daily agenda are managed by a
general staff containing military officers whom prosecutors and even the
president himself have linked to corruption and human rights abuses.

Rather than being placed under civilian control, intelligence services have been
given broad powers and are under the sway of a former major who tried to
overthrow the president in the late 1980's and who has been named government
minister.

Mr. Portillo had promised to solve the 1998 murder of Bishop Juan Gerardi, who
was bludgeoned to death two days after he released a report detailing wartime
atrocities and abuses. Three military officers, including two members of the
presidential general staff, have been charged with the death, and Mr. Portillo
said that he had information implicating 11 others. He has yet to provide
prosecutors with their names.

Despite international pressure to dismantle the presidential general staff -- as
mandated by the 1996 peace accords -- Mr. Portillo has resisted turning
intelligence and administrative functions over to civilians, leaving the
military handling only security.

Some advocates wonder if the president is a prisoner of his own staff.

"This is a return to the past," said Frank LaRue, the director general at the
Legal Action Center for Human Rights, one group that had computers stolen during
a break-in. "Is the military trying to consolidate its impunity? How can you
have advisers who are close to the president who have participated in violence?"

Mr. Portillo has been as much a hostage of Congress, whose president is Efrain
Rios Montt, the former general who presided over the most violent war years.

Mr. Rios Montt enjoys widespread support for being a populist who is tough on
crime, but faces his own problems: He and 20 legislators have been accused of
altering a tax on liquor sales after it was approved by the Congress. A court is
deciding whether to prosecute, and he could lose not only his congressional
seat, but also the immunity from prosecution that comes with it.

Mr. Rios Montt, whose immunity has long been seen as a signal to very
conservative groups that they will not be held accountable for the past, has
already been named in a genocide lawsuit filed by Rigoberta Menchu, the Nobel
Peace Prize laureate. But although human rights groups have taken heart at the
prospect of going after the former general, they remain jittery.

In past weeks, they were rattled by officials who labeled them a threat to
stability and by vague warnings from the minister of government, Byron
Barrientos, that "unknown forces" were planning to bomb and set fire to the
offices of several human rights groups.

Mr. Barrientos, the national chief of police and a leading member of Parliament,
declined requests to be interviewed for this article.

There have also been reports of security committees being formed in some
villages -- an echo of the Civilian Self-Defense Patrols, paramilitary groups
that were implicated in many wartime massacres. Former members of those patrols,
meanwhile, took out a newspaper advertisement pledging allegiance to Mr. Rios
Montt.

Some human rights advocates suspect that the security committees, ostensibly a
local response to high crime levels, could be manipulated.

"There is a mentality in the country that could promote an amalgam of military
and civilian political interests," said Carmen Aida Ibarra, a researcher at the
Myrna Mack Foundation, a human rights group named for an anthropologist slain by
the military. "What has been our experience? Murder and violence. Guatemala has
never known anything else since the Spaniards arrived."

The rights groups had been trying to set a new course for the country, but the
recent attacks have set them back, diverting their energies from new proposals
to antigovernment protests.

"After the peace accords we had hope," said Nery Rodenas, director of the human
rights office at the Archdiocese of Guatemala. "The fear we have now is that
dark forces remain in Guatemala which enjoy immunity and privilege."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (97%); SPAIN (79%);

CITY: GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA (97%); SPAIN (79%);   GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
LITIGATION (89%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); CRIME RATES (88%); ROBBERY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); GENOCIDE (74%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (74%); SHOOTINGS (72%);
POLITICAL SCIENCE (70%); POLITICS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);

PERSON: ALFONSO PORTILLO (86%); CELSO BALAN (73%);

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Celso Balan, a Guatemalan human rights worker, was abducted,
beaten, drugged and dumped in a cemetery. (David Gonzalez/The New York Times)

Map of Guatemala shows the location of Guatemala City: Guatemalan groups have
accused former army leaders of genocide.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              9 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Race Analysis Cites Disparity In Sentencing For Narcotics

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 7


Nearly twice as many black men and women are being imprisoned for drug offenses
than are whites, even though studies show that there are five times more white
drug users than black ones, an international human rights organization said
today.

The report by Human Rights Watch joins a growing body of evidence compiled by
liberal advocacy groups showing racial disparities in the country's soaring
prison population. That population has quadrupled since 1980 and is expected to
surpass two million next year.

"These racial disparities are a national scandal," Ken Roth, executive director
of Human Rights Watch said. "Black and white drug offenders get radically
different treatment in the American justice system. This is not only profoundly
unfair to blacks, it also corrodes the American ideal of equal justice for all."

The report noted that the overwhelming bulk of the increase in the prison
population could be attributed to drug offenses. The report said 62.7 percent of
drug offenders sent to prison in 1996, the last year for which complete
statistics were available, were African-American, while 36.7 percent were white.

The Census Bureau estimates that blacks currently make up about 12.8 percent of
the population and that whites, including Hispanic whites, are about 82.3
percent.

While the Human Rights Watch underlined the racial disparities in the criminal
justice system, other experts in the field said the cause was more complicated
than racism.

Experts at the Bureau of Criminal Justice Statistics, a division of the Justice
Department, say that while studies indicate there are five times as many white
users of illegal drugs as black users, drug abuse among African-Americans tends
to be more chronic and involve harder drugs such as crack cocaine and heroin.

Indeed, studies suggest black incarceration rates are still being fueled by the
crack cocaine epidemic of the 1980's, which helped produce a cadre of chronic
drug users, most of whom are above the age of 30. Many of these abusers have
either been imprisoned for long sentences or have been in and out of a criminal
justice system that fails to provide very much in the way of drug treatment,
said Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, director of the White House Office of National
Drug Control Policy.

"Regardless of how severe you wish to be on punishing them you simply have to
give them a drug-free prison environment," Mr. McCaffrey said. "And there has to
be a follow-on component. That, I would allege is the largest issue."

In today's report, Human Rights Watch based its study on prison admissions
statistics in 1996. States voluntarily provide statistics to the Justice
Department, and the study does not include figures for the 13 states that chose
not to report statistics.

In much of the country, though, the report paints a picture of stark
disparities. In Illinois and Maryland, African-Americans represent 90 percent of
those who were incarcerated for selling or using drugs. In five other states --
Louisiana, New Jersey, North Carolina, South Carolina and Virginia -- blacks
make up more than 80 percent of those imprisoned on drug offenses.

Researchers from Human Rights Watch point to myriad causes for the
disproportionately high number of blacks incarcerated for drugs.

They note that because so much of the drug activity in poor black neighborhoods
is conducted on the street, sellers and users are easier to spot and arrest. In
addition, they contend that law enforcement agencies direct much of their
resources to combating drug activity in black areas, rather than in white
neighborhoods where drug sales and use tend to occur behind closed doors.

Also low-income African-Americans often cannot afford lawyers to win them more
lenient sentences.

Whatever the reason, Human Rights officials say, the numbers of
African-Americans being sent to prison are far out of line with the proportion
of blacks and whites shown in studies to use and sell drugs.

And they say that the disparities need to be addressed by politicians, including
the two presidential contenders.

"I think racial disparities in the criminal justice system is like the elephant
in the room that no one is talking about," said Jamie Fellner, associate counsel
of Human Rights Watch and the report's author. "I find it incomprehensible that
neither of the presidential candidates is talking about this. There still is a
timidity to say anything that would lend them being accused of being soft on
crime. Nobody is willing to say enough is enough."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (70%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(93%); US CENSUS BUREAU  (55%); US CENSUS BUREAU (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

 (54%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (54%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(93%); US CENSUS BUREAU  (55%); US CENSUS BUREAU (55%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE

 (54%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%);   ILLINOIS, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (70%);

SUBJECT: DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; DISCRIMINATION; BLACKS; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL)
HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (91%); SENTENCING (90%); PRISONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (89%); ILLEGAL
DRUGS (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); DRUG POLICY (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%);
STATISTICS (88%); CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (78%); RESEARCH REPORTS (78%); COCAINE
(78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); HEROIN (73%); CENSUS (72%); LIBERALISM (72%);
SCANDALS (70%); EXECUTIVES (70%); POPULATION ESTIMATES & PROJECTIONS (52%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);

PERSON: HOLMES, STEVEN A; ROTH, KEN

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              11 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Chad Ruler Is Charged By Senegal With Torture

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 449 words

DATELINE: DAKAR, Senegal, Feb. 3


A court here indicted the exiled former dictator of Chad today on charges of
torture.

It was the first time that a former African head of state has been charged with
human rights violations by the court of another country, said Human Rights
Watch, a group based in New York.

Backed by the United States and France as a buffer against Libya, the dictator,
Hissene Habre, a French-trained military tactician from northern Chad, ruled
from 1982 to 1990. The United States and France gave him millions of dollars in
weapons and equipment.

A panel set up by President Idriss Deby of Chad has accused Mr. Habre's
administration of 40,000 political assassinations and 200,000 torture cases. Mr.
Habre, 57, has lived here since he fled Chad in 1990, after Mr. Deby had ousted
him.

Mr. Habre appeared in court today to hear the charges. The court placed him
under house arrest, and he remains in his villa on the outskirts of Dakar.

"Today's indictment is a wake-up call to dictators in Africa and elsewhere that
if they commit similar atrocities they could also be brought to justice one
day," said Reed Brody of Human Rights Watch.

The case was inspired by charges of human rights abuses against a former Chilean
dictator, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, by a Spanish judge, Mr. Brody said.

Mr. Pinochet was arrested on a visit to Britain in October 1998 and has been
fighting extradition to Spain since then.

Senegal has signed the United Nations Convention Against Torture, which obliges
states to prosecute or to extradite reported torturers who enter their
territories.

Judge Demba Kandji of the Dakar Regional Court opened an inquiry last week into
whether Mr. Habre was responsible for torture and crimes against humanity.

Judge Kandji heard evidence from six witnesses, five of whom were tortured
during Mr. Habre's administration and one whose brother was killed.

Human Rights Watch led a group of rights organizations, including the African
Assembly for the Defense of Human Rights, whose headquarters are here, in an
abuse complaint filed last week against Mr. Habre. The groups filed papers
detailing 97 political killings, 142 cases of torture and 100 "disappearances."

Seven Chadians and one Frenchwoman whose Chadian husband was killed under Mr.
Habre's government are identified as plaintiffs, along with the Chadian
Association of Victims of Political Repression and Crime, which represents 792
reported victims. They include Samuel Togoto, 53, who says his hands and legs
were bound behind his back for so long that he became temporarily paralyzed.

"Our pleas have been answered," Mr. Togoto said today. "This is one of the
happiest days of my life."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHAD (97%); SENEGAL (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA
(92%); FRANCE (90%); AFRICA (79%); SPAIN (79%); CHILE (79%);   LIBYA (92%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: DAKAR, SENEGAL (87%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(84%); UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(84%); UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHAD; SENEGAL;   CHAD (97%); SENEGAL (94%); UNITED STATES (93%);
LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (92%); FRANCE (90%); AFRICA (79%); SPAIN (79%); CHILE
(79%);   LIBYA (92%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   DAKAR, SENEGAL (87%);

SUBJECT: TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); TORTURE (92%); EXTRADITION
(91%); INDICTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EVIDENCE (78%);
WITNESSES (78%); ARRESTS (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%);
TESTIMONY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%); ASSASSINATION
(73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); PARALYSIS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS

 (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: HABRE, HISSENE  HISSENE HABRE (92%);

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              12 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Chechens Tell of Torture in Russian Camp

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 764 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 18


Three men seized by Russian troops and imprisoned at a detention camp in
northern Chechnya this winter have told human rights observers of beatings,
torture and rapes they say took place there before they bribed their way to
freedom this month.

The three, who are now in the neighboring Russian province of Ingushetia, gave
their accounts to researchers for Human Rights Watch, which relayed them to news
organizations this week.

One of those researchers, Peter Bouckaert, said in a telephone interview from
Ingushetia's capital, Nazran, that the accounts were collected separately and
appear "highly credible."

But the Kremlin spokesman for war issues, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, denounced the
reports today as lies spread by a biased foreign press. Although international
observers have not yet been allowed to enter the camp, at Chernokozovo in
northern Chechnya, Mr. Yastrzhembsky said he saw no problem in arranging visits
there soon.

Russia's acting president, Vladimir V. Putin, ordered the nation's top
immigration official today to serve as a special representative to examine
charges of human rights violations in the war.

The latest accusations came from men arrested on Jan. 16, 17 and 18 as part of a
general roundup of Chechen males by the Russian military. Russia had earlier
barred all Chechen males between the ages of 10 and 65 from leaving the
province, saying they were potential terrorists.

Each man said that he was taken by truck to the Chernokozovo camp, about 30
miles north of the capital, Grozny, where several hundred men and a few women
were being held.

In statements read by Mr. Bouckaert, one man identified as Waha, a 38-year-old
engineer, and another called Ruslan, 21, said they were forced from the trucks
and made to run a gantlet of about 15 Russian soldiers who kicked them and beat
them with rubber truncheons. Both said that sporadic and sometimes severe
beatings continued through their imprisonment. Both men said they were forced to
surrender their belongings, jewelry and money, most of which was not returned.

And both said they were forced to stand for hours in crowded cells, with their
hands above their heads. Prisoners who sat or lowered their hands were beaten,
they said, and at times the cells were sprayed with tear gas.

Waha said that "16 of us were put into one cell" about 11 feet by 16 feet. "We
were made to stand with our arms raised from 3 p.m. to 1 a.m. the next day."

The smell from human waste, he said, was overpowering. "If we wanted to go to
the bathroom, we had to do it in the cell," he said. "We didn't even have a
bucket to use."

Waha and a third man, identified only as Ali, 24, were briefly imprisoned
together. One told Human Rights Watch that he heard the pleas of a 42-year-old
woman named Raisa, imprisoned alone nearby, as she was severely beaten for 15
minutes and then raped.

The two men also described separate instances in which, they said, they heard
the screams of two men who apparently were being raped.

"Afterwards, the victim said to them, 'You have killed me,' " Waha said. The
soldiers, he said, replied that he now had a new name: "They said 'You will now
be Alla, a woman.' "

The second man, Ali said, was forced by soldiers to answer to the name Fatima
after his assault.

All three captives said they were freed from the Chernokozovo camp after their
families tracked them down and paid bribes of between 1,000 and 4,000 rubles, or
about $35 to $140.

There is no way to independently verify such reports.

"I know it sounds pretty severe," Mr. Bouckaert said. "But considering that we
interviewed three people who gave very similar testimony, these testimonies
actually appear quite credible."

In recent weeks, refugees, former prisoners and war victims have given reporters
and human rights groups many new accounts accusing troops on both sides of the
Chechen conflict of torture, summary executions, rapes and other abuses.

The United Nations high commissioner for refugees, Mary Robinson, has released a
statement expressing "deep regret" at Russia's refusal to permit her to visit
sites inside Chechnya. But at his regular briefing today, Mr. Yastrzhembsky
denied that Ms. Robinson had been barred from the war zone, saying instead that
such requests must be processed by the Foreign Ministry.

He specifically denied that any human rights violations had occurred at the
camp, one of at least four inside Chechnya. Mr. Yastrzhembsky said that 744
Chechens have been held at Chernokozovo and that all but 235, including 16
women, had since been freed.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); CHERNOKOZOVO (RUSSIA); INGUSHETIA
(RUSSIAN REPUBLIC);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%);

SUBJECT: TORTURE; SEX CRIMES; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); TORTURE (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); SEX OFFENSES
(78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); IMMIGRATION (74%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%); TERRORISM
(50%);   CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: WINES, MICHAEL  VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%);

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 19, 2000, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article yesterday about Chechens' accounts of abuses by Russian troops at
detention camps in Chechnya misstated the title of Mary Robinson, a United
Nations official who has sought to visit sites there. She is the high
commissioner for human rights, not for refugees.


GRAPHIC: Photo: A Russian soldier holds suspected Chechen rebel army soldiers at
the Chernokozovo detention camp in north Chechnya. Three who had been held there
spoke of beatings, torture, rapes and bribes for their release. (Agence
France-Presse)

Map of Chechnya showing Chernokozovo: Chechens described abuses while they were
held at Chernokozovo.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              14 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Colombian Military, in Report, Says Its Rights Abuses Are Down

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 475 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Mar. 20


Colombia's minister of defense said today that human rights violations by the
country's armed forces had declined significantly, despite reports by the State
Department and human rights groups that the problem is growing.

Of all the human rights violations reported in Colombia, those committed by the
military and police dropped from 15 percent in 1995 to 2 percent last year, said
the minister, Luis Fernando Ramirez Acuna. He was in Washington to brief members
of Congress on the Colombian military's first human rights report on itself.

"We recognize we have problems in our forces and we are working on them," he
said. "Now you have to recognize how serious we are and the improvements we've
made."

The report largely avoided the far more serious charge that the armed forces
continue to work with the paramilitary groups who are responsible for most of
the human rights violations. The human rights record of the Colombian military
and its ties to the right-wing paramilitary groups are key questions for
Congress as it debates whether to approve the administration's emergency $1.6
billion aid package to help Colombia fight narcotics trafficking.

The measure is expected to be passed by the House within two weeks, but it faces
opposition in the Senate. To overcome objections, Mr. Ramirez briefed top
Congressional aides today, but the report was greeted with some skepticism.

"Glossy brochures are not a substitute for protecting human rights," said
Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont. "The reality is that army
officers who commit atrocities almost never go to jail, links between the army
and paramilitaries are widespread and government human rights investigators have
fled the country after receiving death threats."

Critics contend that the defense ministry's human rights report is misleading,
in part because it lumps together all human rights abuses.

Political violence is growing in Colombia, with 2,663 kidnappings last year by
both leftist guerrillas and right-wing paramilitary groups, and with a murder
rate 10 times higher than that of the United States.

Last year the Colombian government dismissed four generals who were accused of
either collaborating with paramilitary groups or refusing to fight against them.
The Colombian general prosecutor charged 101 members of the police and armed
forces with human rights violations, suspended 391 and dismissed 97, according
to the report.

Peter Hakim, president of the Inter-American Dialogue, called the military's
report "an attempt to put a gloss on a very ugly situation" that was more
accurately described in other, impartial reports.

The State Department's human rights report on Colombia this year said there was
"silent support and direct collaboration" by some members of the armed forces
with the paramilitary groups.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); VERMONT, USA (79%);

COMPANY: STATE DEPARTMENT (60%);

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT (60%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (92%); VERMONT, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES  HUMAN RIGHTS
(94%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (92%); ARMED FORCES (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
ARMIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); CRIME RATES (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%);
MURDER (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (71%); APPROVALS (71%); POLITICS (70%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (62%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (51%); VIOLENT CRIME STATISTICS
(50%);

PERSON: RAMIREZ ACUNA, LUIS FERNANDO (MIN); BECKER, ELIZABETH  PATRICK LEAHY
(55%);

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              15 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Defends the Outlay Of $1.3 Billion to Colombia

BYLINE: By MARC LACEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 665 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 23


President Clinton today defended his decision to sign a waiver freeing up $1.3
billion in anti-drug assistance for Colombia, saying that the country is
improving on human rights even though the government of Andres Pastrana has yet
to meet all the conditions imposed by Congress.

"I did it because I believe President Pastrana is committed to dealing with the
human rights issues, about which we're still very concerned," said Mr. Clinton,
who signed the national security waiver on Tuesday night, a week before he flies
to Colombia for a brief trip.

Congress voted in July to support a White House request for economic and
military aid to Colombia, a package designed to interrupt the flow of cocaine
and heroin to the United States.

The aid package, called Plan Colombia, includes $1 billion to train and equip
the army and police forces of Colombia, as well as additional funds to promote
economic development, judicial reform and human rights improvements. Congress
put conditions on the assistance amid concerns about the Colombian military's
poor human rights record and ties to paramilitary groups.

But lawmakers said Mr. Clinton could waive the conditions for national security
reasons.

Mr. Clinton's use of the waiver was widely expected but it still drew criticism
from some members of Congress and human rights organizations, who accused him of
overlooking the Colombian military's brutal record.

"There is no need or justification for waiving the conditions," said Senator
Patrick Leahy, Democrat of Vermont, who pushed for conditions on the aid. "These
conditions are nothing more than what the Colombian government and our
administration said they would do, and this is not too much to ask."

Senator Paul Wellstone, Democrat of Minnesota and opponent of the aid package,
was even more critical. "A waiver that ignores Colombia's abysmal human rights
situation gives the green light to the Colombian military to continue business
as usual," Mr. Wellstone said.

But Mr. Clinton, in a Rose Garden appearance today with reporters, said the
situation in Colombia was too precarious to wait.

"I think we've protected our fundamental interests in human rights and enabled
Plan Columbia to have a chance to succeed, which I think is very, very important
for the long-term stability of democracy and human rights in Colombia and for
protecting the American people and the Colombia people from the drug traffic,"
the president said.

Among the conditions imposed by Congress were requirements that the military
suspend personnel believed to have committed human rights violations and that it
set up a judge advocate general corps to investigate abuses. Of seven conditions
over all, Mr. Pastrana has satisfied only one, by issuing a statement warning
the military that soldiers accused of human rights abuses will be tried in the
country's civilian courts.

But Mr. Clinton, exercising a waiver on the ground of national security,
declared that a "drug emergency" exists in Colombia and that Mr. Pastrana is
making progress on human rights. The president said the United States could
still turn down specific military units for aid if abuses were uncovered.

Administration officials said that while Colombia is improving its human rights
climate, it is unlikely to meet one condition imposed by Congress -- that it
eliminate the country's total coca and opium poppy production by 2005. The
Colombian government has a goal of eliminating half its drug crop over the next
five years, officials said. Eliminating all the cultivation, the officials said,
would require even more resources.

"Colombia confronts a drug emergency that directly affects the United States,"
the White House said in a memorandum justifying the waiver. "In spite of
aggressive counter-drug efforts, coca cultivation in Colombia has increased 140
percent over the last five years. This massive rate of increase threatens to
reverse the counter-drug successes in Peru and Bolivia."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%);   VERMONT, USA
(79%);

SUBJECT: DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); DRUG POLICY (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); ARMIES (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (77%); HEROIN (73%); COCAINE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (70%); ARMED FORCES (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (62%); POLICE
FORCES (53%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%);

PERSON: LACEY, MARC; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); PASTRANA, ANDRES  BILL CLINTON (92%);

 PATRICK LEAHY (57%);

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              16 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 6, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says Russians Executed Grozny Civilians

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 719 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 5


Russia's seizure of Grozny, the capital of Chechnya, did not bring much security
for Hedi, a 40-year-old resident of the battered city. When she and two other
women returned to Grozny to check on their homes, they stumbled across a group
of Russian soldiers who were looting their devastated neighborhood. The women
were blindfolded and shot.

Hedi survived by pretending she was dead even as the soldiers heaped several
mattresses on the bodies, doused them with gasoline and set them on fire,
according to the account she gave this week to Human Rights Watch, an
international rights group, from a hospital in the neighboring republic of
Ingushetia.

After interviewing refugees from Grozny, the group said today that it had
documented 22 cases in which Grozny residents were killed by occupying Russian
troops, and it is investigating at least 14 more. In some cases, the residents
appear to have been shot by vengeful Russian soldiers, distraught at the losses
their units had suffered. In others, robbery may have been the motive.

"The evidence has confirmed some of our worst fears," Peter Bouckaert, a
researcher for Human Rights Watch, said in a telephone interview from
Ingushetia. "We are not talking about incidental casualties."

Neither Sergei Yastrezmbsky, the Russian government's spokesman on the war, nor
any of his aides were available for comment.

This is not the first time that the conduct of Russian troops has been
criticized by human rights experts. Human Rights Watch asserted in December that
Russian troops had pillaged the village of Alkhan-Yurt in Chechnya and killed
civilians there.

Those charges were supported by testimony from some of the survivors, much of
which was recorded on a videotape prepared by a Chechen businessman who supports
the Russians. Russian authorities say they are investigating the episode.

The testimony from the Grozny refugees recalls many of the allegations of human
rights abuses during the 1994-96 war in Chechnya. It is particularly
embarrassing for the Kremlin since it comes as Russian forces are celebrating
their near "liberation" of Grozny.

Russian authorities have blocked virtually all of the Western press from
reporting from Grozny, making it difficult to evaluate Russia's claims that it
is concerned about the safety of civilians.

The testimony covers events from Dec. 22 to Jan. 24. Many of the victims were
civilians from Ingushetia who lived in Grozny and were later evacuated from
Chechnya.

Human Rights Watch spoke to a woman who said she was hiding in a cellar with
five other civilians when Russian troops routed a band of rebels from her
neighborhood. Hearing Russian voices, the civilians went outside only to be
accused of aiding the rebels.

After the civilians returned to their shelter the soldiers threw in several
grenades. The wounded civilians were later lined up against the wall of a garage
and shot.

Saidpudin, a Grozny resident who asked that his last name not be published, said
he was detained in mid-January after witnessing the shooting of a civilian by
Russian troops. He was later beaten and forced to crouch in a pit while Russian
soldiers doused his head with cold water. He was released, but does not know
what happened to eight other men who were also taken away with him.

Hedi's ordeal began on the morning of Jan. 21 when she and two other women went
to check on their homes. A group of soldiers who were looting homes took them
away, telling them they would be questioned at a local Interior Ministry
outpost. Instead, the women were blindfolded and taken to a ruined house across
the street. The two other women were shot to death. Hedi was shot in the
shoulder and acted as if she was dead as the soldiers searched her.

"They checked me all over and found 400 rubles" -- $14 -- "in one pocket," she
said in her testimony.  "It was tough for them to get my gold ring, and they
were looking for a knife. They tried again and fortunately the ring came off."

The soldiers piled old mattresses on top of the bodies and tried to burn them.
But the mattresses were damp, and Hedi survived.

Mr. Bouckaert said that Hedi's bullet wounds and burn marks were consistent with
her testimony. A second witness, a relative who came from Ingushetia to evacuate
Hedi, also confirmed her account.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(93%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; GROZNY (CHECHNYA); CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(97%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); TESTIMONY (87%);
WAR & CONFLICT (77%); REFUGEES (75%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (72%); INTERVIEWS (69%);

PERSON: GORDON, MICHAEL R

LOAD-DATE: February 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              18 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 7, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Russian Official Tries to Ensure Rights in Chechnya

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 962 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, May 4


Vladimir Kalamanov may have the toughest job in Russia. As the Kremlin's special
envoy for human rights, his task is to persuade a skeptical West that Russia is
serious about ending human rights abuses in Chechnya.

It is a hard sell. Despite numerous accounts of pillaging, beatings and killings
by Russian troops in Chechnya, only a handful of cases have been investigated by
military prosecutors. And while Mr. Kalamanov insists he is making progress, he
is the first to acknowledge that the Russian military routinely withholds
critical details of investigations.

"I can't say that I am entirely satisfied," he said in an interview. "I have not
received all of the information I have asked for."

As President Clinton and President-elect Vladimir V. Putin prepare for their
June meeting in Moscow, human rights is again emerging as a politically charged
issue -- and not just for Russia.

The Clinton administration has made it clear that the brutal war in Chechnya
will not prevent it from doing business with Mr. Putin, particularly on arms
control. But the United States has also sought to assure human rights activists
that it is not neglecting the issue and is pressing for an independent
investigation.

That has put the spotlight squarely on Mr. Kalamanov.

Most Russian officials reject Western human rights complaints as a plot to
blacken the nation's image. Mr. Kalamanov, by contrast, has the disarming manner
of agreeing with many of the critics and then imploring them to accept that
Russia is involved in a long and complex struggle to build a democratic society
and hold the once-sacrosanct military to account.

"You should not see this as a game the president is playing to influence
international opinion," he said. "The role of the army and civil authority is
being rethought, but we are only at the beginning."

Critics, however, portray Mr. Kalamanov as an earnest official who tells the
West what it wants to hear, but who has been granted neither the resources nor
the authority by Mr. Putin to bring the culprits to justice.

"Kalamanov is a formidable figure," said Kenneth Roth, the executive director of
Human Rights Watch, the international rights organization. "He is aware of the
atrocities, but he must work through the chief military prosecutor, who is
determined not to do anything. The best way to inspire confidence is to deliver
results, and so far there have not been significant results."

It seems that Mr. Kalamanov, a 47-year-old official of Syrian descent, should be
in a strong position. Eager to strengthen ties with the West and avoid
international sanctions, Mr. Putin has vowed to end human rights abuses. And in
February, Mr. Putin, who will be inaugurated on Sunday, named Mr. Kalamanov as
an ombudsman on human rights and gave him the lofty mandate of protecting civil
rights in Chechnya.

Despite the official backing from Mr. Putin, however, Mr. Kalamanov seems to be
playing David to the Russian military Goliath. Still, he claims some successes.
He has arranged for two European officials to work with his team in Chechnya, a
move intended to assure the West that his efforts are not a whitewash. And he
has worked to assemble a list of prisoners in Russian detention centers in
Chechnya and helped them obtain legal representation. Soon, he boasts, Chechnya
will have a functioning court system.

What Mr. Kalamanov has not yet been able to do is to bring Russian soldiers to
justice. Human Rights Watch has documented a series of assaults and killings in
the Chechen town of Alkhan-Yurt and in the Staropromyslovsky and Aldi areas of
the Chechen capital of Grozny. Mr. Kalamanov says he takes the reports seriously
and that his investigators have received corroborating testimony about some of
the abuses.

But it is up to military and civilian prosecutors to bring criminal charges, and
they have been very reluctant. Military prosecutors say they are investigating
more than 300 crimes by Russian soldiers in Chechnya, but only 10 involve
allegations of crimes against civilians.

So far, only two of these cases have been referred to the military court for
possible trial, and they concern the relatively modest offenses of "hooliganism"
and mishandling weapons.

The reluctance of the military prosecutors to act has diminished Mr. Kalamanov's
authority. To monitor the effectiveness of the prosecutor's investigations, for
example, Mr. Kalamanov has tried to obtain key details of the cases. Instead, he
has been given only the most general statistics about the number of
investigations.

Recently, the military announced that Colonel Yuri Budanov, the commander of a
tank regiment, has been charged with the rape and murder of a young Chechen
woman. In general, however, the generals have not been eager to publicize their
investigations into human rights abuses, a step that might deter the troops from
committing other crimes and win the confidence of civilians.

The result is evident at Mr. Kalamanov's office in the Chechen town of
Znamenskoye. Housed in a defunct winery, the office has received more than 500
complaints, but they mostly concern delayed pensions, appeals by refugees for
tents and medicine, labor disputes, problems in obtaining new documents and, to
a lesser extent, charges of illegal detentions and reports of missing persons.
It has not fielded any complaints about assaults or thefts by Russian soldiers.

"I think they doubt our ability to help," Alvi Ayubov, the deputy head of the
office and an ethnic Chechen, said of Chechnya's residents. "Ten, 20 or even 30
people cannot always solve these problems. The cooperation of all the entire
power structures in the republic, including law enforcement bodies and human
rights organizations, are required."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (98%); UNITED STATES

 (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY OFFENSES (89%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); ARMIES (77%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); EXECUTIVES (74%); ARMED FORCES (71%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(50%);   TALKS & MEETINGS (73%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: KALAMANOV, VLADIMIR; PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRIME MIN); GORDON, MICHAEL R
VLADIMIR PUTIN (93%); BILL CLINTON (71%);

LOAD-DATE: May 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vladimir Kalamanov, the chief of a human rights commission
appointed by Vladimir V. Putin, has his work cut out for him in Chechnya. (James
Hill for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              19 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Morocco Arrests Dozens of Rights Protesters

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: RABAT, Morocco, Dec. 10


The riot police arrested dozens of peaceful protesters today who were demanding
the legalization of their Muslim fundamentalist group and an end to a ban on
their newspapers, which has been in place for more than a decade.

Less than 24 hours after a similar police action in which 41 human rights
campaigners were arrested, Reuters correspondents saw police squads fiercely
beating scores of young protesters and arresting dozens of them aged between 19
and 24.

The protesters had gathered in the capital's central Alawite square to mark the
anniversary of the Universal Human Rights Declaration and were all members of
the outlawed Muslim fundamentalist group Al Adl Wal Ihsane, or Justice and
Charity.

The police seized cameras from Muslim group members and a video camera from a
correspondent for the BBC after they took pictures of the scene, which was
witnessed by thousands of passers-by.

Abderrahmane Benameur, a prominent human rights figure and lawyer, was among the
41 members of the independent Moroccan Human Rights Association who were
detained on Saturday night. He said by cell phone from police custody, "As
everybody could see, the makhzen has returned to its old habits and repressive
behavior." The makhzen is the secretive royal court hierarchy, which operates in
parallel to the government and is widely believed to be behind most important
decisions.

Two of the 41 people detained on Saturday were freed, but others, including Mr.
Benameur and eight women, were interrogated on Sunday by the prosecutor of a
Rabat court for their part in what the authorities termed an "illegal
gathering." The human rights association was demonstrating outside Parliament to
demand an investigation into past human rights abuses.

The Interior Ministry said in a statement that demonstrations on the streets
were banned over the weekend for public security reasons.

Earlier this week, the human rights group urged Parliament to set up an
independent inquiry into the reported involvement of 16 senior Moroccan
officials in the torture and disappearance of opposition activists, mainly in
the 1970's.

Most of the 16 officials identified by the human rights association are now
retired. They include half a dozen top army and police figures, among them
former chiefs of the paramilitary gendarmerie and of counterintelligence.

The human rights association called on the state to acknowledge its part in
reported abuses and urged the authorities to bring those responsible to trial.

King Mohammed VI, in a televised speech on Saturday, urged all sectors of
society to work toward an improvement of the human rights situation in the
country. The king, who was enthroned in 1999, has set up a $12 million fund to
compensate some victims of human rights abuses and ordered the creation of a
human rights body to examine some 5,000 complaints.

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (91%);

COUNTRY: MOROCCO (94%);

CITY: RABAT, MOROCCO (91%);

COMPANY: SICOME SA (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MOROCCO; RABAT (MOROCCO);   MOROCCO (94%);   RABAT, MOROCCO (91%);

SUBJECT: ISLAM; DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS; FREEDOM OF THE PRESS; NEWSPAPERS; NEWS
AND NEWS MEDIA  ARRESTS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); FUNDAMENTALISM (90%); RIOTS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (86%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); GENDARMERIE (78%); RELIGION (78%);

 TORTURE (77%); ANNIVERSARIES (55%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (52%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: SIR GEORGE YOUNG  (57%);

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              20 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says NATO Killed 500 Civilians in Kosovo War

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 581 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 6


The NATO air campaign in Kosovo led to the deaths of 500 civilians in 90
separate attacks, more incidents than the Pentagon has acknowledged but a much
lower toll than Yugoslavia said, according to a human rights study issued today
that documents each incident and lists the names of the victims.

The study, by Human Rights Watch, rejected any notion that NATO committed war
crimes. But it did argue that in waging a war to stop Serbs from killing or
driving out Kosovo Albanians -- 90 percent of the prewar population of the
ethnic Serbian province -- NATO officials themselves violated the Geneva
Convention both in the selection of targets and the use of cluster bombs.

After a six-month investigation, including three weeks interviewing witnesses in
Kosovo, the Human Rights Watch team determined that one-third of the number of
lethal episodes and half the casualties could have been avoided if NATO nation
forces had strictly followed the rules.

"We're not saying there is any equivalency with the Serbs," remarked Bill Arkin,
the author of the report, "but we are saying that NATO made a fetish about
minimizing civilian casualties but the process was deficient."

In examining Serbian and NATO actions, the report emphasized an attack on May 21
by NATO forces that hit Dubrava Prison. The government of Yugoslavia, of which
Serbia is the larger of two remaining republics, said 95 civilians died in
blasts from NATO missiles. Mr. Arkin and his colleague, Bogdan Ivanisevic, found
that 19 of the prisoners were killed in the NATO attack while the others were
all executed by prison guards afterward.

Senior Pentagon officials said they were relieved that so few civilians died in
a bombing campaign that lasted 78 days and included 38,000 sorties. The Yugoslav
government had contended that NATO bombing killed 5,000 civilians.

The new study said Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen and other top officials
are wrong in concluding that civilians were killed in no more than 20 to 30 NATO
bombings.

"One disturbing aspect of the matter of civilian deaths is how starkly the
number of incidents and deaths contrast with official U.S. and Yugoslav
statements," the report said, citing Gen. Wesley K. Clark, the NATO supreme
commander, as well as Mr. Cohen as testifying that only 20 to 30 incidents had
led to such deaths.

Ever since the Vietnam War, when counting bodies of Vietnamese on or near the
battlefield became a way to avoid admitting strategic failures, the Pentagon has
been loath to count the civilians or the enemy combatants who died during a
conflict with United States forces.

The Pentagon has undertaken an extensive investigation of the Kosovo campaign
for a report to be presented by Mr. Cohen to Congress this week. It will review
the goals set for the campaign and measure how they were achieved, but it does
not include a death toll for enemy soldiers or for civilians.

In that report, officials say, Mr. Cohen will maintain that NATO forces took
utmost care in selecting targets and that the targets selected were legitimate
ones.

The Human Rights Watch report also says that NATO erred by dropping cluster
bombs in urban areas, by bombing bridges during daylight hours when civilians
were most likely to be crossing them (unlike in the Persian Gulf war, the report
says), by hitting targets like a Belgrade television station, and by striking
convoys without knowing with certainty that they were made up of Serbian
military forces.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); ALBANIA (79%); VIET NAM (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (94%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  NORTH ATLANTIC
TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (91%);

 NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); ALBANIA (79%); VIET NAM (79%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(89%); BOMBINGS (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%);
DEATHS & DEATH RATES (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); VIETNAM WAR (76%);
WITNESSES (74%); TESTIMONY (74%); ARMED FORCES (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(70%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (65%);   CORRECTIONS (89%); LAW OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: BECKER, ELIZABETH  WILLIAM S COHEN (75%);

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              21 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 3, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Putin Rebuked Over Chechnya Atrocity

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 195 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 2


An international human rights group today challenged the Russian government to
seek out and try the Russian servicemen who went on a rampage near Grozny on
Feb. 5, killing at least 60 civilians.

The atrocity, which was first reported on within weeks, is believed to be the
worst of the latest Chechen war.

In a report that documents the massacre and the pillaging that followed, Human
Rights Watch called on Russian authorities to pursue a vigorous investigation
into what happened in a Grozny suburb, Novye Aldi.

Released on the eve of President Clinton's arrival in Moscow, the report comes
as a rebuke to President Vladimir V. Putin, who has made repeated promises to
pursue reports of war crimes.

"The Russian government has not undertaken any serious investigation," said
Holly Cartner, executive director of the Europe and Central Asia division of
Human Rights Watch.

Spokesmen for two Russian officials in charge of various investigations in
Chechnya could not be reached for comment today. Vladimir Kalamanov, the
Kremlin's special envoy for human rights, has said that his team has received
corroborating evidence of atrocities in Novye Aldi.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); EUROPE (79%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%);



CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(91%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); GROZNY (CHECHNYA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(93%); EUROPE (79%); CENTRAL ASIA (79%); ASIA (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE  HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); WAR CRIMES (91%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); EXECUTIVES
(74%); EVIDENCE (68%);

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (79%); BILL CLINTON (54%);

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              22 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Northern Ireland Police

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 138 words



To the Editor:

According to an Oct. 20 editorial, the Protestant community in Northern Ireland
fears that the police reform bill before Parliament, which would change the name
of the Royal Ulster Constabulary, would "airbrush" the R.U.C. from history.
There is little chance of that.

We're confident that the despicable record of human rights abuses and official
killing by the R.U.C. will stand the test of time. From the archives of Amnesty
International and Human Rights Watch to the calendar of the European Court of
Human Rights, the force's treachery is recorded.

For loyalists who desire a peace with justice, a fresh start on policing is not
just desirable, but also a necessity.

THOMAS E. GILLIGAN
National President
Ancient Order of Hibernians in America
Fort Lauderdale, Fla., Oct. 20, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); UNITED STATES (79%); EUROPE (77%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%);

CITY: FORT LAUDERDALE, FL, USA (50%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); ANCIENT ORDER OF HIBERNIANS IN AMERICA
(56%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL
(57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); EUROPEAN COURT OF
HUMAN RIGHTS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%); ANCIENT ORDER OF HIBERNIANS IN
AMERICA (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NORTHERN IRELAND;   NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);
EUROPE (77%);   FLORIDA, USA (79%);   FORT LAUDERDALE, FL, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (73%); POLITICS (72%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%);

PERSON: GILLIGAN, THOMAS E

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              23 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bush Should Start Over in Colombia

BYLINE: By Paul Wellstone;  Paul Wellstone is a senator from Minnesota.

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


Earlier this month I traveled to Colombia to learn more about this war-torn
country, whose military is getting nearly $2 million per day from the United
States as part of an aid package that passed last June after narrow approval in
the Senate.

I paid a visit to Barrancabermeja, an oil-refining port city on Colombia's
Magdalena River. "Barranca," a city of 210,000, is one of the most dangerous
places in one of the world's most dangerous countries. This year so far,
violence in Barranca has killed at least 410 people. According to local human
rights groups, most of those killed were the victims of right-wing paramilitary
death squads.

These human rights groups operate in the midst of a 40-year-old civil war now in
one of its most violent phases. Every year, the violence in Colombia kills
nearly 4,000 people, most of them poor, powerless noncombatants. About 300,000
-- more than half of them children -- are forced from their homes each year.
Another 3,000 people are kidnapped. Ransoms, extortion and the drug trade
finance armed groups on the right and left.

In the name of the drug war, the American aid package approved this year
allocates approximately 75 percent of its resources to Colombia's security
forces. But Colombia's military is a deeply troubled institution, even though it
has recently taken important steps to improve its overall human rights record.

The State Department recently reported that "civilian management of the armed
forces is limited" in Colombia, and that in 1999 "the authorities rarely brought
officers of the security forces and the police charged with human rights
offenses to justice, and impunity remains a problem." Many members of the
security forces continue to collaborate with the right-wing paramilitaries, who
commit about three-quarters of the politically motivated murders in Colombia.

The country's two main guerrilla groups, the FARC and E.L.N., meanwhile, are
supported in part by skimming from the drug trade (as are the paramilitaries),
and commit about a fifth of killings while terrorizing the population. Yet even
in these circumstances, I met many individuals in Colombia who are working for
peace as prosecutors, investigators and journalists, and as workers in dozens of
nongovernmental organizations. These people have little room for maneuver. A
shocking number disappear, are assassinated or are forced to leave the country.

Now Washington has made their jobs harder. As part of an antidrug strategy that
has failed so far, the new aid package is escalating the fighting and dealing a
severe blow to President Andres Pastrana's already troubled peace talks with the
guerrillas.

Before things get any worse, the coming administration of George W. Bush would
do well to take our Colombia policy back to the drawing board. A more effective
approach has to include support for Colombia's peace process, strong new
protections for human rights defenders and initiatives to make drug production
less attractive to economically desperate peasants by providing support for
sustainable alternative crops.

In the meantime, we need to make short-term improvements in the policy. The
American aid package itself offers a guide.

The Senate's version included strong human rights conditions. It would have cut
off military aid until the United States government could certify that
Colombia's armed forces were disentangling from paramilitaries and punishing
criminal conduct in their ranks. A House-Senate conference committee watered
down this safeguard by giving the president the ability to waive it --
essentially making the human rights conditions optional. The State Department
recognized that Colombia's military did not meet these standards, but the
administration took the easy way out and waived the conditions in August.

The waiver sent a terrible signal to Colombia's military and to its beleaguered
defenders of human rights. The waiver eliminated what could have been an
important source of leverage with the government for those working for human
rights.

Next month, the United States government must once again certify that Colombia's
military satisfies the conditions, so that delivery of antidrug aid can continue
in 2001. This time, the Bush administration's State Department must take a tough
stance: no waiver and no aid until all human rights conditions are met.
Americans should not be supporting a partnership with a military that does not
meet these very basic standards.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: STATE DEPARTMENT (60%);

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT (60%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FOREIGN AID; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  WAR & CONFLICT
(91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (87%); DRUG POLICY
(87%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%);
CHILDREN (76%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (75%); MURDER (75%); INVESTIGATIONS (74%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
(74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (73%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (72%); EXTORTION
(71%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (66%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (63%); PEACE PROCESS (50%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (69%);

PERSON: WELLSTONE, PAUL (SEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV)  GEORGE W BUSH (78%);

LOAD-DATE: December 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              24 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

British, Under European Ruling, End Ban on Openly Gay Soldiers

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 12


The government announced a code of conduct for the military today that ends its
ban on openly gay men and women serving in the armed forces.

The action follows a European court ruling last fall that Britain could no
longer keep the exclusion. It ends a decades-old practice of subjecting gays in
the military to intrusive investigations and dishonorable discharges.

The change brings Britain into line with almost all other NATO nations,
including France, Canada and Germany, which allow openly gay men and lesbians to
serve in their armed forces.

The United States, with its "don't ask, don't tell" policy, is at variance with
that trend. The policy, adopted by the Clinton administration, allows gays to
serve provided they do not disclose or discuss their sexuality. President
Clinton himself has objected to the results of the policy.

In the American presidential campaign, both contenders for the Democratic
nomination have said they would work to change the policy so that gays could
serve openly, while leading Republicans stand by the policy. The topic has
become more charged since the killing of a gay soldier at a Kentucky base last
summer.

The new British policy sets out a code of conduct for all manner of social and
sexual relations, whether heterosexual or homosexual.

Under the guidelines, "unacceptable social conduct" that might result in
disciplinary action includes sexual harassment; overt displays of affection that
might offend others; and taking sexual advantage of subordinates.

The code determines that commanders have the right to be aware of and to
intervene in the personal lives of their subordinates. "In the area of personal
relationships," it says, there is an "overriding operational imperative to
sustain team cohesion and to maintain trust and loyalty between commanders and
those they command."

That "imposes a need for standards of social behavior which are more demanding
than those required by society at large," the statement says.

The about-face in British policy became inevitable on Sept. 27 when the European
Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, unanimously ruled in favor of four
former servicemen and -women who were discharged in the mid-1990's because of
their homosexuality. In ruling against the British government, the court found
that its ban violated the fundamental human right to privacy, as set out in the
European Convention on Human Rights.

In cases where Britons argue that their rights have been violated, Strasbourg
serves as a court of last resort, much the way the Supreme Court functions in
the United States.

Britain signed the European convention, with 40 other countries, and thus
obliged itself to abide by the court's rulings, even to the extent of changing
its laws if necessary. Previous cases have forced Britain to end corporal
punishment in schools and to give greater rights to prisoners and to suspected
terrorists.

Today's announcement follows a decision on Tuesday by the European Union's
highest legal body, the Court of Justice in Luxembourg, which ruled in favor of
a woman who argued that Germany's constitutional ban against women bearing arms
amounted to unlawful sex discrimination.

In the House of Commons this afternoon, Geoffrey Hoon, the defense secretary,
acknowledged that the human rights court's ruling had left the government with
no choice but to end the ban. "The European Court of Human Rights ruling makes
very clear that the existing policy in relation to homosexuality must change,"
he said.

"As all personal behavior will be regulated by the code of conduct," he said,
"there is no longer a reason to deny homosexuals the opportunity of a career in
the armed forces."

The British Defense Department has long argued that the presence of gays in the
military would depress morale among the 210,000 uniformed personnel and disrupt
the services' effectiveness as fighting forces. In defending its ban, it has
also pointed to surveys that it says show that members of the armed services are
reluctant to serve with gay men and lesbians.

Responding to today's announcement, Iain Duncan Smith, the Conservative Party's
defense spokesman, said that there was no reason to believe that people in the
armed services would be more willing to accept gays than they had in the past.

"I believe and have always believed," Mr. Duncan Smith said, "that we should
follow the advice of the armed forces, which had always been that lifting the
ban would adversely affect operational effectiveness."

But supporters of gay rights and civil liberties applauded the change, saying
that it was overdue.

Angela Mason, the executive director of the gay-rights group Stonewall, said:
"When I first came to Stonewall seven years ago, I was shocked that lesbians and
gay men in the armed forces were treated so brutally. I am very proud that as
from today they will be able to serve their country with dignity and respect."

And Roger Garford, a member of Rank Outsiders, a support group for gay men and
lesbians who are serving or have served in the military, said he welcomed the
news that no one in the armed forces could now be forced to go through what he
did in the early 1980's, when rumors that he had had a homosexual relationship
with a civilian reached his commanding officer. A chief technician in the Royal
Air Force, Mr. Garford had then served for about 20 years.

The Special Branch was called to investigate, he said, and interrogated him for
nine hours. After he broke down and admitted he had had an affair with a man,
Mr. Garford, who was married at the time, was released by the officers. But they
then embarked on a long investigation of his friends and colleagues in an effort
to amass further evidence that he was gay.

Finally, Mr. Garford said, they gave him a dishonorable discharge, four months
before he was to become eligible for a pension. He soon divorced, and is
currently waiting, along with some 60 others who were dismissed by the military
because of their homosexuality, to see whether he is entitled to compensation.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); FRANCE (92%);
CANADA (79%); GERMANY (79%);

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (91%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(59%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION
(59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS

 NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (91%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(59%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (59%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION
(59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREAT BRITAIN; EUROPE;   EUROPE (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); UNITED
KINGDOM (94%); FRANCE (92%); CANADA (79%); GERMANY (79%);   ALSACE, FRANCE
(79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; HOMOSEXUALITY; UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS  GAYS & LESBIANS
(94%); ARMED FORCES (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
ETHICS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); SEXUAL
HARASSMENT (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); SUPREME
COURTS (77%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); TERRORISM (66%);
CORPORAL PUNISHMENT IN SCHOOLS (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (64%); PRIVACY
RIGHTS (64%);

PERSON: LYALL, SARAH  BILL CLINTON (71%);

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Defense Secretary Geoffrey Hoon announcing in the House of
Commons that Britain is dropping its ban on the openly gay serving in the
military. The change brings Britain in line with almost all other NATO
countries. (Associated Press)(pg. A10)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              26 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 30, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Russia Arrests Officer in Case Of the Killing Of a Chechen

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 634 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, March 29


A Russian officer was charged today with killing a civilian in Chechnya, a rare
move by the Russian military to crack down on human rights abuses.

The chief of the Russian General Staff, Gen. Anatoly Kvashnin, informed Acting
President Vladimir V. Putin of the arrest.

"A tank regiment commander, Colonel Budanov, humiliated a woman citizen of
Chechnya and then killed her," General Kvashnin told the RTR television network.
He said Russia troops had apologized to the woman's family and expressed regrets
by attending her funeral.

Although international human rights organizations have reported numerous cases
in which Chechens have been robbed, beaten, killed and raped, there has been
little or no action until now by the authorities to bring the culprits to
justice.

"It is a welcome step, but not a substitute for a thorough investigation of the
massacres that have been documented so far," said Rachel Denber, a deputy
director at Human Rights Watch.

Curbing rights abuses is not only important for Russia's effort to maintain
smooth relations with the West, but also for its longer-term effort to build
credibility with the Chechen people and win the peace.

But peace, as Russians learned today, remained elusive. In a deadly replay of
recent clashes, Chechen rebels ambushed two military units in the Chechen
highlands.

The attack, reported on state-owned television, undercut the military's
assertions that the war was virtually at an end and gave new ammunition to some
leaders who have begun to call for a political solution to the six-month-old
war.

The episode began when 41 militia members were traveling in a convoy near the
mountain village of Zhani-Vedeno. The convoy was attacked. When a rescue party
went to the scene, it, too, was ambushed.

Russian officials said that they did not know how many soldiers had been killed
or wounded in the convoy and that 14 were wounded in the 20-member rescue group.

The Kremlin spokesman on Chechnya, Sergei Yastrzhembsky, said tonight that other
forces were being dispatched to the area and that Russian troops were using
helicopters and artillery to attack the rebels.

The attacks were the latest in a series of setbacks for the Russian military.
They were especially embarrassing because they occurred during a visit by
Interior Minister Vladimir B. Rushailo to Chechnya to plan ways to capture rebel
leaders.

And it seemed to set the stage for a new call by regional leaders for a
political settlement.

After meeting with Mr. Putin today, two leaders from the northern Caucasus
regions that border Chechnya again urged him to open a dialogue with President
Aslan Maskhadov of Chechnya.

"I am a kind of envoy between Maskhadov's government and Moscow," President
Ruslan Aushev of Ingushetia said in remarks broadcast on the state-owned
television.

Russia has refused to talk to Mr. Maskhadov, who was seen as a relative moderate
before Moscow mounted its offensive. But Mr. Yastrzhembsky said on Wednesday
that Mr. Maskhadov could be given amnesty "if it is proved that there is no
blood on his hands."

Russia's military campaign, which has had broad public support and has accounted
in large measure for Mr. Putin's popularity, was barely an issue in the recent
presidential campaign. But the call for a political solution to the war could
pick up additional support now that the election is over.

In an interview this week, Boris Nemtsov, a reform-minded leader in a coalition
called the Union of Right Forces, said his party had decided that it was too
politically costly to oppose the war during the election campaign. But more
reform politicians might begin to speak up now.

"Then to organize a big noise was inefficient," Mr. Nemtsov said in an
interview. "Now I think it is the thing to do."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CAUCASIAN
STATES (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);

SUBJECT: SEX CRIMES; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (89%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY
(89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); SEX OFFENSES (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); POLITICS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); MOUNTAINS (65%);
WOUNDS & INJURIES (62%); HELICOPTERS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(75%);

PERSON: GORDON, MICHAEL R; KVASHNIN, ANATOLY (GEN); DENBER, RACHEL  VLADIMIR
PUTIN (78%);

LOAD-DATE: March 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              27 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Human Rights Panel Faults Russia and Others, but Not China

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 571 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 29


After six weeks of review, debate and bargaining at the annual session of the
main United Nations human rights forum, which ended on Friday, China emerged
free of condemnation of its human rights record while Russia and others were
chastised.

After it sidestepped bringing China to account for repression of political and
spiritual dissenters, the United Nations Human Rights Commission voted to
castigate Russia for its actions in Chechnya, the breakaway republic in the
Caucasus.

It was the first time the 53-country commission had taken such strong action
against one of the five permanent members of the Security Council, diplomats
said. The resolution was introduced by the European Union. The permanent council
members are Russia, the United States, France, Britain and China.

Russia's actions during its earlier campaign in Chechnya were criticized by the
commission in 1995 and 1996, but only after a text was agreed upon with Moscow.

This year negotiations broke down, and commission members voted 25 to 7, with 19
abstentions, to condemn "disproportionate and indiscriminate use of Russian
military force, including attacks against civilians."

In lobbying European delegates for the vote against Russia, human rights groups
had contended that after Europe moved last year against abuses in Yugoslavia
with the NATO bombing campaign, it should not be any less concerned over alleged
abuses in Russia.

Only Cuba, China, India, the Republic of Congo, Madagascar and Sri Lanka voted
with Russia against the call for a national investigation into alleged mass
killings and other atrocities.

"It is our firm view that this commission should not remain silent," said
Portugal's envoy, Alvaro Mendonca e Moura.

Cuba's rights practices were also condemned, for the second year in a row, in a
resolution that cited the government for suppression of political opposition and
detention of dissidents.

The resolution was proposed by the Czech Republic and Poland and cosponsored by
the United States.

Among other countries censured this year were Yugoslavia, accused of repression
of the news media and political foes; Myanmar, the former Burma, accused of
using forced labor; Iran, accused of torture and discrimination against
minorities and because of the suspicious deaths of political activists; and
Iraq, accused of widespread repression and systematic torture and summary and
arbitrary executions.

China avoided, as it has every year since 1990, a full-scale debate on its
policies toward dissenters and other minorities.

France, Belgium and other countries blocked the 15-member European Union from
taking a unified stand against China, or from publicly backing the
American-sponsored resolution. Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright appeared
in Geneva to urge delegates to review Chinese human rights practices.

China has thrown political and commercial weight behind its campaign to escape
scrutiny, envoys and human rights lobbyists say, making it difficult, especially
for smaller countries, to vote for any anti-China resolution for fear of
retaliation.

The body's disapproval carries no penalties. The United States, for example,
while not named, was one of the targets of a European Union resolution against
the death penalty. Last year's nearly identical vote did not persuade any of the
countries that allow capital punishment, including the United States, to halt
the practice.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE
(93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); FRANCE (92%); CAUCASIAN STATES (92%);

 CUBA (92%); INDIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); PORTUGAL (79%); IRAQ (79%); POLAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (53%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (UN)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION
(57%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (UN)  UNITED NATIONS
(94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (57%); EUROPEAN
UNION  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); RUSSIA; CHINA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CHINA
(97%); UNITED STATES (94%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%);
FRANCE (92%); CAUCASIAN STATES (92%); CUBA (92%); INDIA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); PORTUGAL (79%); IRAQ

 (79%); POLAND (79%); BELGIUM (79%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (53%);   MOSCOW,
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CHURCH-STATE
RELATIONS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  HUMAN RIGHTS (93%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (91%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); TORTURE (89%);
LOBBYING (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%);
RELIGION (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); POLITICS
(72%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%); BOMBINGS (67%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (66%);
FORCED LABOR (73%);

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              28 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Australian Action Reopens Dispute on Human Rights Monitors

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 704 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 30


A decision by Australia to limit its cooperation with the United Nations on
human rights reporting has reopened a debate about whether international
monitors are sometimes harder on democracies than on closed societies.

Some democracies, aware that information is more accessible and independent
advocacy groups are more influential in their countries, are wary of the
monitoring.

In Australia, a campaign has been building for months to curb access to United
Nations monitors after reports came out critical of the government's judicial
treatment of Aborigines and foreigners who seek asylum.

Politicians from Prime Minister John Howard's conservative Liberal Party have
been particularly angry over criticisms from the United Nations Committee for
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination that relate to mandatory sentencing
laws in Australia. The committee found that they fell hardest on Aborigines,
some of them children.

On Tuesday, Australia said that it would demand that United Nations monitors
produce compelling reasons to visit Australia before granting permissions for
fact-finding trips. The government also said it would reject requests from the
United Nations to stay the deportation of unsuccessful asylum seekers.

Mr. Howard told Parliament today that the decision to reduce cooperation did not
amount to "a turning away by Australia from the principles of the United
Nations."

"But it does represent a determination by this government to ensure that matters
affecting Australia are resolved by Australians within Australia," he said.

United Nations human rights activities are fragmented. The office of the high
commissioner for human rights is less than a decade old. An older group, the
Human Rights Commission, is a body of government representatives that meets
annually to hear reports from monitors assigned to specific countries or issues
and may censure governments.

Then there are treaty committees set up to monitor individual covenants against
torture, on children's rights, on eliminating discrimination against women, on
eliminating racial discrimination and on civil and political rights. Those are
expert panels whose candidates are nominated by governments and elected by
nations that have signed the relevant treaties or covenants.

Only countries that have signed the treaties are required to submit reports for
scrutiny, leaving some countries known for abuses free of monitoring. Other
signing nations submit perfunctory or late reports or ignore the requirement
altogether.

Australia has been a strong supporter of the treaties and has submitted regular
reports. The Australian decision to restrict cooperation was a shock for many
rights groups. "For the Australians, who have done so much to build the
international human rights system and the treaty system, to say this is a
particularly sad moment," said Felice Gaer, director of the Jacob Blaustein
Institute for the Advancement of Human Rights and a member of the United Nations
committee against torture.

Of the 25 core treaties that Secretary General Kofi Annan has asked governments
to sign or ratify next week at a summit meeting in New York, "13 of them are
human rights treaties," Ms. Gaer said. "What kind of a message does this send to
the rest of the world about the importance of global norms?"

Australia's decision reflects opinions shared by some Americans who oppose what
they see as a growing tendency toward international scrutiny. John Bolton of the
American Enterprise Institute in Washington, a former assistant secretary of
state in the Bush administration, said his objections were constitutional.

"What Australia has done is a triumph for democracy," he said in an interview.
"Within a constitutional system of representative government, you're allowed to
struggle for policy outcomes. In a democracy, sometimes you win and sometimes
you lose. What Australia is objecting to is the idea that a losing side in a
democratic country can ask for a lifeline to a U.N. agency."

Speaking to Parliament today in Canberra, Mr. Howard contended that Australia,
which has signed all the main human rights treaties, was under greater scrutiny
than the United States and as much as Britain.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AUSTRALIA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRALIA;   AUSTRALIA (98%); UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA
(79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); RACE & RACISM (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); TORTURE (89%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (88%); LIBERALISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%);

 HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); CHILD WELFARE
(77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); POLITICS (75%); GENDER EQUALITY (73%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%);
DEPORTATION (70%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (54%); SENTENCING (54%);   RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (89%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; HOWARD, JOHN (PRIME MIN)  JOHN HOWARD (88%);

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              30 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 10, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

America as Role Model

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 155 words



To the Editor:

Joseph S. Nye is right that America's "soft power" -- its ability to attract
support by virtue of its example -- is at risk "to the extent that we fail to
live up to our proclaimed standards" (Op-Ed, Jan. 3). American human rights
leadership has been undermined by the government's unwillingness to subject
itself to the standards it applies to others.

Washington has insisted on ratifying human rights treaties with reservations
that preclude Americans from invoking the treaties in court to challenge
official misconduct. The government was a strong supporter of war-crimes
tribunals in Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia because they were aimed mainly at
others. But it opposes an international criminal court because, despite
safeguards against unwarranted prosecutions, it theoretically could pursue
American service members.

KENNETH ROTH
Exec. Dir., Human Rights Watch
New York, Jan. 3, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); RWANDA (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); RWANDA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (87%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(87%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (86%); MISCONDUCT (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%);

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH; NYE, JOSEPH S  JOSEPH S NYE (60%);

LOAD-DATE: January 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              31 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 17, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

In Chechnya's Shattered Capital, Survivors See Their Own Reflection

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 828 words

DATELINE: GROZNY, Russia, Feb. 14


The battle for Grozny ended too late for Klavdiya M. Nefyodova. Her son was
killed three weeks ago by a band of rebel fighters after he refused to dig
trenches for the defense of the Chechen capital.

When the 88-year-old Ms. Nefyodova learned the awful news she kept quiet.
Protesting was dangerous, her nephew warned. The rebels might kill her, too.

Grozny is more than a landscape of shattered buildings. It is also a city of
broken lives.

The limited access that Russian forces have granted to the capital makes it
difficult to chronicle the human rights violations there systematically. But
accounts provided by residents during a two-day period appeared credible and
pointed to abuses on both sides.

Some of the most chilling allegations have been made against the Russian
soldiers who battled their way into the city. Anxious to avenge their fallen
comrades, some took out their frustrations on Grozny's defenseless civilians.

Larissa, who was selling cigarettes and candy near Grozny's destroyed market
place, said that troops had run wild through her neighborhood.

She said a young woman was raped and killed by Russian soldiers, who burned her
body. When the woman's father became distraught the soldiers shot him and burned
his body, too.

"They don't consider us civilians!" she shouted. "They look at us as animals or
beasts! They throw grenades into the cellars and kill the civilians!

"You want names. I can give you names. Ella, Dzhabrail, Adam were killed in a
basement when the federals entered the city. The corpses are still lying there.
You can go and see."

As she cried out, a Russian Interior Ministry spokesman intervened, telling
reporters the area was too dangerous and shooing them away.

Her account of burnt corpses and indiscriminate grenade attacks is similar to
testimony that refugees from Grozny have provided to human rights experts.

Human Rights watch said it had confirmed the killing of more than 40 Chechen
civilians by Russian soldiers in one Grozny district alone.

The rebels committed offenses as well. Russian soldiers and Grozny residents say
that the militants included Chechen rebels, mercenaries and Islamic fighters who
came from abroad to join the battle.

Refugees from Grozny said that in some cases, militants took an interest in
their welfare and even led them to safety. But there have also been reports of
marauders who looted apartments and went house to house, searching for men they
could force to work.

Tamara N. Zheromyskaya, a 57-year-old veterinarian, survived along with her son.
They did not resist when militants took her son from their apartment to dig
trenches.

"The conversation was always short," she recalled bitterly. "They would come and
say to my son, 'Christian, get dressed.' "

Those less fortunate were forced to turn over their apartments at the point of a
gun.

Nadezhda G. Shchelchkova, 73, said a group of marauders raided her apartment,
taped her mouth shut and stole her life savings, 1,100 rubles, or about $39.
More important, they stole her stores of food. She retreated to a nearby
basement, she said, and lived on the edge of starvation throughout the fighting.

Ms. Nefyodova, a short, frail woman, was stoically hauling bottles of water back
to her apartment when she stopped for a few minutes to explain how the tug of
war over Grozny had changed her life.

The communal apartment she lived in was destroyed by a bomb. So she and her
54-year-old son, Valery, moved into the apartment of a relative, who had fled
the city. It did not take long before their presence was noticed and a group of
rebels came after them for food.

"The militants came and took all of the flour," she recalled. "Then they came
again and took the canned tomatoes. All we had to eat was some low-quality
flour. We still depend on it."

A bad situation got much worse when militants came looking for her son. He
argued that he needed to stay and look after his elderly mother, but they needed
his labor and took him away to dig trenches. After a day, he fled.

"We hid him for a while, but the militants came back," Ms. Nefyodova recalled.

Ms. Nefyodova was feeling poorly and lying in bed when the militants returned.
There was a commotion outside. Soon afterward, a militant barged into her
apartment, ordered her to stay put and quickly left.

She did not learn what had happened until her nephew came to visit later that
day. The militants, he explained, had demanded that her son go with them and
shot him when he refused. Then they ordered the nephew to bury him. "Your Valery
has been killed," the nephew told Ms. Nefyodova. "Don't cry and don't yell."

Fearing reprisals, she said, she did neither. Today she and her nephew scrounge
for food in streets cluttered with debris and look for ways to get by. She does
not expect much help from the outside, and she is beyond complaining.

"The previous war was easier," she said matter-of-factly. "We had bread."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(59%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; GROZNY (CHECHNYA); CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(94%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); BURN INJURIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
SHOOTINGS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); REFUGEES
(75%); WOMEN (75%); SEX OFFENSES (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (74%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (69%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (65%); RELIGION (60%);

PERSON: GORDON, MICHAEL R

LOAD-DATE: February 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: RUINS UNDER THREAT -- Dust clouds rose this week over a Grozny
street from the remains of a building as Russian forces destroyed structures
they feared might provide sniper sites.; FOOD IN SHORT SUPPLY -- At a temporary
police station, taller supplicants surrounded a Grozny boy as he begged a
Russian soldier to let him take more food home for his family.; PRICE OF
DESTRUCTION -- A resident reacting to the sight of her former home. (Photographs
by JAMES HILL for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              32 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

After 16 Months of House Arrest, Pinochet Quits England

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1111 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 2


Gen. Augusto Pinochet was allowed to fly home to Chile today after Britain
dropped extradition proceedings against him and put an end to his 16 months of
house arrest in England.

A Chilean military plane lifted off from Waddington Royal Air Force Base in
Lincolnshire at 1:10 p.m., just hours after the decision to free the 84-year-old
former Chilean dictator was announced by Home Secretary Jack Straw.

Moments after the plane was airborne, Mr. Straw told the House of Commons that
because of the failing health of General Pinochet, he was ending the complex
legal and judicial case in which four European countries had been seeking the
general's extradition. Spain had initiated the case by asking that he be sent to
Madrid to stand trial on charges of torture dating from his 17-year
authoritarian rule of Chile in which more than 3,000 people died or disappeared.

In letters to ambassadors of the four countries made public today, Mr. Straw
argued that the general's declining health had produced a "memory deficit" that
would have compromised his ability to understand charges and direct his lawyers.

Before General Pinochet could even arrive in Chile, both human rights activists
and supporters of the former dictator began preparing for the next legal battle
over whether he will be obliged to stand trial there. Human rights activists
were already in court by afternoon, presenting evidence to a judge and hoping to
keep the case alive.

Although General Pinochet left Britain today on short notice, the protracted
case will be remembered and cited long after its undramatic end today. Its most
significant legacy is a fundamental change in international law that gives
universal jurisdiction to the prosecution of crimes considered human rights
atrocities.

"It has established beyond question the principle that those who commit human
rights abuses in one country cannot assume they are safe elsewhere," Mr. Straw
told Parliament. Already, human rights groups are using rulings in the Pinochet
case as a legal basis for trying Hissene Habre, the former president of the
central African nation Chad, in Senegal on torture charges.

In his letter to the Spanish mission, Mr. Straw said that General Pinochet
"would be unable to follow the process of a trial sufficiently to instruct
counsel" and "would have had difficulty in understanding the content and the
implications of questions put to him and would have inadequate insight into this
difficulty." The letter concluded, "He would have difficulty in making himself
understood in replying to questions."

Mr. Straw had first signaled his intention to make today's move in January after
medical tests conducted by four British specialists maintained that the general
was unfit to stand trial. Spain, France, Belgium and Switzerland challenged that
finding, and Mr. Straw was subsequently ordered by a three-judge panel of
Britain's High Court to send the four governments the records of the
examination.

None of the governments or human rights organizations that had mounted legal
challenges to his release pressed to bring an appeal to today's final decision
in the scant time available before General Pinochet could leave Britain.

The lasting impact of the Pinochet case stems from two decisions by the Law
Lords of the House of Lords, Britain's highest court. They ruled that General
Pinochet was not immune from prosecution even though he was head of state at the
time that the alleged crimes against humanity took place.

To rights groups, these rulings amounted to a coming of age for international
law, a framework that has gradually seen a shift from the notion that countries
do not interfere in one another's affairs to a belief that human rights
transcend domestic jurisdictions. Amnesty International said today that the case
represented the greatest advance for international law since the Nuremberg
trials.

"It's a terrible disappointment for Pinochet's thousands of victims that he will
not face trial in Spain," said Reed Brody, advocacy director of the New
York-based Human Rights Watch, which has been among the groups pursuing the
case. "But the very fact that he was arrested and that his claim of immunity was
rejected has already changed the calculus of dictators around the world. The
Pinochet case signified the beginning of the end of their impunity"

General Pinochet was originally arrested on Oct. 16, 1998, as he lay in a London
clinic recuperating from back surgery. The British police made their surprise
move in response to an application from a Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon,
seeking his extradition to Madrid to stand trial on charges of genocide,
torture, kidnapping and murder in connection with the disappearance of 3,197
people in the years after he seized power in a coup in 1973.

General Pinochet won his first legal battle to overcome the charges in a ruling
by the High Court on Oct. 28 that upheld his claim to sovereign immunity. But in
a ruling that was to create the case's legacy, the Law Lords a month later
overturned that decision, saying that being a head of state did not excuse
crimes against humanity.

The case eventually moved on to the validity of the actual extradition order
itself, which was upheld by a London magistrate last October and remained under
appeal with a hearing scheduled for this March 20.

In the one appearance in court that General Pinochet was obliged to make, on
Dec. 11, 1998, he maintained the defiant attitude he adopted from the beginning,
saying he did not recognize the jurisdiction of any court outside of one in
Chile to try him and saying he was innocent of "all the lies of Spain." He later
described himself as "England's only political prisoner."

Every hearing and court date has produced throngs of supporters and opponents
angrily facing down one another from behind barricades, trading taunts and jeers
and holding aloft flags and placards with accusatory slogans and pictures of
missing friends and relatives.

For the last 15 months, the general has been living under 24-hour police custody
with his wife, Lucia, in a rented mansion in one of London's exclusive southern
suburbs. He has had periodic visits from Chilean supporters and backers of his
in this country, the most visible and voluble of whom has been former Prime
Minister Margaret Thatcher.

She has argued that far from holding him in custody, Britain instead owes him
its gratitude for the support he gave the country in 1982 during the Falkland
Islands war with Argentina. "His reward by this government," she told reporters
today on the steps of her Belgravia home, "was to be held prisoner for 16
months."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC4512 AIR TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (58%);

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); SPAIN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); SWITZERLAND (91%);
ENGLAND (90%); FRANCE (88%); BELGIUM (88%); EUROPE (79%); SENEGAL (79%); CENTRAL
AFRICA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%);

COMPANY: ROYAL AIR MAROC  (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; SPAIN;   CHILE (98%); SPAIN (94%); UNITED
KINGDOM (94%); SWITZERLAND (91%); ENGLAND (90%); FRANCE (88%); BELGIUM (88%);
EUROPE (79%); SENEGAL (79%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(92%);   MADRID, SPAIN (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  EXTRADITION (93%);
HOUSE ARREST (91%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); TORTURE (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); AIR FORCES (77%);
SUPREME COURTS (76%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%);
JURISDICTION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); JUDGES (73%); ARMED FORCES

 (72%); LAWYERS (71%); MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (70%);   MEDICAL
DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (70%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING

 (70%);

PERSON: HOGE, WARREN; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); STRAW, JACK (SEC)  JACK STRAW
(92%);

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: General Pinochet last September.
Agence France-Presse

Chart: "CHRONOLOGY: Home Again"

1998
SEPT. 22 -- Gen. Augusto Pinochet arrives in Britain.
OCT. 9 -- He undergoes back surgery at a London clinic.
OCT. 16 -- He is arrested in the clinic on a Spanish request that he be
extradited to Madrid to stand trial on charges of crimes against humanity.
OCT. 28 -- The High Court rules that he is immune from arrest because he was
head of a state at the time of crimes of which he is accused, but says he must
stay in custody pending appeal.
NOV. 25 -- The Law Lords of the House of Lords, Britain's highest court,
overturn the High Court judgment and say General Pinochet is not immune from
arrest.
DEC. 1 -- Under continuing house arrest, he moves to an exclusive suburb south
of London.
DEC. 17 -- The Law Lords set aside their own ruling on the ground it was tainted
by the possible bias of one of its judges.

1999
MARCH 24 -- In the decision that sets the Pinochet case's legacy, the Law Lords
reconfirm earlier ruling that he does not enjoy immunity, but reduces the number
of charges.
OCT. 8 -- The Bow Street Magistrates Court approves terms of Spanish extradition
request. General Pinochet appeals the ruling.

2000
JAN. 5 -- He undergoes medical examination by British doctors to assess his
fitness to be extradited.
JAN. 11 -- Home Secretary Jack Straw says he is minded to release General
Pinochet because of evidence in the doctors' report that he is not mentally fit
to stand trial.
FEB. 15 -- The High Court orders Mr. Straw to disclose the medical report to
Spain, France, Belgium and Switzerland, all of whom are seeking his extradition.

YESTERDAY -- General Pinochet is freed from house arrest and allowed to fly home
to Chile when Britain drops extradition proceedings on the ground that age and
illness have rendered him mentally incapable of standing trial.



TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              33 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 11, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

State Dept. Helped Peruvian Accused of Torture Avoid Arrest

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 10


Citing diplomatic immunity, the State Department interceded on behalf of a
visiting Peruvian intelligence official who is accused of committing torture in
Peru, a senior official said tonight.

United States agents had questioned the Peruvian, Maj. Tomas Ricardo Anderson
Kohatsu, at a Houston airport on Thursday and wanted to arrest him, the American
official said. But in the early evening, Major Anderson was released after the
State Department argued that he had a right to diplomatic immunity.

The State Department did not dispute the torture allegation but informed the
Justice Department that diplomatic immunity precluded legal action against Major
Anderson.

The decision not to detain Major Anderson, an officer in Peru's intelligence
service, caused an outcry among human rights groups, which contend there is
overwhelming evidence against him.

Major Anderson had taken part in a hearing at the Inter-American Commission on
Human Rights, an arm of the Organization of American States.

Five human rights groups, including the Center for Justice and International
Law, criticized the State Department for interceding on his behalf.

Viviana Krsticevic, the center's executive director, said Major Anderson was on
his way to Mexico on Thursday and planned to fly on to Peru.

"Overwhelming evidence implicates Anderson in the torture of Leonor La Rosa
Bustamante, also a former intelligence officer who was left paraplegic as a
result of the torture," the center said.

An international convention permits the prosecution of torturers regardless of
national boundaries. It was under provisions of that convention that the former
Chilean president, Gen. Augusto Pinochet, was arrested in London in October 1998
at the request of a Spanish judge. General Pinochet was allowed to return to
Chile last week on the ground that he was too ill to face trial.

United States officials said Major Anderson was part of a "diplomatic mission"
to the Organization of American States, while General Pinochet's visit to London
was not officially sponsored.

The torture charges in Peru are linked to the case of Baruch Ivcher, an Israeli
native who was stripped of his Peruvian citizenship after his television station
reported on torture by army intelligence officers and the wiretapping of
journalists, officials and opposition politicians.

In Washington, the Senate and House have approved resolutions criticizing Peru
for its actions in the Ivcher case and other reported examples of government
repression.

The State Department's annual human rights report said Major Anderson was linked
to "horrendous crimes." It is the department's official policy to "condemn
torture no matter where it may occur."

A second department official said people who apply for a so-called G-2 category
visa as a member of a temporary delegation are exempt from most grounds of "visa
ineligibility." This enabled Major Anderson to escape prosecution.

The human rights groups deplored the decision of the State Department to "block
the rare opportunity to prosecute Anderson."

Joining the Center for Justice and International Law in opposition to the State
Department decision were the Coalition for International Justice, National
Coordinator for Human Rights of Peru, Human Rights Watch and the Washington
Office on Latin America.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHILE (92%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (86%);

COMPANY: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE  (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%);
INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES

 (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (56%);

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE  (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%);
INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES

 (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU;   PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHILE (92%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (86%);

SUBJECT: TORTURE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY
IMMUNITY (91%); DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY (91%); TORTURE (91%); EVIDENCE (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (89%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); LITIGATION (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); EXECUTIVES (74%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); POLITICS (70%); APPROVALS (70%); WIRETAPPING (69%);
PARALYSIS (68%); JUDGES (68%); JOURNALISM (66%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (50%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%);

PERSON: ANDERSON KOHATSU, TOMAS RICARDO (MAJ)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (66%); BARUCH
IVCHER (55%);

LOAD-DATE: March 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              35 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Court Orders State to Release Data on Mentally Ill Prisoners

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 450 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Aug. 21


Reports from a doctor hired to review New Jersey's treatment of mentally ill
prisoners should be made public, a federal judge ruled today.

United States Magistrate Judge John Hughes said that humane treatment of
prisoners is a public concern and that the public should have access to such
reports.

The reviews were called for in an agreement settling a suit against the state
last year that claimed mentally ill prison inmates were poorly treated and
subjected to abuse. The settlement called for keeping the reports secret.

A human rights group seeking access to the reports sued the state, claiming it
had a right to know how those prisoners were being treated.

"The only way for the public to know of the state of affairs of our prisons is
to have access to documents that chronicle both the prison system's deficiencies
and improvements," Magistrate Hughes wrote in the opinion.

"Moreover, it is important that entities, both public and private, doing the
government's business be held accountable for their actions, and answer to its
citizenry, whose taxpaying dollars support the prison establishments," the judge
said.

The plaintiff, Human Rights Watch, plans to include these reports in its review
of prison conditions.

"We want to look at the before and after. At least now we'll know what the
'before' is from these reports," said Bruce Rosen, a lawyer representing Human
Rights Watch.

"Hopefully now some of this information will become available," he said.

The state attorney general's office will not appeal, said Paul Loriquet, a
spokesman.

Corrections department officials can withhold inmates' names to protect the
privacy of their medical treatment, the judge said.

The original suit was filed by the Inmate Advocacy Clinic at Seton Hall
University Law School, which sought better treatment for mentally ill state
prison inmates. The suit alleged that prisoners whose illnesses caused
behavioral problems were disciplined or not treated.

New Jersey officials agreed last year to almost all the demands in the lawsuit,
promising changes at every level in the system treating mentally ill inmates.
The Department of Corrections said it would hire more workers, offer better
training, build treatment facilities and rewrite disciplinary procedures to
consider an inmate's illness. Both sides said a psychiatrist would visit state
prisons four times a year, interview inmates and review procedures. According to
court documents, his reports will determine whether the state is complying with
the agreement.

The state has spent $16 million on improvements ordered by the settlement and
has budgeted $17.7 million for further improvements in the current fiscal year.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%);

CITY: TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW JERSEY;   UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (94%);
TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: PRISONS AND PRISONERS; MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS; SUITS AND
LITIGATION  JUDGES (92%); MENTAL ILLNESS (92%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); PRISONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); MAGISTRATES (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
PSYCHIATRY (78%); MENTAL HEALTH (78%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (78%); MENTAL HEALTH
PRACTICE (78%); PATIENT PRIVACY (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (73%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (72%); LAW SCHOOLS (69%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (62%);   MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (78%);
CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: HUGHES, JOHN (JUDGE)  JOHN HUGHES (92%);

LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              36 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Chinese Leader Sued in New York Over Deaths Stemming From Tiananmen Crackdown

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 897 words


Five veterans of the 1989 Tiananmen Square democracy movement are suing Li Peng,
the chairman of China's National People's Congress, in a federal court in New
York for human rights abuses stemming from his role in the military crackdown
that killed hundreds of civilians in Beijing.

It is the first time that such a legal action has been taken in this country
against a Chinese official.

The civil suit was filed on Monday in federal district court in Manhattan by the
Center for Constitutional Rights, a nonprofit legal group that specializes in
human rights cases. Among the five plaintiffs are Wang Dan, a student leader of
the Tiananmen demonstrations, and Zhang Liming, whose sister was shot dead by
army troops who overran Tiananmen Square in the chaotic early morning hours of
June 4, 1989.

Mr. Li, who is in New York this week attending a conference of the world's
parliaments at the United Nations, was served with a court summons yesterday
morning at the Waldorf Towers in midtown Manhattan. The summons was handed by a
process server to an employee of the United States State Department who was
guarding Mr. Li.

In Washington today, a State Department spokesman said, "We are not in a
position to accept such a document on behalf of a foreign official." However,
earlier this week, Judge Richard Casey ruled that a federal employee guarding
Mr. Li could accept the summons, given the difficulty of reaching Mr. Li.

The lawsuit charges that Mr. Li, who was prime minister during the Tiananmen
massacre, was responsible for "crimes against humanity, including summary
execution, arbitrary detention, torture and other torts."

"We want to prove that he is accountable for the crime, and that this kind of
crime, the human rights violation, is beyond China's borders," said Xiao Qiang,
executive director of Human Rights in China, a New York-based group that brought
together the plaintiffs with lawyers from the Center for Constitutional Rights
in anticipation of Mr. Li's visit to New York.

Zhang Yuanyuan, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, did not
return calls.

The first such across-the-border lawsuit was brought by the Center for
Constitutional Rights in 1979, when an opposition leader in Paraguay, whose son
was killed by the authorities, sued the chief of police in Asuncion, the capital
city. Although the plaintiffs were living in Paraguay, the defendant was
residing in Brooklyn at the time. In 1984, a federal court ruling awarded $10.4
million to the family.

Since then, dozens of these civil suits have been filed in the United States.
Several have resulted in favorable rulings for the plaintiffs, including one in
a federal court in Boston in 1994 that found an Indonesian general responsible
for a 1991 massacre in East Timor, ordering him to pay $14 million. In 1996, a
federal court in Manhattan found a Hutu leader in Rwanda liable for $110 million
in damages stemming from the genocide in that country.

In none of the cases has any money been collected. But if the federal court in
Manhattan found in favor of the plaintiffs in the case against Mr. Li, it would
be the first time that a representative of the Chinese government had been found
legally culpable in the Tiananmen massacre. The government continues to insist
that the student-led demonstrations of 1989 constituted a "counterrevolutionary
rebellion" that justified the military action.

"The Chinese perception of this will be that, once again, we are attempting to
interfere in what they view as a domestic matter," said Bob Berring, a law
professor at the University of California at Berkeley who studies the Chinese
legal system. "But for the human rights community, they have to seize on an
opportunity like this to put human rights issues on the table."

The legal basis for the lawsuit comes from the Alien Tort Claims Act, passed in
1789, and the Torture Victim Protection Act, passed in 1992, said Jennie Green,
the lead lawyer representing the plaintiffs. The two statutes allow human rights
victims to file for claims in United States courts even if both the plaintiffs
and the defendants live in another country. The only requirement is that the
defendant be presented with a court summons while in the United States.

For Mr. Li, that took place early yesterday morning, when a private detective
and a process server retained by Human Rights in China walked up to a half-dozen
plainclothes police officers standing outside an entrance to the Waldorf Towers.
After a tense wait, a supervising officer called for one of the State Department
guards.

Mr. Li has 20 days to answer the summons. He is scheduled to leave the United
States on Friday.

Ms. Green said that Mr. Li does not qualify for diplomatic immunity since he is
not an appointed Chinese envoy to this country. A State Department official said
that the immunity question is not relevant yet, but that lawyers will examine it
if necessary.

Hours after Mr. Li was served, Mr. Zhang sat in the offices of Human Rights in
China and held up pictures of his slain sister.

"This is something that my family has been working toward, even while I was back
in China," said Mr. Zhang, who came here in 1997 and works as a cook in San
Diego. "I hope to continue with the legal procedure to further the interests of
my family. But what benefit will come out of that, I'm not sure."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); PARAGUAY (92%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%);
INDONESIA (79%); RWANDA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (95%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA

 (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); BEIJING, CHINA (90%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%);
ASUNCION, PARAGUAY (67%);

COMPANY: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (57%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (57%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA; BEIJING (CHINA); TIANANMEN SQUARE (BEIJING);   CHINA (99%);
UNITED STATES (95%); PARAGUAY (92%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); INDONESIA (79%); RWANDA
(79%);   NEW YORK, USA (95%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA,
USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%); BEIJING, CHINA
(90%); BOSTON, MA, USA (79%);   ASUNCION, PARAGUAY (67%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; SUITS AND LITIGATION; DEMONSTRATIONS AND
RIOTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES

 (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); CIVIL SERVICES (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (78%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(77%); TORTURE (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); LAWYERS (75%);
POLITICS (75%); ARMIES (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (72%);

 EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); POLICE FORCES (71%); EXECUTIVES (69%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); RIOTS (60%);

PERSON: LI PENG; WONG, EDWARD  LI PENG (92%); RICHARD L CASEY  (54%);

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lawyers serving a federal lawsuit at the Waldorf to security
personnel protecting Li Peng, China's prime minister during the Tiananmen
massacre. Mr. Li is now the chairman of China's National People's Congress.
(Spencer Platt for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              38 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Oil and Mining Leaders Agree to Protect Rights in Remote Areas

BYLINE: By DAVID STOUT

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 20


Several big oil and mining companies have agreed to principles meant to
safeguard human rights while protecting employees and property in remote parts
of the world, the State Department said today.

The department announced that the companies, human rights organizations and the
governments of the United States and Britain have agreed to a set of voluntary
guidelines after months of negotiations.

Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said she was pleased with the accord,
which she said embodied precepts "that we hope and expect will become the global
standard in the oil and mining industries."

Human rights organizations said that the rules of conduct were an encouraging
step, but that their voluntary nature meant there was still no formal regulation
for the conduct of the companies abroad nor a system for monitoring possible
abuses.

The guidelines address situations that were once little noticed but that, with
the global economy and instant communications, have become more common and more
publicized. Diplomats and others who have studied the problems said today that
they arose when residents near mines, drilling fields or pipelines resented
their government leaders and law enforcement officials and saw the companies as
being in league with them. In such cases, explosive ingredients are present,
they said.

The countries of greatest concern include Angola, Cameroon, Chad, Colombia,
Ecuador, Equatorial Guinea, Indonesia and Nigeria. Oil exploration in Nigeria,
for instance, has seen deadly pipeline explosions that have killed hundreds of
people. Oil companies and the government have faulted vandals for pipeline
breaks. But some people fault the government for not enforcing safety codes.

Under the guidelines, companies agree not to hire security forces implicated in
human rights abuses, and they have to ensure that police equipment provided by
the companies is not used to violate citizens' rights.

The accord states that companies should pressure governments to make security
arrangements "transparent and accessible to the public." When there are reports
of human rights abuses, "companies should actively monitor the status of
investigations and press for their proper resolution," one guideline states.

An assistant secretary of state who heads the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights
and Labor, Harold Koh, said, "The global marketplace is a tremendously powerful
tool for promoting freedom."

"No government, even the most committed, can promote human rights alone," Mr.
Koh said.

Those agreeing to the guidelines include BP Amoco, Chevron, Freeport McMoRan
Copper & Gold, Conoco, Shell and Texaco, along with Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch and other rights groups.

Mr. Koh's deputy, Bennett Freeman, called the accord "the start of a process,
not an end." Department officials acknowledged that some of the biggest
multinational names in business were not listed.

Aron Cramer, vice president of Business for Social Responsibility, whose 1,400
member companies pledge to improve business practices, acknowledged in an
interview from San Francisco that the accord was but a beginning, and a
nonbinding one at that. Still, Mr. Cramer said, what was announced is
significant. Not so long ago, he said, such an accord would have been "unlikely,
bordering on unthinkable."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: FCX (NYSE) (62%); BP (NYSE) (58%); BP (LSE) (58%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS331410 NONFERROUS METAL (EXCEPT ALUMINUM) SMELTING & REFINING
(62%); NAICS213114 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR METAL MINING (62%); NAICS212234 COPPER
ORE & NICKEL ORE MINING (62%); NAICS212222 SILVER ORE MINING (62%); NAICS212221
GOLD ORE MINING (62%); SIC3341 SECONDARY SMELTING & REFINING OF NONFERROUS
METALS (62%); SIC3331 PRIMARY SMELTING & REFINING OF COPPER (62%); SIC1081 METAL
MINING SERVICES (62%); SIC1044 SILVER ORES (62%); SIC1041 GOLD ORES (62%);
SIC1021 COPPER ORES (62%); NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES

 (58%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (58%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); NIGERIA (92%); COLOMBIA (79%); INDONESIA (79%);
CAMEROON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CHAD (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: FREEPORT-MCMORAN COPPER & GOLD INC (62%); BP PLC (58%);
FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC (62%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREAT BRITAIN;   UNITED STATES (93%); NIGERIA (92%); COLOMBIA (79%);

 INDONESIA (79%); CAMEROON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CHAD (79%);   NEW YORK,
USA (92%);

SUBJECT: OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; MINES AND
MINING  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); MINES & MINING (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (87%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL
GAS EXTRACTION (87%); ETHICS (78%); OIL EXPLORATION (78%); GLOBALIZATION (78%);
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (78%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); OIL & GAS
EXPLORATION (73%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (66%); EXECUTIVES (66%);   BUSINESS ETHICS &
CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP (78%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: STOUT, DAVID  HAROLD KOH (75%); ARON CRAMER (62%);

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              39 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Delays The Execution Of Rebel Kurd

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 841 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 12


Responding to European pressure and hoping to end a civil conflict that has
shaken this country for 15 years, Turkish leaders decided today to postpone the
execution of the country's most prominent Kurdish rebel.

The prisoner, Abdullah Ocalan, who directed a guerrilla war aimed at winning
more rights for Turkey's Kurdish minority, was convicted of treason in June and
sentenced to die. The decision today means that he will probably remain alive
for at least a year, and perhaps escape the death sentence altogether.

The decision could also accelerate Turkey's move toward membership in the
European Union, which has become a transcendent national goal. European leaders
have been pressing Turkey strongly not to execute Mr. Ocalan, and his fate has
become a major factor in the debate over Turkey's entry into the union, all of
whose members have banned the death penalty.

Besides solidifying relations with Europe, the decision also holds out the
possibility of improved relations between the government and Kurds who
sympathize with Mr. Ocalan. Fighting in the Kurdish region has died down, and
there have been tentative steps toward reconciliation.

The decision today was to postpone the execution until the European Court of
Human Rights has ruled on Mr. Ocalan's appeal. The appeal focused on the
fairness of the closed trial, and not the death sentence, and there was no
guarantee that Turkey would accept the court's ruling. But the court was set up
under the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights, which Turkey
has ratified, and Turkey has accepted rulings of the court in the past.

However the appeal plays out, the government decision marked a victory for Prime
Minister Bulent Ecevit. He not only opposes the death penalty, but also hopes to
secure his place in history by leading Turkey toward the European Union.

Mr. Ecevit's task today was to win over his senior coalition partner, Devlet
Bahceli, who heads the far-right Nationalist Action Party. Some leaders of
Nationalist Action, along with many of its rank-and-file members, have been
clamoring for Mr. Ocalan's quick execution. But today Mr. Bahceli chose to
overrule them.

Mr. Bahceli made no statement after the meeting at which the decision was
reached. But Mr. Ecevit, evidently seeking to calm emotions in Mr. Bahceli's
party, asserted that he would support executing Mr. Ocalan "if the terrorist
organization and its supporters try to use this process against the high
interests of Turkey."

In recent days, newspapers have been full of warnings that executing Mr. Ocalan
would not only alienate Europe, but also lead to a resumption of fighting in the
mostly Kurdish southeast, hurt the economy and probably bring down the
government.

President Suleyman Demirel had urged that the execution be postponed in
deference to "Turkey's higher interests."

"We need to proceed in accordance with reason, not emotion," Mr. Demirel said.

According to reports in the Turkish news media, the country's intelligence
agency also opposed an execution. It reportedly prepared a confidential memo
urging the government to "use" Mr. Ocalan rather than risk turning him into a
martyr.

Under Turkish law, Parliament must approve all executions. There have been none
here since 1984, although death sentences are still handed down occasionally.

Within Turkey, Mr. Ocalan has two very different images. For years the news
media have described him in terms like terrorist, murderer and baby-killer. Many
Turks have come to share this view, among them relatives of fallen soldiers and
nationalists who support them.

Many Kurds, however, speak of Mr. Ocalan with respect and admiration. More than
a few consider him their leader.

Soon after his capture in Kenya in February, which led to rioting by Kurds
across Europe and elsewhere, Mr. Ocalan began issuing calls for an end to the
guerrilla war. The government has not responded, and in recent days the police
carried out a new round of raids on legal Kurdish political offices.

There are signs, however, that the political climate may be slowly changing.
Several Kurdish politicians have said they may soon try to start new pro-Kurdish
parties.

One pillar of the political establishment, former Prime Minister Mesut Yilmaz,
caused a stir last month when he declared, "The road leading to the European
Union passes through Diyarbakir." Diyarbakir is the biggest city in the Kurdish
region and a hotbed of Kurdish nationalism.

In another sign of possibly softening attitudes, Foreign Minister Ismail Cem
said he believed Kurds should be allowed to operate television stations in their
own language. The authorities have refused this right for years, fearing that
Kurdish-language broadcasts would encourage separatist feelings.

After Mr. Cem made his statement, an aggrieved citizen filed a complaint against
him, demanding that he be prosecuted under laws that forbid advocating
separatism. A judge refused, saying Mr. Cem's comment was not extreme enough to
deserve prosecution.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (98%); TURKEY (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION; EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  EUROPEAN UNION  (83%);
EUROPEAN UNION (83%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (82%); EUROPEAN COURT OF
HUMAN RIGHTS (82%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION; EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  EUROPEAN UNION
(83%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (82%); EUROPEAN
COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY; EUROPE;   EUROPE (98%); TURKEY (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (93%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: KURDS; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; SENTENCES
(CRIMINAL)  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (90%); EUROPEAN
UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (77%); TREASON (76%);
LITIGATION (76%); POLITICS (76%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (74%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); TERRORISM (67%);   TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);   CORRECTIONS
(77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (75%);

PERSON: KINZER, STEPHEN; OCALAN, ABDULLAH; ECEVIT, BULENT (PRIME MIN)  ABDULLAH
OCALAN (94%); BULENT ECEVIT (58%);

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              41 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 7, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Russian Troops Capture What Remains of Grozny

BYLINE: By MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, Feb. 6


Nearly five months after he dispatched Russian forces to Chechnya, Acting
President Vladimir V. Putin announced today that the Russian military had
captured its capital, Grozny, and that the Russian tricolor was flying over it.

"A short time ago, the last stronghold of the terrorists' resistance was taken:
the Zavodsky district of the city," Mr. Putin told the ORT television network.
"So we can say that the operation for the freeing of Grozny has ended."

But for all of the Kremlin's celebration, that does not signal an end to the
war.

The Chechen militants suffered heavy losses when they blundered into a Russian
minefield and ambush after fleeing the city last week. But hundreds appear to
have escaped and are trying to make their way to the Chechen highlands in the
south, where as many as 7,000 more of their fighters are believed to be
operating.

From the start, Moscow made the seizure of Grozny a political requirement.
Grozny was the scene of some of the Russian military's most humiliating defeats
during the earlier war in the secessionist southern region, from 1994 to 1996.

In their quest to even the score, Russian generals brushed aside suggestions
that they limit themselves to a quarantine of Chechnya. Capturing the capital
was also important to Mr. Putin, who is facing a presidential election on March
26 and whose popularity has risen, apparently because of popular support for the
war.

Taking the city had its costs, though. Since Russian forces entered Chechnya on
Oct. 1, more than 1,000 soldiers have been killed and almost 3,400 wounded. Many
of those casualties occurred during two hard-fought attempts to storm the city.

Refugees from Grozny say many civilians have also been killed by Russian
rockets, artillery and bombs. And Human Rights Watch, the international human
rights organization, says it has documented 22 cases in which civilians were
killed by vengeful Russian troops after they began to reoccupy Grozny.

Russian television reports show the city in ruins. So many buildings were
destroyed in the bombardment that the Russian military has found it difficult to
find an adequate office for the city's new commandant.

With the cost of rebuilding the city estimated at more than $1 billion, Russian
officials have suggested that Grozny will probably never be restored, leaving it
as a symbol of retribution, not reconciliation.

With most Western correspondents blocked from reporting from Chechnya, it is
difficult to verify the Russian account of the fighting.

According to the Russian account, a Russian counterintelligence officer
approached rebel field commanders and offered to arrange the militants' escape
through the nearby settlement of Alkhan-Kala for a $100,000 bribe. The militants
were said to have trusted him because he had previously arranged the exchange of
Russian and rebel bodies.

To persuade the rebels that they could find a gap through the Russian lines,
small groups of militants were allowed to escape in recent weeks, Col. Gen.
Viktor G. Kazantsev, the commander of Russian forces in the north Caucasus, said
in a recent interview with ORT.

The Russian military also broadcast fake radio reports suggesting that its
troops were moving away from the area, the newspaper Kommersant reported. But
when the main rebel force decided to make its escape, it found the path to
Alkhan-Kala mined.

"We laid a dense field of mines, because we knew they would try to go out on the
night of Feb. 1," said General Kazantsev, who asserted that the Russian military
had informers among the rebels.

As the militants raced through the minefield and a nearby pathway to the
village, Russian troops fired mortars while helicopters blasted the rebels from
overhead. General Kazantsev asserted that as many as 500 rebels were killed.

There is no way to confirm that account, and Russian television has not shown
large numbers of bodies. The militants say they had serious losses, including
several top commanders who led the charge.

Tonight Russian television broadcast a film showing doctors amputating the right
foot of Shamil Basayev, a Chechen warlord. The rebels apparently allowed the
gruesome film to be made to demonstrate that their leader was wounded but still
alive.

Still, not even the Russians insist that this is the end of the fight. General
Valery Manilov of the Russian general staff said 6,000 to 7,000 militants were
in the Argun and Vedeno gorges of the Caucasus mountains in southern Chechnya.

Chechen field commanders have vowed to take the war to the Russian heartland, a
rebel television broadcast said.

But the attacks, they said, "will not do any harm to the Russian people or to
Russian officials whose hands are not stained with the Chechen blood."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(59%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); GROZNY (CHECHNYA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(97%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

SUBJECT: INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION  ARMED FORCES (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); REFUGEES (75%);
ELECTIONS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (71%); URBAN DEVELOPMENT
(65%); ECONOMIC NEWS (65%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (62%);

PERSON: PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRIME MIN); GORDON, MICHAEL R  VLADIMIR PUTIN (90%);

LOAD-DATE: February 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Russia shows location of Grozny: Grozny fell to Russian forces,
Acting President Putin announced.


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              44 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Terrorist Logic

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 109 words



To the Editor:

The National Commission on Terrorism is profoundly misguided in recommending the
lifting of restrictions on the Central Intelligence Agency's ability to recruit
foreign informants who have been involved in serious human rights abuses (news
article, June 4). When the C.I.A. enlists informants who are committing murder
and torture, it sends the signal that anything goes in the fight against
terrorism or other evils.

That ends-justify-the-means approach is the logic of terrorism. It should play
no part in our government's response to terrorism.

KENNETH ROTH
Exec. Dir., Human Rights Watch
New York, June 5, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; NATIONAL COMMISSION ON TERRORISM; HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (92%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(92%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; NATIONAL COMMISSION ON TERRORISM;
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (92%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; INFORMERS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  TERRORISM (94%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              47 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Report Faults Laws for Slowing Growth of Unions

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1219 words

DATELINE: MIAMI


Marie Sylvain, a longtime nursing home worker, was so upset about her low wages
and workload -- feeding, washing, dressing and changing linens for 14 patients
each shift -- that she decided to lead a unionization drive.

But her employer soon fired her, and the organizing drive quickly fizzled as her
70 co-workers feared that they would also be dismissed if they pushed for a
union.

That was four and a half years ago. Today, Ms. Sylvain voices intense
frustration that, because of extended legal appeals, she has still not been
reinstated even though a judge ruled nearly three years ago that her firing
violated the National Labor Relations Act, which prohibits employers from firing
or penalizing workers for supporting a union.

Ms. Sylvain's dismissal made her one of thousands of workers who are fired,
demoted or otherwise punished each year for backing a union. A recent study of
National Labor Relations Board data showed that from 1992 to 1997, employers
fired or punished more than 125,000 workers for supporting a union.

Numerous academic studies showed that it frequently took three to five years for
fired workers to be reinstated, delays that union leaders said often caused
organizing drives to die at a time when the labor movement was seeking to add
hundreds of thousands of members and reverse its decades-long decline.

"U.S. labor law is stacked against employees who wish to organize a union,
allowing employers to intimidate and coerce workers not to unionize," said John
J. Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O.

But some experts said unions were having trouble attracting members, not because
of firings and delays by the labor board, but because of economic changes,
especially the shift from manufacturing to services.

"Job growth is coming where unions are historically weak," said Leo Troy, a
labor economist at Rutgers University. "The economy is leaving unions behind.
Employer behavior is virtually irrelevant to labor's decline. Employer behavior
is an easy scapegoat."

The concern about obstacles to organizing is one reason labor is supporting Vice
President Al Gore in the presidential race despite differences with him over
trade. In numerous appearances at union conventions, Mr. Gore has vowed to push
for changes that would make it easier for unions to organize.

"Vice President Gore has been the most outspoken champion of the freedom to join
a union since Franklin Delano Roosevelt," Mr. Sweeney said.

A recent report by Human Rights Watch concluded that because of systematic
violations by employers and long delays in obtaining legal redress, the United
States was essentially violating international agreements guaranteeing the
rights of workers to form unions.

"Most people view these issues as just a labor-management dispute," said Lance
Compa, a Cornell University labor relations professor who wrote the Human Rights
Watch report, "but we think the focus should be that there is a right of freedom
of association recognized under international law, and that right is being
widely denied in the United States."

In the 1950's, several hundred workers suffered reprisals each year for backing
a union, according to National Labor Relations Board data. But Charles Morris, a
professor emeritus at Southern Methodist University, said that by the late
1990's, employers carried out reprisals against more than 20,000 union
supporters each year. He also found that 1 out of 18 workers involved in
unionization drives faced some type of punishment for supporting the union.

Ms. Sylvain said her firing frightened other workers from backing a union at
Palm Gardens nursing home.

"They say, 'Look what happened to Marie,' " said Ms. Sylvain, who said she was
paid $6.50 an hour at the nursing home and needed food stamps and Medicaid to
support herself and two children. "The law gives you something with one hand,
and then it takes it away with the other."

But business groups argued that after eight years under President Clinton, the
nation's enforcement was stacked against management, not unions.

"Back in the 1950's, unions were fat and happy and represented 35 percent of the
labor force," said Randy Johnson, vice president for labor policy at the United
States Chamber of Commerce.

"Now that they represent just 9 percent of private-sector workers," Mr. Johnson
said, "they're blaming the law for their problems. They're trying to create a
straw man instead of looking at the more logical explanation that the message
unions have for workers isn't selling."

Many labor experts said the penalties that employers faced for firing union
supporters were so modest that it made economic sense for companies to flout the
law.

When the National Labor Relations Board ruled that Ernest Duval and six other
fired workers should be reinstated five years after a nursing home in Palm
Beach, Fla., fired them for leading a unionization drive, the labor board
concluded that he was owed $1,800 in back pay. The award was modest because
federal law requires employers to pay the wages workers missed after their
dismissal, minus whatever they earned in other jobs they took after being fired.

The Human Rights Watch report said: "An employer determined to get rid of a
union activist knows that all that awaits, after years of litigation if the
employer persists in appeals, is a reinstatement order the worker is likely to
decline and a modest back-pay award. For many employers, it is a small price to
pay to destroy a workers' organizing effort by firing its leaders."

Mr. Compa said: "Firing is the single most potent anti-union weapon. The upshot
is many employers can achieve their goal of remaining union-free by breaking the
law."
 Vice President Gore has yet to spell out how he would change labor laws to make
it easier to form unions. Also looking for ways to discourage illegal firings,
Ralph Nader, the Green Party presidential candidate, has proposed that
improperly fired union supporters receive punitive damages and lawyers' fees.
Gov. George W. Bush, who has long clashed with unions, has not called for making
it easier for workers to unionize.

Labor leaders said that as long as the Republicans controlled Congress, it would
be difficult to enact laws making it easier to form unions. But, these leaders
said, some steps could be taken under existing law, among them having the labor
board's lawyers seek more injunctions that would quickly reinstate wrongly fired
workers. That would allow the terminated employee to remain on the job during
appeals.

Ms. Sylvain said she wished a court could have ordered her back to work while
her case was appealed. In January 1998, 21 months after she was fired, an
administrative law judge ruled that the nursing home had fired her illegally and
that she should be reinstated. The judge found that the nursing home had
concocted a story for firing by saying she took time off without filling out the
required vacation forms.

In March 1999, the National Labor Relations Board in Washington affirmed that
decision, but the nursing home appealed. On Oct. 5, a federal appeals court
affirmed the labor board and ruled that Ms. Sylvain should be reinstated.

She is still not back on the job because the labor board has yet to negotiate
her reinstatement with her the nursing home.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%);

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (56%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  CORNELL UNIVERSITY PRESS (50%);   HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%); NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD  (56%);
NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(59%); NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD  (56%); NATIONAL LABOR RELATIONS BOARD
(56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (93%);   MIAMI, FL, USA (56%);

SUBJECT: LABOR; LAYOFFS AND JOB REDUCTIONS; ORGANIZED LABOR; NURSING HOMES;
SUITS AND LITIGATION  LABOR UNIONS (91%); LAYOFFS (90%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); DISMISSALS (90%); EMPLOYEE TERMINATION (90%);
EMPLOYMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (83%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); EMPLOYEE DEMOTIONS (78%); LABOR
DISPUTES & NEGOTIATIONS (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (77%); EMPLOYMENT GROWTH (76%); THIS DAY IN HISTORY (76%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (73%); APPEALS (71%); JUDGES (70%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (62%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (61%);   HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (64%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; SYLVAIN, MARIE  AL GORE (69%);

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Although a judge ruled in 1998 that Marie Sylvain was fired for
trying to organize a Miami nursing home, she is still waiting to return to work.
(Andrew Itkoff for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              48 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Wins Round in Court But More Hurdles Lie Ahead

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 438 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Dec. 11


A Chilean Appeals Court today dismissed kidnapping and murder charges filed
against the former dictator Augusto Pinochet and reversed an order placing him
under house arrest. But an appeal was immediately filed in Supreme Court, which
will decide on the matter in the next few weeks.

The ruling came 10 days after Judge Juan Guzman Tapia stunned Chile by
announcing that he had found ample evidence to charge General Pinochet with
involvement in the kidnapping and murders of 74 Socialist activists and labor
leaders in the first months after he took power in a coup in 1973.

By a 3-to-0 vote, the court concluded that Judge Guzman Tapia should have
interrogated General Pinochet before putting him under arrest and charging him.
The decision did not address the evidence uncovered by the judge, who is the
prosecutor under Chilean law, and falls far short of ending the legal problems
of the 85-year-old former dictator.

"We see this as a temporary setback," said Sebastian Brett, a human rights
researcher for Human Rights Watch in Chile. "The Supreme Court could come to a
different decision, but even if it doesn't, Judge Guzman can reinstate the
charges after interviewing Pinochet."

Nearly 200 criminal complaints have been lodged against General Pinochet in the
last several years by human rights groups, families of people who disappeared
and torture victims. But the central case under investigation by Judge Guzman
involves a death squad known as the Caravan of Death.

Judge Guzman has concentrated on this case because it offers a loophole in a
1978 amnesty. The bodies of 19 of the 74 people seized by the so-called Caravan
of Death have still not been recovered, leaving Judge Guzman with the argument
that the missing people still could be alive as the victims of kidnapping. As a
continuing crime, at least theoretically, the 19 kidnappings cannot be covered
by the Pinochet government's amnesty, the judge has contended for the last two
years.

Judge Guzman's creative legal interpretation was affirmed by various senior
Chilean courts last year, and it was not put into question by the ruling today.
He argued that he had tried to interrogate General Pinochet by sending him a
list of questions while he was under house arrest in London last year on a
Spanish warrant. General Pinochet was eventually released for health reasons and
returned to Chile in March.

In a court hearing last week Pablo Rodriguez, one of General Pinochet's lawyers,
argued that the questionnaire could not be considered an interrogation since his
client did not answer the questions. The court agreed.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (72%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (97%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND
(72%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; KIDNAPPING  LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); APPEALS COURTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); APPEALS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MURDER (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); ARRESTS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); EVIDENCE (89%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); MISSING PERSONS
(78%); TORTURE (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);

PERSON: PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); KRAUSS, CLIFFORD  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (96%); JUAN
GUZMAN TAPIA (91%);

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              50 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

SHADOWS OF TORMENT/A special report.;
Pinochet Case Reviving Voices of the Tortured

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2588 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


It was only when Mario Fernandez saw the headline, "Pinochet Under Arrest," that
the dam broke and he finally found it possible to talk about the beatings, the
electric shocks, the cigarette burns, the terrible sense of humiliation and
alienation.

"My body froze; I had an intense allergic reaction, and I didn't know whether to
laugh or cry," said Mr. Fernandez, trembling at the memory. He ran to his wife
and wept on her shoulder, and, at long last, took her advice to seek therapy.

"I needed to talk about the terror inside that hood they put on me, of not
knowing whether they would kill me from one minute to the next," he said.

Mr. Fernandez is not alone in the anguished release that has come with the
arrest of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in London on human rights charges in October
1998.

Psychologists report that hundreds if not thousands of people like him have
begun to see therapists, to organize group therapy, to share their long-hidden
horrors with spouses and children.

Although no accurate count exists, at least 40,000 Chileans were tortured under
the Pinochet dictatorship from 1973 until 1990, people who had been members of
leftist parties, unions, student groups or even merely bureaucrats in the
Socialist government of President Salvador Allende Gossens.

Some were tortured for information, some to drive them into exile, some purely
to intimidate them. In a systematic campaign run by the armed forces and the
police at special sites across the country, they were raped, beaten, shocked,
hooded, drugged, held under water and deprived of sleep; they were subjected to
mock executions and months of solitary confinement.

And when it ended in 1990, they were forgotten, overshadowed by the 4,000
Chileans who disappeared altogether, resented by a majority still suspicious of
the political left, hounded by guilt and anger, silently enduring the terrible
mental scars of their ordeal.

Now 44 and unemployed, Mr. Fernandez, who was a factory metal worker in the
Allende era, still suffers from insomnia, chronic head and joint aches and red
blotches that he calls an allergy. He said he seriously contemplated suicide
four times, once very nearly jumping off a bridge before some passers-by stopped
him.

To this day no torturer has been investigated, no torturer has been tried, no
compensation has been paid. Too many military officers were involved for the new
civilian government to pursue the issue without threatening the stability of a
still-incomplete transition to civilian rule.

"Torture is the great dark secret in Chile's closet that is just beginning to
open a crack," said Alfredo Joselyn-Holt Letelier, a historian at the University
of Santiago de Chile. "If we can't deal with 4,000 disappeared easily, how are
we going to deal with 40,000, 70,000, or maybe even 100,000 torture victims? The
fact that we don't even have good statistics is a sign of how we treat this
issue."

But since the arrest of General Pinochet on a warrant issued by a Spanish judge,
reports about the torture charges against him have begun to appear regularly in
the press. Newly reinvigorated human rights groups have come to victims, first
seeking testimony they could use in the courts in London and Madrid, then urging
them to seek help.

One group of torture victims said 500 people sought its help this year, three
times as many as last year. A mental health program sponsored by several
Christian churches reported that monthly demand had climbed from 60 patients a
month before General Pinochet's arrest to 90, and was still rising.

Of 300 torture victims interviewed for testimony by the Group of the Families of
the Disappeared, for instance, at least 100 have sought or plan to seek therapy.

In the small agricultural center of Rancagua, 50 miles south of Santiago, newly
organized torture victims recently held meetings with 3,000 people who were
fired from their jobs for political reasons after the 1973 coup. They have
identified 200 who suffer various physical and psychological problems from
torture, and who have now said they are willing to give testimony and seek help
for themselves.

"It's like a snowball gathering momentum," said Jorge Pantoja, a psychologist
and director of the Christian program. Paz Rojas, chief of neurological services
at the University of Chile, said a growing number of torture victims were
appealing for help from private doctors and psychologists. "Pinochet's arrest
was a great catharsis that has begun to break the silence," she said.

Victim
Torture Memories 'Always Inside Me'

Viviana Uribe, a 48-year-old human rights activist with a warm smile and
confident countenance, dug through her pocketbook for some pills as she prepared
to leave her Santiago apartment to do some errands the other day.

"I feel a lot better, I really do," she said in a strong, steady voice. "I still
get my headaches, but maybe they are a little better. Ever since I heard
Pinochet would be judged for his crimes, it has been a tremendous relief for
me."

Given the horrendous torture she experienced -- Ms. Uribe said that she was
raped four times and that among other things, electric cables had repeatedly
been clamped to her eyelids, lips, tongue and around her head for bolts of shock
during interrogation sessions -- she appears to be the picture of a
well-adjusted woman.

Ms. Uribe has no ticks or obvious nervous habits as so many other torture
victims do. And although she refused to have her photograph taken for this
article, she spoke with surprising ease about the disappearances of her husband,
Fernando, and her sister Barbara -- whose pictures, of each smiling broadly, one
at a wedding, the other at the beach -- she keeps posted on the wall next to her
desk.

For years, Ms. Uribe managed to cope by helping around the office of a human
rights group and marching with other relatives of the disappeared for an
accounting of her husband's and sister's fates. She took it upon herself to find
her torturers, looking up their addresses in the telephone book, and even to
confront the wives of men she believes raped her.

She says the repeated torture sessions -- some combined with interrogations --
still made no sense to her. She had belonged to a radical group that supported
the Allende government, but she said she never did anything more extreme than to
plaster walls with posters. Her interrogators' claims that she had been a threat
to the state were absurd, she said. But through her years of exile in Mexico and
her eventual return to Chile, she mainly kept silent about her terrible
experience.

"My own torture always took second place," she said.

Everything changed a few weeks after General Pinochet's arrest, when her
daughter Barbara sat down with her on her living room couch to discuss the
disappearance of her aunt and namesake.

The two had discussed the terror of the Pinochet years many times in the past,
but this time was different. Like many other relatives of the disappeared,
Barbara was gathering testimony for the human rights lawyers in London and
Madrid. Under her daughter's urging, for the first time Ms. Uribe told her of
the rapes.

"It was like vomiting, all the horrible things flowing out uncontrollably," she
recalled. "The torturers are always inside of me." The very next day, Ms. Uribe
entered therapy.

Government
Official Position Angers Victims

Torture had always taken a distant second place to the disappearances as a
political crime and public issue in Chile, but the Pinochet case has finally
pushed the subject front and center.

Soon after he took power in 1990, President Patricio Aylwin established a
commission that documented more than 3,000 disappearances during the Pinochet
years. But the panel left torture out of its report, except for cases that ended
in death, leaving many torture victims feeling abandoned and cheated.

The reason for their exclusion goes to the heart of Chile's slow democratic
transition. General Pinochet remained a potent political force as commander in
chief of the army until he stepped down from that post in early 1998, and human
rights investigations would have threatened the uneasy civilian-military
balance. Torture was a particularly sensitive subject because it involved a far
greater number of military officers and units than the disappearances, which
were largely the work of two quasi-independent military intelligence agencies.

Since General Pinochet's arrest, President Eduardo Frei has pressed to block the
general's extradition to Spain, contending that any trial should be in Chile.
His position has been supported by Ricardo Lagos, a Socialist Party member who
is the presidential candidate of the Socialist-Christian Democratic coalition
that has governed the country for the last nine years.

That position has caused anger and pain among many torture victims, including
Mr. Fernandez, the unemployed metal worker. "Their betrayal," he said, "is the
cause of my pounding headaches."

Repeated attempts were made to interview senior officials in the presidential
palace and Health Ministry, but aides said they were unavailable for comment.

The emergence of democracy spurred only modest efforts to help torture victims
resuscitate their lives. The government established a small unit in the Ministry
of Health called the Program for the Integral Repair of Health and Human Rights
to treat torture victims, former political prisoners and family members of the
disappeared.

From 1991 through 1998, 31,102 people received at least some attention, but over
time the program has withered and several administrators have resigned in
frustration. Today many of the program's original 13 teams -- which were to
include a doctor, a nurse, a social worker and a psychologist -- are now down to
a nurse and social worker. Foreign financing for private and public agencies
that help torture victims has dried up, in part because the government has
refused to pitch in matching funds.

Still, Patricia Narvaez, a senior administrator at the health ministry program,
said first-time visits of torture victims this year for treatment at her agency
were up 20 percent from 1998.

"The needs are great," Ms. Narvaez said. "Some, especially on the right, wanted
to shove this subject into the past, but we have all been full of silence. It's
macabre. It's a phenomenon of silence."

If there is a conspiracy of silence, the victims are a part of it. Psychologists
say many of the victims are still embarrassed that they survived while others
were executed. Some feel shame for having given up names of comrades to their
torturers, while others feel paranoia at the thought that people may think they
did even when they did not.

But now their grievances have taken on international legitimacy, and as the
Pinochet case has propelled torture to the top of the agenda of international
human rights law, many torture survivors say they are happy that their testimony
can have legal value for the cause of justice.

In March, the House of Lords in Britain ruled that General Pinochet could be
extradited to Spain on charges of torture and conspiracy to commit torture
committed only after his government signed the international Convention Against
Torture in 1988. A judicial panel of seven members of the House of Lords, known
as the Law Lords, further ruled that torture was an international crime for
which any court in a country that has signed the convention has jurisdiction.

Baltasar Garzon, the Spanish judge who issued the warrant for General Pinochet's
arrest and who wants to try him in Spain, has prominently included charges of
torture in his case against the former dictator.

Meanwhile, a group of former political prisoners here is preparing to file the
first criminal complaint in a Chilean court accusing General Pinochet, as well
as an undetermined number of former officers, of torture. The hope, leaders of
the group say, is to see the imprisonment of the leaders of the former military
government's vast torture apparatus and to collect millions of dollars in
reparations from the government. They are beginning with 50 cases and hope to
expand their complaint to 500 in the next few months.

"Pinochet's arrest catalyzed us," said Raul Reyes, a 60-year-old bookseller who
is one of the organizers of the complaint. "During the dictatorship, we were
stigmatized as criminals and terrorists, and even rebuffed by our families.
That's changing now, albeit slowly."

Aftereffects
High Alcoholism And Joblessness

For all the change, a lot of torture victims say they feel no better. As a
group, experts say, they still experience high rates of alcoholism, family
violence and chronic unemployment.

"It's a mortal sin to be 52 years old and a returned political exile or torture
victim," said Antonio Ozimica, who is all three. "People isolate you, and you
can't find work."

None of that has changed for Mr. Ozimica since General Pinochet's arrest. In
fact, he said he has only felt worse watching the government working hard to
defend the former dictator against extradition. He has begun therapy at a public
hospital under a new government program to help people who lost their jobs for
political reasons, but relief appears distant.

"If Lavin wins," he said, referring to Joaquin Lavin, the former official in
General Pinochet's planning ministry who stands a good chance of winning the
presidency Jan. 16, "I am going to put a pistol to my head."

Mr. Ozimica appears to be a particularly frail man, even among torture victims.
He goes from giddy highs to the deepest lows of depression from one moment to
the next. After what he has gone through, his gloom is understandable.

As Mr. Ozimica tells it, his only crime was to serve as a low-level accountant
in President Allende's agrarian reform in the town of Temuco. Shortly after the
coup, he was dismissed and then pulled out of bed by troops in the middle of the
night and dragged through the streets naked.

For six days he went through torturous interrogation at a police station, and he
said he had nothing of value to tell them. For two days he was kept in total
darkness, he recalled, the next two under intense fluorescent lights burning
into his eyes. Then for two more days, he said, he was hung by his wrists,
causing the dislocation of his right shoulder, which is still maimed. He also
lost the ability to feel in his right hand.

In another torture session, police dunked him repeatedly in a tub of water. As
he gasped for air, his torturers pulled him up by his hair and smashed metal
plates against his ears until blood flooded from one of them. He remains hard of
hearing.

After months of imprisonment, Mr. Ozimica said, he was allowed to leave the
country, and he settled in an Indian village deep in the Venezuelan Amazon,
where he lived for 18 years in a hut under a zinc roof.

"The torture made me hate life," he said. "I was so dehumanized, I figured only
the Indians were human beings because they were nonviolent and they didn't lie.
And I didn't need hearing because it was so quiet in the wilderness."

Mr. Ozimica said that he had made a living making cement bricks, but that his
wife left him and took their two children back to Chile. He finally came back
too, after democracy returned, but he still does not live in peace. "Pinochet's
arrest didn't give me happiness or sadness because his falling prisoner doesn't
solve anything," he said. "So many of the people who were behind him are still
around."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);   SPAIN (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (76%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; SPAIN; GREAT BRITAIN;   CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
SPAIN (79%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (76%);

SUBJECT: SURVEYS AND SERIES; TORTURE; EXTRADITION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
MISSING PERSONS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES  HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); PSYCHOLOGY (75%); SLEEP DISORDERS (75%);
LIBERALISM (73%); MISSING PERSONS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (72%); ALLERGIES (72%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); HISTORY
(71%); MILITARY WEAPONS (69%); EXTRADITION (69%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES
(66%); SUICIDE (60%);   FACTORY WORKERS (71%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET
(93%); MARIO FERNANDEZ (72%);

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Antonio Ozimiosa, left, says his twisted chest resulted from
being hung by his wrists. Mario Fernandez says he felt able to seek therapy for
the mental scars of torture only after Gen. Augusto Pinochet's arrest.
(Photographs by Helen Hughes for The New York Times)(pg. A1); Former political
prisoners in Santiago -- from left, Juana Aguilera, Raul Reyes, Antonio Ruiz,
Elicidez Martinez and Carmen Gloria Diaz -- are among more than 40 Chileans
preparing a legal complaint giving testimony on torture they say they endured
during Gen. Augusto Pinochet's rule. (Helen Hughes for The New York Times)(pg.
A10)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              51 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 2, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

3 Massacres In Chechnya Are Described

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 431 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 1


An investigator for Human Rights Watch told Congress today that his group had
documented three "large-scale massacres" by Russian forces in Chechnya. That
prompted Democratic and Republican senators to criticize the Clinton
administration, saying that it was playing down Russia's conduct in the war to
keep its relationship with Moscow intact for other issues like arms control.

Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, the ranking minority member
of the Foreign Relations Committee, said the administration had "tiptoed" around
human rights abuses in the war because it was "so worried about affecting other
aspects of the relationship."

The committee chairman, Senator Jesse Helms of South Carolina, said, "I am
ashamed of our government and its comments made in defense of Russia." Mr. Helms
condemned what he called the portrayal of the Chechen war as a "legitimate
battle against 'terrorists.' "

Mr. Biden described as "wrong" the manner in which the State Department dealt
with the capture and disappearance of a Russian war reporter, Andrei Babitsky,
who works for the American-financed Radio Liberty. Mr. Biden suggested that the
department had not worked hard enough to ensure his release.

Mr. Babitsky spoke today at a news conference in Moscow. He surfaced on Friday
in Dagestan and was flown to Moscow by Russian authorities on Monday. He
described his detention, which lasted more than a month, as apparently the work
of a domestic Russian agency, the Federal Security Service. A spokesman for the
agency denied that.

Appearing before the Foreign Relations Committee, Peter Bouckaert of Human
Rights Watch said Russian forces had gone on a "killing spree" in the Aldi
district of Grozny, the Chechen capital, and had killed at least 62 civilians,
and possibly more.

He said the massacre was on Feb. 5. That would put it three days after Secretary
of State Madeleine K. Albright met in Moscow with Acting President Vladimir V.
Putin, after which Dr. Albright praised Mr. Putin as a pragmatic leader who
appeared receptive to her request that international workers be allowed into
Chechnya to assess the needs of those whose houses and livelihoods had been
ruined by the war.

Mr. Bouckaert said the civilians in Aldi had been shot while waiting in the
street and in their yards for soldiers to check their documents.  Details of the
killings in Aldi and two other sites were obtained from interviews with
survivors who fled to refugee camps in Ingushetia, a neighboring republic to
Chechnya where Mr. Bouckaert has been based.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: DELAWARE, USA (92%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);   DELAWARE, USA
(92%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

 FOREIGN POLICY (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); REFUGEES (78%); US
DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (71%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (69%); TERRORISM (68%); PRESS CONFERENCES (67%); SHOOTINGS
(63%);

PERSON: JOE BIDEN (78%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%);

LOAD-DATE: March 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              54 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Saudi Arabia Bridles as Rights Group Charges Widespread Abuses

BYLINE: By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 484 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, March 26


In a sharply worded report, Amnesty International today accused the government
of Saudi Arabia of widespread human rights abuses, including arbitrary arrests,
the torture of detainees and the barring of prisoner access to family members or
lawyers.

The group said it has received and published graphic accounts of mistreatment,
discrimination against religious minorities, and suppression of political
dissent in the Persian Gulf kingdom for years. But Saudi Arabia has escaped
international condemnation for its record, Amnesty officials added, because
oil-dependent nations like the United States have not wanted to offend the
kingdom's rulers.

Saudi officials, who rarely respond to outside critics, this time reacted
swiftly, emphatically rejecting Amnesty's findings as biased and inaccurate.

"We have nothing to hide in human rights," said Prince Turki bin Mohammedi, the
deputy foreign minister responsible for international organizations, in a
telephone interview from the Saudi capital Riyadh. "There is no harm in having
their point of view, but they have to be more accurate in their information."

The executive director of Amnesty's United States affiliate, William F. Schulz,
said the human rights organization would try to spotlight the Saudi record
through a worldwide publicity campaign this year.

"Amnesty International does launch one or two major campaigns a year aimed at
countries with particularly serious human rights violations," said Mr. Schulz.
"In the case of Saudi Arabia, the country has gotten away with arbitrary
detention and torture for years, while escaping international scrutiny."

The campaign will begin on Tuesday with a truck-mounted billboard -- the most
aggressive tactic ever used by Amnesty's American office -- that will be driven
around Washington. The billboard will feature an amputated hand over the slogan:
"This suffering is the secret of Saudi justice."

"What this research clearly reveals is that people who are arrested in Saudi
Arabia for whatever reason find themselves trapped in a criminal justice system
that provides them with no information about their fate, allows them no prompt
contact with their families or a doctor, and offers them no hope of contacting a
lawyer," the report said.

In response to a request for comment on the Amnesty report, the Saudi Foreign
Ministry said the country's laws already provide stringent guidelines for how
the police and security officials should deal with prisoners and people they
arrest. It also said that, contrary to the human rights group's report, most
trials are open to the public, conducted according to Saudi law, and that prison
conditions are fair.

The State Department, in its annual report on human rights practices in various
countries around the world, has carefully raised criticisms of life in Saudi
Arabia similar to those cited in the Amnesty report.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); GULF STATES (91%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (88%);

CITY: RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (78%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  SAUDI ARABIA CONCRETE PRODUCTS LTD (92%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (93%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (93%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (93%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SAUDI ARABIA;   SAUDI ARABIA (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); GULF STATES

 (91%);   INDIAN OCEAN (88%);   RIYADH, SAUDI ARABIA (78%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TORTURE; POLITICAL PRISONERS  HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); LAWYERS
(77%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: SACHS, SUSAN  WILLIAM F SCHULZ (58%);

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              55 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ex-Official Challenges China's Limits on Speech

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 489 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, March 28


A former senior official who spent seven years in prison for sympathizing with
democracy advocates has challenged the authorities to abide by the Constitution
and stop restricting his freedom to speak out.

The former official, Bao Tong, 67, has risked re-arrest over the last year and a
half with calls for democratic changes and a re-appraisal of the 1989 student
demonstrations in Tiananmen Square, which were officially classified as
counterrevolutionary and violently crushed.

On March 13, as China worked to fend off an American-sponsored resolution to
censure China's rights record at a United Nations meeting in Geneva, Mr. Bao
wrote a new letter to the Chinese authorities. It was distributed to reporters
today by Human Rights Watch, a group based in New York.

In the letter, Mr. Bao contended that the Government had whitewashed its human
rights record in a recent report and that based on his own treatment he felt
that he had to set the record straight.

"I am an old man, and I have neither fear nor illusions," Mr. Bao wrote. "But I
feel obligated to confront such violation of a citizen's civil rights, even if
that means my own imprisonment."

By continuing his lonely advocacy here -- most dissidents are in prison or in
exile -- Mr. Bao is taking a serious risk. Although he theoretically regained
his rights as a citizen in May 1998, security agents have warned him eight times
since then that his statements "endangered state security," he said in the
letter.

Last year, Mr. Bao granted many interviews to foreign journalists despite
harassment and warnings from officials. In the new letter, he said his treatment
had worsened in recent months, with six agents following him day and night.

"They come with me when I accompany my granddaughter to school and when I go to
the hospital, bank or shops," he wrote. "They watch very closely to see who I
talk to, what I do and what I say."

Mr. Bao challenged the authorities to compare his treatment with the right to
free speech enshrined in China's Constitution and laws, and urged the United
Nations Human Rights Commission, which is meeting in Geneva, to note the
inconsistency. In 1989, when student demonstrations in favor of democratic
change erupted, Mr. Bao was a senior aide to the Communist Party chairman at the
time, Zhao Ziyang, helping him plan economic reforms.

In late May 1989, less than two weeks before the army crushed the demonstrations
and Mr. Zhao was ousted for being too soft, Mr. Bao was arrested and imprisoned,
ostensibly for sharing information about the coming crackdown with the students.

After seven years in prison, he had two years of virtual house arrest with no
political rights. But in May 1998, when that probation ended, he defiantly spoke
to foreign reporters, saying China urgently needed political change. He has been
under police scrutiny ever since, required to live in a monitored apartment.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (72%);

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (57%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW
YORK, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (72%);   BEIJING, CHINA (57%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION  FREEDOM OF SPEECH (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS

 (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (89%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (89%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (89%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HOUSE ARREST
(78%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (78%); ARRESTS (77%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(76%); POLITICS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(75%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (74%); WRITERS (74%); JOURNALISM (69%); GRANDCHILDREN
(50%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: BAO TONG; ECKHOLM, ERIK  BAO TONG (94%); ZHAO ZIYANG (57%);

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bao Tong speaking out last year in a video smuggled out of
China. (Agence France-Presse)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              56 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Turkish Study Finds Torture Of Prisoners Is Widespread

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, May 31


When a harsh report asserting that torture is widespread in Turkey was released
this week, the surprise was not just the amount of damning evidence it
contained, but also the source.

Rather than being prepared by a private advocacy group, the report was the work
of the parliamentary committee on human rights.

For years, Turkish leaders have sought to play down accusations that torture is
widely practiced here. That will be harder after what the parliamentary
committee found.

Its report contains transcripts of interviews with many prisoners who said they
had been abused. It also includes photos of torture equipment and floor plans
that show where torture cells are supposedly located in various police stations.
No report by a government human rights body has ever been nearly this extensive
or graphic.

Committee members and investigators interviewed more than 8,500 prisoners during
a two-year period. They also conducted unannounced visits to 50 prisons and two
dozen police stations, said the vice chairman, Sebgetullah Seydaoglu.

"This committee has existed for seven years but it hasn't been functioning
properly," said Mr. Seydaoglu, who represents the southeastern city of
Diyarbakir, where the mostly Kurdish population has long complained of bad
treatment by police. "In the last year we've become very decisive about our
mission."

On Monday, members of the committee presented a copy of their report to the
minister of justice, Hikmet Sami Turk. Afterward he said the report "will hold
up a light for us."

"Torture is a crime against humanity," Mr. Turk said. "Turkey will resolve this
issue. No country can justify torture on the grounds that other countries
practice it. Claims of torture will be followed up with resolve. Torture has
never been and never will be state policy."

The report says that when inmates of Istanbul's main women's prison were
interviewed, "all recounted details of the torture and abuse they suffered."
Most prisoners interviewed at jails in the eastern cities of Sanliurfa, Erzurum
and Erzincan told similar stories.

European leaders have repeatedly told their Turkish counterparts that Turkey
must improve its human rights record if it hopes to join the European Union.

The United States State Department said in its latest human rights report that
during 1999 "torture, beatings and other abuses by security forces remained
widespread, at times resulting in deaths."

Human rights advocates are unhappy with the government's record. The bluntness
of the new parliamentary report suggests that impatience for change is growing.

"This report says what we have been saying for years, that torture is extensive
and systematic in Turkey," said Nazmi Gur, chairman of the Human Rights
Association, which has often been at odds with the government. "This could be
the beginning of progress toward meeting European legal standards."

Some officials have expressed fear of what might happen if the Turkish police
are forced to abandon their traditional methods.

"People are happy with the performance of the police," the deputy interior
minister, Sami Sonmez, asserted at a parliamentary hearing last year. "The
police are capable of extracting confessions from the culprits. What's the use
of creating a lot of fuss as long as public opinion endorses what the police
do?"

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (99%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (91%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TORTURE; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); PRISONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); RESEARCH REPORTS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (76%); EUROPEAN UNION (74%); POLITICS
(72%); TRANSCRIPTS (70%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (68%);
CORRECTIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: KINZER, STEPHEN

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              57 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

On Death Row, but by Mistake

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 162 words



To the Editor:

The risk of executing the innocent and the lack of competent counsel for
indigent defendants aren't the only problems with the "conveyor-belt death
penalty system" in Texas ("The New Death Penalty Politics," editorial, June 7).
Gov. George W. Bush should also end the use of the death penalty on mentally
retarded people and those who committed crimes when they were under 18.

The record 131 executions during Governor Bush's tenure include 3 juvenile
offenders, 2 with severe brain damage. On June 22, Gary Graham is scheduled to
become the fourth youthful offender to be put to death on Governor Bush's watch.

Of the juvenile offenders on death row across the country, more than a third are
in Texas. Death is an inhumane punishment for adolescents and mentally ill
people, who lack the judgment, experience and restraint of most adults.

MICHAEL BOCHENEK
Counsel, Children's Rights Div.
Human Rights Watch
New York, June 9, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NORTH AMERICA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (94%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TEXAS;   NORTH AMERICA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);   TEXAS, USA
(94%);

SUBJECT: MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT;
ELECTION ISSUES; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); MENTAL RETARDATION  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(94%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%); GOVERNORS (90%);
CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (88%); JUVENILE CRIME (87%); MENTAL RETARDATION
(87%); ADOLESCENTS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); DISABLED PERSONS (70%);
MENTAL ILLNESS (70%); CHILD WELFARE (65%); NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS & INJURIES
(54%);

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); BOCHENEK, MICHAEL  GEORGE W BUSH (79%);

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              58 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

ARTS ABROAD;
A Filmmaker Without Honor Or Outlets in Her Own Land

BYLINE: By ALAN RIDING

SECTION: Section E; Page 1; Column 4; The Arts/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1084 words

DATELINE: PARIS, June 12


Randa Chahal Sabbag insists that her new film about the Lebanese civil war, "A
Civilized People," was not designed to shock. Rather, she says, she simply
wanted to remind her compatriots of the collective madness that led them to
spend the best part of 17 years killing one another and destroying their
country. Of course this filmmaker also wanted to air a few thoughts of her own.

"It angers and disgusts me to hear Lebanese saying that they were only victims
of the war," Mrs. Sabbag, who was born in Tripoli, explained in an interview in
her home in Paris, where she lives with her husband and three children. "It was
our war, and we should not play the innocent. I tell my story through people of
all classes and religions as a way of saying that all Lebanese are responsible
for the war. Unless we accept responsibility for every bullet, we will never
become a nation."

This is a proposition, however, that the Lebanese have been unable to debate.
When Mrs. Sabbag submitted her drama for approval by Lebanon's Interior Ministry
last year, she was told that the film would give the country a bad image abroad,
that it used excessively vulgar language, and that it insulted both Islam and
Christianity. The ministry's military censors then proposed cuts representing
about 50 minutes of the 97-minute film. Mrs. Sabbag refused to accept them.

Still unseen in Lebanon, "A Civilized People" has been chosen to open the Human
Rights Watch International Film Festival at 9:15 on Wednesday night in the
Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center. Further screenings will take place at
3:45 p.m. on Thursday, 6:30 p.m. on Friday and 1 p.m. on Monday. Mrs. Sabbag,
45, is also to be awarded the Nestor Almendros Prize for courage in filmmaking,
named after the Academy Award-winning Cuban cinematographer who spoke out
against human rights abuses in his country.

Mrs. Sabbag's film is not itself overtly political: it addresses neither the
merits of the numerous factions engaged in the war nor the 1991 peace accord
that proclaimed no winners or losers and enabled innumerable war crimes to go
unpunished under a general amnesty. The film's purpose, though, is political: by
revisiting the hatred that drove the conflict, she hopes that her countrymen
(and women) can draw some conclusions about their behavior, she said.

Adopting something of the soap-operatic structure of Pedro Almodovar movies, "A
Civilized People" dwells on a dozen or so characters whose lives are variously
battered and twisted by the war. These include not only Christian and Muslim
combatants (Samir, a particularly deranged Christian sniper, is played by Mrs.
Sabbag's brother, Tamim Chahal) but also a private chauffeur whose son has been
kidnapped, a wealthy woman who arrives from France to rejoin her lover, a
Christian girl who falls for a Muslim fighter and children who urge their elders
to kidnap foreigners for ransom.

The film's opening sequence well illustrates the cheapness of life in the 1980's
in Beirut: two young men blow themselves up while tying explosives on the back
of a cat. The only "civilized people" in the movie are maids from Egypt, Sri
Lanka and the Philippines who have been left in charge of homes abandoned by
bourgeois Lebanese exiles. A French volunteer from Doctors Without Borders, on
the other hand, is portrayed as an unwelcome interfering foreigner.

Most of the objections presented by the Lebanese censors relate to language and
scenes thought to be offensive to religious groups, not only religious and
sexual expletives but also one scene in which a coffin is kicked into an open
grave and another in which the crazed Samir shoots a Catholic priest. The
censors also complained about the portrayal of physical affection between two
Egyptian maids who are lesbians.

After the censors published their list of proposed cuts, Mrs. Sabbag was
denounced in some Beirut mosques, and she and her crew were subjected to death
threats. She also found much of the Beirut press lined up against her, with the
local English-language newspaper, The Daily Star, saying she had no reason "to
expect the authorities in her troubled homeland to subject a still-recovering
populace to the shocking scenes and repulsive profanity that mar her latest
effort."

Mrs. Sabbag said that only after a few journalists saw the film on cassette did
some begin to defend her. She also began negotiating with Sunni Muslim leaders
-- she is herself Sunni -- and agreed to cover four offensive passages with
bleeps. "I did so to save the film and protect my family and also because my
lawyers told me there is a law of blasphemy in Lebanon," she explained. But so
far the French-financed film has only been released, to mixed reviews, in
France.

"I think the film is very sweet, much sweeter than many American films," Mrs.
Sabbag said. "How can I make a film about war without any images of violence or
insults or blood? How can you make a film about life without showing life? Or it
is because I am a woman that they want me to make something different? I didn't
try to provoke. I could have made something far more provocative."

Certainly "A Civilized People" is infinitely less violent and blasphemous than
what occurred during the Lebanese civil war. On the other hand, while Lebanon is
not the first country to opt for amnesia over self-examination after emerging
from a period of fratricidal, ethnic or religious conflict, the controversy
surrounding the film is a measure of the fragility of its current peace, a peace
that has still not turned Lebanon into a fully democratic and independent
nation.

For Mrs. Sabbag, though, the film is also a reminder that she has become
something of an outsider in her own country. Although she frequently visited
Lebanon to film during the civil war, she has kept a home in Paris since she
moved here to study cinema in 1972. Furthermore, while her documentary "Nos
Guerres Imprudentes" and her two previous dramatic feature films, "Ecrans de
Sable" and "Les Infideles," dealt with Middle Eastern subjects, they have only
been seen in France and at film festivals.

Yet if her family and career are in France, her heart is still in Lebanon, she
said. Before flying to New York for Wednesday's screening of her movie, she
spent a week in southern Lebanon filming the aftermath of the Israeli
withdrawal.

"I've been following a woman who for 10 years was a prisoner of the South
Lebanon Army," she said. "I'm thinking of making a documentary about her."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: LEBANON (96%); FRANCE (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (68%);

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (54%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (59%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: LEBANON (96%); FRANCE (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (68%);   PARIS, FRANCE
(54%);

SUBJECT: MOTION PICTURES; CENSORSHIP; HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH INTERNATIONAL FILM
FESTIVAL  CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); VISUAL ARTISTS
(90%); FILM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MOVIE INDUSTRY (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); RELIGION (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); CENSORSHIP (78%); ARTS FESTIVALS & EXHIBITIONS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%);
SHOOTINGS (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); CHILDREN (75%); CINEMATOGRAPHY (73%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS AWARDS (69%);
APPROVALS (67%); AMNESTY (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%);

PERSON: RIDING, ALAN  RANDA CHAHAL SABBAG (96%);

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Hassan Mrad and Nada Ghosn in a scene from Randa Chahal Sabbag's
film drama "A Civilized People." (Film Society of Lincoln Center)(pg. E2)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              62 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

More Companies Offering Same-Sex-Partner Benefits

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section C; Page 2; Column 5; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 556 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


More companies are offering health insurance benefits to partners of gay and
lesbian employees than ever before, including more than 100 of the Fortune 500
companies, a new study has found.

As of August, 3,572 companies, colleges, universities, states and local
governments were offering or had announced that they would offer health
insurance coverage to domestic partners of their employees -- an increase of 25
percent from last year, the study found. In August 1999, 2,856 of these
companies, educational institutions and governments offered such benefits.

Sixty-five percent of those in the survey provide domestic partner benefits to
same-sex and opposite-sex couples; 35 percent offer benefits only to same-sex
couples, the study found.

The study was conducted by the Human Rights Campaign, a Washington-based group
that represents gay, lesbian and transgender Americans.

"Employers have discovered that these benefits help attract and keep the best
workers, a critical consideration in the current tight job market," said Kim I.
Mills, education director for the Human Rights Campaign and an editor of the
report.

Among Fortune 500 companies, the number of employers offering benefits to
domestic partners increased 46 percent, the study found, to 102 this year from
70 in 1999.

The Big Three automakers -- DaimlerChrysler,, General Motors and Ford Motor --
announced in June that they would offer health benefits to the same-sex partners
of their 466,000 hourly and salaried employees in the United States. This was a
"landmark move" in the effort by corporate America to provide such benefits for
gay and lesbian couples, the report concluded.

Coca-Cola also announced in June that it would extend health coverage to
domestic partners, joining General Mills and Pillsbury, two other leading food
producers that offer these benefits.

Boeing decided last October that it would offer health coverage to nonunion
members and their partners. Honeywell, another leading aerospace company,
provides benefits to domestic partners.

Until this year, the two largest American companies offering same-sex benefits
had been I.B.M. and Citigroup, Ms. Mills said. Both companies are based in the
New York area, where gays and lesbians are more politically and economically
influential than in the Midwest.

"There is a cultural shift taking place," Ms. Mills said. "People want to be
open about their lives in the workplace. The public attitude is that this kind
of discrimination is wrong."

In May 1998, President Clinton issued an executive order prohibiting
discrimination based on sexual orientation in the federal civilian work force.
To date, all cabinet-level departments and 24 independent agencies have adopted
nondiscrimination policies with regard to sexual orientation. But the federal
government does not provide same-sex benefits for its employees.

Ninety state and local governments or government agencies, however, provide
domestic-partner health benefits, the report showed. Since August 1999,
Connecticut and Washington have added benefits for state workers, joining
California, New York, Vermont and Oregon. In addition, 12 cities and counties
have added or announced that they would begin to offer these benefits, including
Atlanta; Phoenix; Montgomery County, Md.; and Albuquerque.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: C (NYSE) (58%); C (BMV) (58%); 8710 (TSE) (58%); FORDP (PAR) (55%); F
(NYSE) (55%); GM (NYSE) (55%); KO (NYSE) (53%); GIS (NYSE) (53%); BOE (LSE)
(53%); BAB (BRU) (53%); BA (NYSE) (53%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS523120 SECURITIES BROKERAGE (58%); NAICS522210 CREDIT CARD
ISSUING (58%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (58%); NAICS336112 LIGHT TRUCK &
UTILITY VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (55%); NAICS336111 AUTOMOBILE MANUFACTURING (55%);

 SIC3711 MOTOR VEHICLES & PASSENGER CAR BODIES (55%); NAICS312111 SOFT DRINK
MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC2086 BOTTLED & CANNED SOFT DRINKS & CARBONATED WATER
(53%); NAICS311919 OTHER SNACK FOOD MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS311824 DRY PASTA,
DOUGH & FLOUR MIXES MANUFACTURING FROM PURCHASED FLOUR (53%); NAICS311230
BREAKFAST CEREAL MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS311211 FLOUR MILLING (53%); SIC2099
OTHER FOOD PREPARATIONS (53%); SIC2043 CEREAL BREAKFAST FOODS (53%); SIC2041
FLOUR & OTHER GRAIN MILL PRODUCTS (53%); NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE
VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS
MANUFACTURING (53%); NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (53%); SIC3761 GUIDED
MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (53%);   SIC3714 MOTOR VEHICLE PARTS & ACCESSORIES
(55%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: MIDWEST USA (79%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  CITIGROUP INC (58%); FORD MOTOR CO (55%);
GENERAL MOTORS CO (55%); COCA-COLA CO (53%); GENERAL MILLS INC (53%); BOEING CO
(53%);   HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (91%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
CAMPAIGN (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   MIDWEST USA (79%);

SUBJECT: LABOR; HEALTH INSURANCE; HOMOSEXUALITY; MEDICINE AND HEALTH  GAYS &
LESBIANS (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); COMPANY LISTS & RANKINGS (90%); HEALTH
INSURANCE (90%); DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIPS (90%); COHABITATION (90%); INSURANCE
COVERAGE (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (86%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (78%); LABOR FORCE
(78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); LABOR SECTOR PERFORMANCE (76%);
EMPLOYMENT (75%); FOOD & BEVERAGE (73%); FOOD INDUSTRY (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS
(72%); AUTOMOTIVE MFG (70%); AUTOMOBILE MFG (70%); US PRESIDENTS (69%);
AEROSPACE INDUSTRY (67%); AUTOMAKERS (65%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (63%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (51%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (51%); HILLARY RODHAM
CLINTON (51%);

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              66 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Postpones a Hanging

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 265 words


Turkey made the right choice in deferring the execution of Abdullah Ocalan, the
Kurdish rebel leader, until the European Court of Human Rights hears his appeal.
The decision took political courage in a country where passions against Mr.
Ocalan run high. But it will help smooth Turkey's path into the European Union,
and may permit a solution to the Kurdish conflict, Turkey's most vexing internal
problem. Turkey is not obliged to follow the court's ruling, but has obeyed its
decisions in the past.

Mr. Ocalan was seized in Kenya last February, brought to Turkey and tried for
the murder of the more than 30,000 people killed in the Kurdish insurgency. He
was convicted and sentenced to death last June. Mr. Ocalan has tried to bargain
for his life by offering to broker an end to the 15-year-long Kurdish conflict.
He has also ordered his followers to withdraw from battle. As a result Kurdish
violence inside Turkey has sharply diminished.

Others with terrorist pasts, like Yasir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation
Organization and Gerry Adams of the Irish Republican Army's political wing, Sinn
Fein, have swapped violence for political bargaining and contributed to
peacemaking. Istanbul should give Mr. Ocalan a chance to do the same.

Delaying his execution will ease European concerns about Turkey's human rights
record and its retention of the death penalty, which all members of the European
Union have abolished. Turkey has not executed anyone since 1984. Ending that
moratorium would be a mistake. Turkey should not just postpone Mr. Ocalan's
hanging, but cancel it.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (95%); TURKEY (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (93%); KENYA
(79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (91%);
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION  (84%); EUROPEAN UNION
(84%); SINN FEIN (55%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (55%); PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION  (55%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (55%); PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION (55%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(91%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); EUROPEAN UNION  (84%); EUROPEAN
UNION (84%); SINN FEIN (55%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (55%); PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION  (55%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (55%); PALESTINE LIBERATION
ORGANIZATION (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   EUROPE (95%); TURKEY (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(93%); KENYA (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY
(79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; KURDS; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT; PUBLIC OPINION; TERRORISM;
INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORISM

 (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); EUROPEAN
UNION (90%); SENTENCING (78%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); PALESTINE
LIBERATION ORGANIZATION (73%); MURDER (55%);

PERSON: OCALAN, ABDULLAH  GERARD ADAMS (55%); YASIR ARAFAT (55%);

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              69 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 22, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Chechens Tell of Murderous Rampage by Russians

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words

DATELINE: NAZRAN, Russia, Feb. 21


Refugees trickling out of Chechnya into the makeshift camps that pock the
Caucasus foothills near Nazran are bringing stories of what could be one of the
worst civilian massacres in the Chechen war.

They charge that "kontraktniki" -- Russian men hired by the army to fight in
Chechnya -- staged a drunken rampage of looting and gunfire through the tiny,
bombed-out, straw-brick homes of a neighborhood called Aldi in the Chechen
capital, Grozny.

They say the mercenaries massacred women and elderly men and burned houses and
animal pens to the ground. By the time the Russians left, carting away
furniture, jewelry and money on loaded-down armored personnel carriers, dozens
if not scores of residents had perished, survivors say.

They also tell the story of how Zina Labazaneva died, and of how a woman she
never met, a plump, 40-ish mother of teenagers named Sapiyat, helped give her
peace in death, because that first Saturday in February there was no relative to
wash Mrs. Labazaneva, wrap her in a white shroud and lay her in her grave.

A half-dozen witnesses of what happened in Aldi that day -- though not Sapiyat
-- have been interviewed by the New York-based organization Human Rights Watch,
which has compiled what it calls a credible list of 30 victims in Aldi. Other
survivors have circulated a list of 82 dead.

"And after all this is finished, and we are out, we know that 115 were killed,"
Sapiyat, a tall, hollow-eyed woman in a long print dress and owlish glasses,
said today between sobs.

While refugees seem to have been generally safe from retribution for their
statements, virtually all have refused to give their full names in interviews
with reporters. One refugee was reported to have been arrested this week after
telling interviewers about abuses in a Russian-run detention camp near Grozny.

There is no way to verify any of the figures, much less the circumstances of the
deaths. The Russian government has denied that its troops have engaged in
atrocities and has called such reports malicious propaganda.

In a long interview in one of Nazran's many refugee huddles, where she arrived
not long ago, Sapiyat said she was alive today because of where she had lived --
on Almaznaya Street, the very last in a warren of curving, interlocking lanes
that make up the Aldi neighborhood.

In the last days of January, Russian troops pressing their final assault on
Grozny began bombarding Aldi almost around the clock with artillery and air
strikes. The secessionist Chechen guerrillas who controlled the area left on
Jan. 29, but the bombing continued for three more days, Sapiyat said.

"And then, suddenly, it became calm," she said. "And the troops started mopping
up. We thought they would just check everyone's passports. But it was a
cleansing of everything alive. They killed cattle, dogs, people -- children and
old people."

It was Saturday, Feb. 5. Sapiyat said she had not witnessed what occurred,
because she was hiding in her two-room house.

But survivors and other witnesses who gathered afterward told the story: A
convoy of soldiers, in tanks and armored personnel carriers, began moving up and
down the streets of Aldi, tossing grenades into cellars where families were
hiding, forcing residents onto the streets. At various stops they demanded
money, gold and other valuables. Those who resisted were shot. Sometimes those
who gave were shot as well.

On Voronezhskaya Street, three in the Musayev family, from 27 to 76 years old,
were said to have been shot dead. At least three more -- a father and two sons
-- died on Bryansky Street. At 88 Zemlyansky Street, two sons died two days
after burying their mother in their yard.

On Second Zemlyansky Lane, Yan Sultanovich, onetime administrator of Aldi, was
shot in his yard. On Third Zemlyansky, Adurahman Tasuyev, 51, and Ziyardi
Akhmerzuyev, about 44, were shot in theirs.

On Mesayev Street, Akhmed Abulkhonov, 75, rushed from his house to volunteer 300
rubles in tribute, said one survivor interviewed by Human Rights Watch, a woman
too frightened to be publicly named. The soldiers threw it in his face, the
woman said.

He ran into his house and returned with $100. "You have dollars and you only
wanted to give us rubles," the survivor quoted one soldier as saying. By her
account, they beat Mr. Abulkhonov and shot him, set his cattle shed afire, then
roped his hysterical daughter, Lucia, to a personnel carrier and drove off.

Zina Labazaneva, single and in her early 50's, lived on Mesayev Street too, with
her brother Husein. Exactly what happened to them is unclear.

Sapiyat, who was several streets away, knows only this much. "We went out and
were standing with our passports outside," she said. "I saw a soldier come. He
wasn't a regular, but a kontraktnik. And then a whole herd came. The soldier
shot his gun around the street" -- she made a side-to-side motion -- "and said,
'Everyone go into your houses.' "

The soldiers, she said, were very drunk. "They didn't come into the houses on
the last street," she said. "They were probably tired of looting and killing."

In the midafternoon silence, as survivors collected to exchange rumors, a woman
approached Sapiyat and begged her to go to Mesayev Street. Her neighbors were
dead, she said, and she needed help in washing a woman's body for burial.

It is a cardinal rule of Islam that no one should go to the grave unclean.

"And so I went to Mesayev Street, and I saw corpses outside," she said. And
inside the little brick house where the neighbor took them lay Ms. Labazaneva
and her brother. Two rows of automatic rifle bullets had marched across her
body, one at her chest, another at the abdomen.

Sapiyat, her daughter and the neighbor undressed the dead woman, bathed her and
wrapped her in a white cloth from the neighbor's house. Then, Sapiyat said, Zina
Labazaneva and her brother were buried in their front yard, side by side with
Mr. Abulkhonov and another man.

They worked for two hours. And then Sapiyat and her daughter began the walk
home.

"I told the neighbor to run home very quickly, that it was still dangerous," she
said. "We had to go across Voronezhskaya Street. We saw two armored vehicles on
one side and two tanks on the other, and so we ran back, looking for places to
hide. All the gates were locked. We found a hole in a wooden fence, and so we
got in and waited in a bathroom for everyone to leave."

In the days that followed, she said, Russian military commanders rounded up the
men in the area, gave them their confiscated passports and told them to forget
that they had ever seen each other.

A week later, Sapiyat left Grozny for good. "I couldn't bear it any more," she
said. "I had to leave for my children and myself."

Peter Bouckaert, a researcher for Human Rights Watch, said the group had not yet
published its investigation of the Aldi events or notified the Russian
government of its findings. It was not possible to reach Russian officials for
comment this evening.

Acting President Vladimir V. Putin named a senior official last week to examine
complaints of atrocities like the ones alleged at Aldi. Mr. Bouckaert indicated
that the official was likely to be busy for some time.

"People are returning to their homes to find their relatives shot to death all
over the city," Mr. Bouckaert said. "What happened in the last two weeks are the
most severe abuses we've seen in the war. It's as if a sledgehammer was slammed
into Grozny after soldiers took the place."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); CAUCASIAN STATES (91%); UNITED STATES (76%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (76%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); GROZNY (CHECHNYA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(97%); CAUCASIAN STATES (91%); UNITED STATES (76%);   NEW YORK, USA (76%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);
BOMBINGS (89%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); INTERVIEWS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (79%); ARMIES (78%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (74%);
VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR (72%); ARRESTS (72%); SENIOR CITIZENS (55%);

PERSON: WINES, MICHAEL  ZINA LABAZANEVA (62%);

LOAD-DATE: February 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Two Chechen men among ruined houses in Grozny, Russia. Refugees
from the region are saying that Russian "contract soldiers" stormed through a
section of the city, looting, burning and killing women and old men. (Associated
Press)(pg. A11)

Map showing the location of Aldi: Survivors of the Aldi neighborhood told a tale
of horror. (pg. A11)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              70 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Europeans Deplore Executions in the U.S.

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 25


An average person in France could not help but be familiar with the case of
Betty Lou Beets, the Texas woman who was executed on Thursday for killing her
fifth husband. Her story, with particular attention to her assertion that she
was abused by her father and husbands, has been on the front page of many
newspapers here.

The French also know about Odell Barnes, also of Texas, who is scheduled to be
executed March 1, and who has been the subject of several articles by
journalists and editorial writers here contemplating whether he is innocent. A
few months ago, thousands of Parisians took to the streets in support of another
American inmate: Mumia Abu Jamal, a former Black Panther convicted of murder.

The United States may have become accustomed to the revival of the death
penalty, but much of Western Europe is appalled by it. While executions get
little notice in American newspapers anymore, the United States' willingness to
put prisoners to death is often scrutinized here.

In fact, there is so much political mileage to be gotten from criticizing the
executions that a candidate for Paris mayor recently went all the way to Texas
to meet with Mr. Barnes.

Many Europeans find it a contradiction that the United States claims to be a
leader in protecting human rights when it executed more than 75 people last
year. Since the 1976 Supreme Court ruling that allowed the reinstitution of
executions, 38 states have adopted a death penalty.

To many French citizens, deploring the rise in executions in the United States
is no different from taking a stand against Serbian attacks on Kosovo or the
Russian bombardment of Chechnya. All European Union countries either ban the
death penalty or long ago placed a moratorium on its use.

"For us, what the Americans are doing is completely incomprehensible, that such
an advanced country can be involved in such an act of barbarism," said Henry
Leclerc, the president of the Human Rights League in Paris. "No European country
does this. No advanced country does this. America is doing it along with
countries like China and Russia and other countries that have terrible human
rights records. To us, it looks the same as if the Americans were endorsing
torture or slavery."

France gave up the guillotine in 1981, after long and heated debate, even though
polls showed that the majority of the French still favored executions. But the
numbers have changed significantly since then. A recent poll indicated that only
46 percent still favored the death penalty.

France's neighbors feel much the same. Last year, the European Union announced
that it would submit a resolution to the United Nations Human Rights Commission
calling for an end to the death penalty. The move was seen as a criticism of the
United States, though it was not mentioned by name.

In Italy, sentiment against the death penalty runs particularly strong. More
than two million people have signed a petition calling for the death penalty to
be abolished worldwide. The Colosseum is illuminated in gold whenever a death
sentence is commuted anywhere around the world.

One of Italy's leading clothes manufacturers, United Benetton, has been running
an ad campaign with photographs of American inmates on death row in seven
states. The "We, on death row" ads have caused a uproar in the United States.
Sears, Roebuck & Company says it will stop sales of Benetton USA apparel, and
Missouri officials have sued the company, saying those who photographed the
inmates misrepresented what they were doing.

Some French rights activists believe that Mr. Barnes may have been framed for
the murder of a friend. Jack Lang, who on Thursday declared his candidacy for
Paris mayor, made news recently when he traveled to Texas to see Mr. Barnes.

Patrick Baudouin, the president of the International League of Human Rights,
pointed out that France also takes other countries to task for sentencing
prisoners to death. But he said the outrage reserved for America was special.

"We think of America as being in our camp -- a democracy that defends liberty
and human rights," he said. "Of the countries we consider in our camp, it is the
only one that goes on with the death penalty."

He says he is well aware that Americans are not listening to European opinion on
the matter.

"We know that when we have a press conference here, it does not do a lot," Mr.
Baudouin said. "But 15 years ago, no one would have guessed the Berlin Wall was
coming down. You keep pressing ahead. We are in an age of globalization, and
sometimes our American friends have a lesson to teach us, and maybe sometime we
have a lesson to teach them."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); EUROPE (96%); FRANCE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); CHINA (79%); WESTERN
EUROPE (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (68%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (73%);

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (91%);

COMPANY: WESTERN EUROPE (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); EUROPE (96%); FRANCE (94%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); CHINA (79%);
WESTERN EUROPE (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (68%);   TEXAS, USA (73%);   PARIS,
FRANCE (91%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); WRITERS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); MURDER (78%); JOURNALISM (77%); TORTURE (77%);

 CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (74%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (72%); POLLS & SURVEYS (68%);
PETITIONS (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (60%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (52%);
SUPREME COURTS (50%);   CORRECTIONS (74%);

PERSON: ODELL BARNES (69%);

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              71 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 3, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FREED BY BRITAIN, PINOCHET IS FACING A BATTLE AT HOME

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1383 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, March 2


Britain abruptly dropped extradition proceedings today against Gen. Augusto
Pinochet, who then headed home to Chile where his political opponents were
waiting, intent on making him face months, if not years, of additional court
proceedings.

After 16 months of house arrest in distant London, where he waited out legal
twists and turns, General Pinochet was told by Britain's home secretary, Jack
Straw, early today that because of his failing health he did not have to stand
trial on charges of gross human rights violations.

Although Mr. Straw's ruling ended Mr. Pinochet's plight there, his case is
expected to have far-reaching implications in international law governing human
rights violations.  Page A6.

The 84-year-old former dictator was accused of abducting, torturing and
executing thousands of political prisoners during his 17-year authoritarian rule
in Chile. As the case now shifts to his homeland, it will undoubtedly have an
important political impact on the new civilian government and the still-powerful
armed forces.

President-elect Ricardo Lagos, a Socialist who takes office in nine days, has
pledged to let what promises to be a lengthy and complicated judicial process
run its course. But the departing government of President Eduardo Frei is
quietly pushing a constitutional reform that could erect another hurdle to
resolving the case, by allowing General Pinochet to retain his parliamentary
immunity from prosecution even if he gave up his current position in the Senate.

About 50 people who had family members disappear during General Pinochet's years
in power sat up most of the night holding hands and singing folk songs while
waiting for Mr. Straw's decision at the headquarters of a human rights group.
When news arrived that General Pinochet was free, they broke into sobs.

"Until the last minute we thought Jack Straw would allow the extradition," said
Viviana Diaz, president of Family Members of the Disappeared, "but we always had
to take into account the enormous political effort our government made toward
Britain, Spain, France and Belgium to free Pinochet." But despite her
disappointment, she added, "Pinochet left Chile as the king of the world, and he
returns a criminal condemned morally by the world."

By the afternoon, Ms. Diaz and other activists were in court filing a petition
to revoke General Pinochet's senatorial immunity, which was granted along with
his status as a senator for life under a Constitution written while he was still
in power.

Removing his immunity would be necessary before an indictment could proceed in a
case alleging his involvement with a military death squad known as the Caravan
of Death, which removed scores of political prisoners from police and army jails
for execution the month after the 1973 coup that overthrew President Salvador
Allende, a Socialist.

Across Santiago, a hundred supporters of General Pinochet celebrated at the
offices of the Pinochet Foundation with patriotic chants and songs. But while
expressing relief that the former dictator was returning home, they said Chile's
sovereignty had been sullied and their leader had been humiliated.

"No one won, everyone lost," said Luis Cortes Villa, a retired general who is
executive director of the foundation, a private group that promotes the former
dictator's image. "There is really nothing to celebrate when an ex-president is
arrested arbitrarily and unfairly."

The government and armed forces are going out of their way to ensure that
General Pinochet's arrival on Friday morning will be as uneventful as possible.
He is scheduled to land in a northern desert town before finally arriving in
Santiago, where family members, military commanders and leaders of the Pinochet
Foundation will give him a ceremonial welcome that will not be open to the
public.

The former dictator will then be taken to the Military Hospital for a medical
checkup that will last at least two days. Officials said he could remain there
under tight security for several weeks.

Judge Juan Guzman Tapia of the Santiago Appeals Court, who is investigating 60
criminal complaints against the former dictator, has requested a battery of
other medical tests be done by doctors chosen by the courts in preparation for a
possible trial. Under Chilean law, findings of dementia or mental impairment --
though not physical ill health -- would protect General Pinochet from legal
proceedings. Last month, two newspapers in Spain quoted British medical reports
as saying that he had suffered brain damage during two minor strokes in recent
months.

For more than a year Chilean officials argued that Spain's request to have
General Pinochet sent to Madrid to stand trial on torture charges was
unnecessary because the justice system here could try him. Now that claim will
be put to the test, with the armed forces and the first Socialist president
since Dr. Allende watching the case closely.

Judge Guzman has been engaged in an aggressive investigation into General
Pinochet's possible connection to more than 2,000 political deaths and tens of
thousands of tortures. And his ruling last year that an amnesty decree that
covered the years between 1973 and 1978 did not cover disappearances of people
who remain missing has opened the way for the arrests of about 50 retired
military and police officers.

But to prosecute General Pinochet, Judge Guzman must first request that the
Santiago Appeals Court lift the parliamentary immunity that accompanies his
position as a senator for life. That process could take months or years,
including appeals to the Supreme Court.

In a candlelight vigil tonight in front of La Moneda, the presidential palace,
500 protesters chanted "No to the amnesty, no to immunity, the blood of the dead
is not negotiable."

Apparently in an effort to nudge General Pinochet out of his Senate position,
President Frei and a coalition of moderate and conservative legislators have
proposed a new constitutional provision that would allow him to retire from the
Congress but retain his senatorial privileges, including salary and legal
immunity.

Human rights advocates say that the measure, which appears headed for passage at
the end of the month, would give General Pinochet extra protection because there
would be no provision in the law to strip immunity from a former president who
is no longer serving in the Congress.

President-elect Lagos has not spoken on the proposed constitutional measure
publicly. But while attending the presidential inauguration of Jorge Batlle in
Uruguay on Wednesday, he said: "The conditions exist to judge Senator-for-Life
Augusto Pinochet. If that were not the case, it would be as if to say we have a
castrated democracy."

For Socialists like Mr. Lagos who have served in the current Christian
Democratic-Socialist coalition government, working for General Pinochet's
release has been a bitter experience forced by their need to get along with the
powerful military and defend the country's sovereignty.

That explains why at the moment of a long-sought diplomatic victory, Foreign
Minister Juan Gabriel Valdes's reaction to the news from London was so
distraught. "This has been a disgraceful affair that has damaged the image of
Chile throughout the world," said Mr. Valdes, a Socialist. "And the principal
person responsible for that is General Pinochet himself."

The coming judicial deliberations in Chile are bound to be complex.

Human rights lawyers are likely to argue against any parliamentary immunity
defenses and against the 1973-1978 amnesty decree as contrary to new precedents
in international law that invalidate amnesties and statutes of limitations in
cases of crimes against humanity such as torture. The Supreme Court would most
likely have to rule on this point before lower courts could judge the former
dictator.

Meanwhile, General Pinochet's lawyers are expected to argue that Judge Guzman
does not have grounds to investigate alleged crimes committed on military
premises or during military service and that any case against the former
dictator should be decided before a military tribunal. In the past, civilian
courts have given military tribunals wide authority in cases involving military
personnel. Again, the Supreme Court would have to decide.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); SPAIN (79%); FRANCE (52%); BELGIUM
(52%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%);

COMPANY: PINOCHET FOUNDATION (81%);

ORGANIZATION: PINOCHET FOUNDATION (81%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN;   CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); SPAIN
(79%); FRANCE (52%); BELGIUM (52%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);
SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
EXTRADITION (92%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); COUPS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); IMMUNITY (77%); HOUSE ARREST (77%);

 INDICTMENTS (77%); TORTURE (75%); ELECTION LAW (74%); ARMIES (74%); PETITIONS
(73%); ARRESTS (72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (72%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); STRAW, JACK (SEC)  JACK STRAW

 (89%);

LOAD-DATE: March 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chilean protesters sat in silence in Santiago yesterday after
learning that Britain had dropped extradition charges against Gen. Augusto
Pinochet. (Reuters)(pg. A6)



                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              74 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 1, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Gay Rights Rally Over Gains and Goals

BYLINE: By ROBIN TONER

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1039 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 30


Waving banners of gay pride and identity, a crowd estimated in the hundreds of
thousands rallied in the nation's capital today, celebrating the gains of the
gay rights movement in recent years and vowing redoubled efforts on issues like
hate crime legislation.

One leader after another urged the crowd to demonstrate its influence at the
ballot box in November. For more than six hours, under a warm spring sun, a wide
range of speakers, including the parents of Matthew Shepard, the Wyoming gay
college student whose beating death galvanized the drive for laws against hate
crimes, addressed the unfinished agenda of the gay rights movement.

"Let people know you are a part of America, you are a solid God-fearing part of
America, and you deserve the same rights," said Dennis Shepard, Matthew's
father.

There was a strong political subtext to the day. Elizabeth Birch, executive
director of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation's largest gay and lesbian
organization, told the audience, "We must elect Al Gore as president of the
United States," arguing that "the very future of the U.S. Supreme Court for the
next generation hangs in the balance."

Ms. Birch said of Gov. George W. Bush's position on gay rights issues: "There is
absolutely nothing about these policies that is compassionate."

Vice President Gore, addressing the group by videotape beamed on a huge screen
above the Mall, declared, "I stand with you, and am with you every step of the
way" in the march for civil rights.

Mr. Gore said he would not rest in the fight against AIDS and in the struggle to
protect gay Americans from employment discrimination and to ensure that "crimes
of hate against all people, including gays and lesbians," are severely punished.

President Clinton, also speaking by videotape, said he had created the "most
inclusive" administration in history, with more than 150 openly gay men and
lesbians as appointees, and would "continue our fight for an employment
nondiscrimination act that would ban discrimination against gays and lesbians in
the workplace."

But there was more than electoral politics to the day; there was a broader, more
festive tone. The marchers, who began to wind from the Washington Monument to
the Capitol at 10:20 a.m., were a long, ebullient parade of cops and veterans,
drag queens and college students, gay parents with toddlers on their backs and
heterosexual parents marching in support of gay children.

Their signs and banners, some carefully designed and mass produced, some
homemade, reflected the diversity: "Proud Son of a Lesbian." "Protect Our
Families." "Stop Hate Crimes." "Ohio Gay Officers Action League." "Gay Veterans
of Chicago." "Proud to be from Vermont."

There were several variations on Vermont signs. The state, which recently passed
a bill creating civil unions that give gay couples the rights of marriage, was
praised and trumpeted throughout the day.

As the organizers hoped, there were many families here. Larry Leon was pushing
his 22-month-old twins in a double-stroller with his partner, Marc Salans, and
carrying a sign that demanded, "Keep Gay Adoption Legal." Mr. Leon, who lives in
Washington, said, "We want to celebrate our family, celebrate the joy of having
a family, celebrate the success of our adoption endeavor."

Susan from North Carolina, who declined to give her last name, said she, her
partner and their 17-month-old daughter were "just marching for our family."

Ms. Birch, of the Human Rights Campaign, described her and her partner's
adoption of twins and told the crowd, "Don't let anybody tell you that you're
not worthy of parenthood."

There were tiny clusters of protesters. As the march began, a man with a
bullhorn shouted, "Sick! Sick! Sick!" The marchers chanted back, "Shame! Shame!
Shame!" Another protester yelled: "You're despicable before God. You know
nothing about families." And a marcher shouted back, "Jesus loves me."

But by and large, the march had the air of a vast street festival, fed by the
array of entertainers and celebrities, from Melissa Etheridge to Martina
Navratilova, who took the stage at the foot of the Capitol. Anne Heche, the
actress, declared from the stage, "I gotta say I was straight for 27 years and I
never came to a party as big as this."

The march came under criticism from some gay activists, who argued that the
planning was not inclusive enough, that the organizers had allowed too much
commercialization with sponsors like United Airlines and Showtime Network and
that the purpose of the march was ill-defined.

One critic, Bill Dobbs, with the Ad Hoc Committee for an Open Process, said
today: "Rather than unite and galvanize the gay, lesbian, bisexual and
transgender community, the march's organizers and the Human Rights Campaign have
created divisions. That rift, about who speaks for the movement and how
decisions are made, must be addressed before we can move forward."

But Dianne Hardy-Garcia, executive director of the Millennium March on
Washington, as today's rally was called, said that taking such a strong, visible
stand for equality in an election year "is smart -- and a judicious use of
resources."

Ms. Hardy-Garcia said the march was intended to show the generational and
geographic range of the movement, its growing numbers of openly gay families and
its ability to build coalitions. "I think there was an image that we were only
an urban gay community," she said.

One of those coalitions was demonstrated on the stage today, when the family of
Matthew Shepard was joined by the family of James Byrd Jr., a black man who was
dragged to death behind a truck by three whites in Jasper, Tex.

Many of those here today said they hoped their presence would send a signal.
When asked why she was here, a New York City police sergeant replied: "Strength
in numbers. Pride. For some people, it's a life-altering event."

This was the first national gay rights march in Washington since 1993.
Organizers gave various estimates of the crowd size as the day progressed,
asserting that at its peak, it was 800,000; the United States Park Police no
longer issues crowd estimates, which had become an unending source of debate
with the organizers of various marches.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: VERMONT, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%); WYOMING, USA (55%);

CITY: WASHINGTON, DC, USA (51%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (56%); SUPREME
COURT OF THE UNITED STATES  (55%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (55%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (56%); SUPREME
COURT OF THE UNITED STATES  (55%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   VERMONT, USA (92%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA

 (92%); WYOMING, USA (55%);   WASHINGTON, DC, USA (51%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   GAYS & LESBIANS (95%); LGBT RIGHTS
(93%); HATE CRIME (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%);
CHILDREN (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%); GAY
PARENTING (78%); AIDS & HIV (78%); TRANSGENDER PERSONS (78%); CRIMINAL LAW
(77%); LEGISLATION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%);
EXECUTIVES (77%); POLITICS (76%); FAMILY (76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); EMPLOYMENT (68%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES
(64%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (60%); SUPREME COURTS (52%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW
(89%);

PERSON: AL GORE (72%); BILL CLINTON (71%); ELLEN DEGENERES (57%); GEORGE W BUSH
(52%);

LOAD-DATE: May 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A crowd estimated in the hundreds of thousands marched from the
Washington Monument to the Capitol yesterday for a rally in support of the gay
and lesbian rights movement. Among the demonstrators were the actresses Ellen
DeGeneres, left, and Anne Heche. (Photographs by Nicole Bengiveno/The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              77 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

United States and Indonesia Quietly Resume Military Cooperation

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 567 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 23


The Clinton administration has quietly resumed military cooperation with
Indonesia, senior defense officials said today, eight months after cutting off
those ties following massacres in East Timor.

The United States broke the freeze this month by inviting Indonesian military
observers to joint exercises in Thailand and by completing plans this week to
hold the first joint exercises between American and Indonesian armed forces in
July.

The exercises are a prelude to a much larger military-to-military program the
administration will present Congress this month to reward the new,
democratically elected Indonesian government for removing some of the senior
military officers under investigation for the East Timor massacres and for
imposing civilian control of the military, according to senior administration
officials.

Since taking office seven months ago, President Abdurrahman Wahid has appointed
a civilian minister of defense and removed General Wiranto, the powerful chief
of the armed forces, who is under investigation for allowing several army units
to orchestrate the rampage last year in East Timor, which left hundreds dead
after the province voted for independence.

But some members of Congress and human rights groups are critical of resuming
any relations with the military until the current investigations into the
massacres and other human rights abuses in East Timor lead to trials of senior
officers.

Senator Russell D. Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, will propose legislation as
early as this week to prolong the freeze on military relations until the
officers are all put on trial.

And a group of 29 human rights organizations has petitioned Secretary of State
Madeleine K. Albright to prevent any "resumption of military engagement at any
level."

"I really do think it is premature for the Pentagon to be resuming cooperation
when there has been a lack of accountability for the senior officers," said
Michael Jendrzejczyk of Human Rights Watch, which signed the letter to Dr.
Albright.

President Clinton suspended all military ties with Indonesia in September when
General Wiranto failed to reign in the local militia as it rampaged through East
Timor. And in its report issued earlier this year, the United Nations said its
investigation uncovered evidence that special forces of the Indonesian army did
"support the militias in intimidation and terror attacks" in East Timor.

To avoid working with those units, the Pentagon is renewing its ties first with
the Indonesia's air force and navy. The joint exercises this summer will be held
with Indonesian marines and will concentrate on humanitarian assistance and
disaster relief, according to a senior defense official.

"What better way than to take some first steps towards re-engagement with
humanitarian exercises and with the services that don't have a cloud over them,"
said a senior official who asked for anonymity.

After consultations with Congress, the administration hopes to begin what Dr.
Albright described in a letter to the human rights groups as a "carefully
calibrated" program to renew ties with the two militaries.

"Given where Indonesia was a year ago, this government has made tremendous
progress in asserting civilian control over the military," said Adam Schwarz,
the author of "A Nation in Waiting: Indonesia's Search for Stability," (Westview
Press, 1994).


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); THAILAND
(88%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA; EAST TIMOR;   INDONESIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%);
TIMOR-LESTE (94%); THAILAND (88%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; INDONESIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  US
PRESIDENTS (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); MILITARY OPERATIONS
(78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); LEGISLATION (75%); AIR
FORCES (73%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%);
APPOINTMENTS (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); PETITIONS (64%);
TERRORISM (61%); DISASTER RELIEF (60%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); BECKER, ELIZABETH  BILL CLINTON (79%); RUSS
FEINGOLD (58%);

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              79 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 6, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

O.A.S. to Send Panel to Peru To Check Vote

BYLINE: By JAMES BROOKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 661 words

DATELINE: WINDSOR, Ontario, June 5


Responding to the unopposed election of Alberto Fujimori to a third term as
president of Peru, foreign ministers at the annual assembly of the Organization
of American States agreed tonight to send a mission to Lima to explore options
for strengthening democracy in Peru.

The team is to be led by Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd Axworthy, and Cesar
Gaviria, secretary general of the Organization of the American States.

"The presidential vote in Peru is a matter of deep concern to us all," Mr.
Axworthy said before the vote. "Left unexamined, it will certainly diminish the
credibility of this organization."

The resolution left it up to the mission to decide on a timetable and a forum
for its reporting. Many diplomats agreed that the mission would have the most
impact if it went to Lima well before Mr. Fujimori's planned inauguration date,
July 28.

Human rights and Peruvian opposition legislators who gathered here today called
for new elections, and, failing that, concerted pressure on Mr. Fujimori.

"It is important to tell Fujimori that we have you under the microscope here;
your case is not under a done deal," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, a Chilean lawyer
who is executive director of the Americas division of Human Rights Watch, a
Washington-based organization. "If the O.A.S. does not take these minimal steps,
the message is the O.A.S.will only react to confront bloody, unpopular coups."

The May 28 runoff in Peru set off a cascade of criticism. Mr. Fujimori ran
unopposed because his first-round opponent, Alejandro Toledo, had dropped out,
denouncing limits on media coverage and voting irregularities in the first round
of the election in April.

Rights advocates from Peru and North American converged here to pressfor strong
action.

"If this process is legitimized, in the end, other countries will be encourage
to follow the bad example of Peru," warned Sofia Macher, director of the
National Human Rights Coordinate, a coalition of about 60 Peruvian rights
groups. Calling President Fujimori's planned inauguration "a coup d'etat in slow
motion," she urged other countries to press Peru for "new elections under new
conditions."

Defending his government, Fernando de Trazegnies Granda, Peru's foreign
minister, cited its battles with hyperinflation and terrorism in the early
1990's, saying: "Don't judge us by where we fall short by utopian criteria, but
by what we have traveled through."

As the delegates debated Peru, another issue -- free trade -- brought 2,500
protesters to the steel fence protecting the meetings, though trade was not on
the agenda.  The protests here have been the largest in memory at an O.A.S.
gathering.

Canadian immigration officials at the border crossings from Detroit refused
admittance to 560 Americans in the four days before the O.A.S. meeting opened,
much higher than the normal rate of refusal of 1,000 a month. Ken Lawrence, a
spokesman for the immigration service, said many of "the individuals were coming
in to protest."

Danny Yen, a Canadian customs spokesman, said that during the same time at the
Detroit crossing, customs officials had confiscated from about 200 Americans
hundreds of items that could have been used in protests, including tear gas
canisters, gas masks, eye goggles, bleach, pepper spray, pipes, bats and flares.

On Sunday, 41 protesters were arrested outside the riverfront convention center
here, 35 for blocking a bus that carried delegates and several more for
attempting to scale the security fence. Sgt. David Rossell of the Windsor police
said that officers used pepper spray after protesters had thrown smoke bombs and
unknown liquids at them.

At the same time, about 400 people paraded in downtown Detroit carrying banners
and chanting "Clean up this mess, stop the O.A.S."

Today police officers removed scores of demonstrators who had linked arms and
sat in the rain to block delegates in three buses from arriving at an official
luncheon.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (95%); CANADA (94%); NORTH AMERICA (79%);
NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (58%);

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (79%);   LIMA, PERU (88%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(94%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(94%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (55%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; CANADA;   PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (95%); CANADA (94%); NORTH
AMERICA (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);   MICHIGAN, USA (79%); ONTARIO,
CANADA (58%);   DETROIT, MI, USA (79%);   LIMA, PERU (88%);

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); ELECTIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (88%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES

 (78%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

 (73%); COUPS (73%); EXECUTIVES (73%); TERRORISM (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); HYPERINFLATION (60%);

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K (PRES); TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO; BROOKE, JAMES; AXWORTHY,
LLOYD (MIN); GAVIRIA, CESAR (SEC GEN)  ALBERTO FUJIMORI  (94%);

LOAD-DATE: June 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              80 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 943 words



EUROPE

UKRAINE: PRESIDENTIAL POWERS
A constitutional court ruled that President Leonid Kuchma's plan to strengthen
his powers over Parliament do not violate the Constitution. The ruling paves the
way for Mr. Kuchma to submit the changes to Parliament, which must pass them by
a two-thirds majority. Some opposition leaders want to water down the proposals,
fearing Mr. Kuchma's executive powers will too easily override the legislature.
Ever since Mr. Kuchma won re-election last November, he has been campaigning for
stronger powers to break the many deadlocks that have snarled economic reform
plans.  Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)


AUSTRIA: RIGHTS MONITORS
Austria said it was willing to cooperate with a panel asked to examine its human
rights records. The European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg, France, will
appoint three monitors, who will send their findings to the other 14 European
Union governments. Analysts believe this could be a first step toward ending
Austria's political isolation within the Union, which froze political relations
with Vienna on Feb. 4 after Jorg Haider's far-right Freedom Party joined
Austria's coalition government.  Victor Homola (NYT)

TURKEY: ARMENIANS EXPELLED
Four Armenians invited to a meeting in the eastern city of Kars were expelled by
Turkish security agents. Local authorities had invited the four as part of an
effort to improve relations between the two countries, which would greatly help
the economy in Kars and other border areas. But the Foreign Ministry said that
since Armenia is occupying territory that belongs to Azerbaijan, Turkey's ally,
and is promoting hostility toward Turkey, the ministry is "not promoting such
contacts." Stephen Kinzer (NYT)

IRELAND: PREMIER TESTIFIES
Prime Minister Bertie Ahern told a tribunal investigating improper payments to
politicians that he had no knowledge of a donation of $91,000 that disappeared
in 1989. A Fianna Fail party supporter donated $121,000 to former Prime Minister
Charles Haughey, of which only $30,000 reached the party account. Mr. Ahern, who
handled party finances at the time, said he was aware of only the $30,000
donation, and he accepted blame for not sending a receipt for that amount.
Brian F. Lavery (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

ARGENTINA: SUING BRITAIN
Relatives of more than 300 sailors who were killed when the cruiser General
Belgrano was sunk by the Royal Navy during the Falklands war in 1982 announced
that they plan to sue Britain for damages next week in the European Court of
Human Rights in Strasbourg, France. Lawyers for the relatives, who have been
preparing the case for five years, will argue that since the ship's sinking was
outside the theater of operations, it violated international wartime
conventions.  Clifford Krauss (NYT)

COLOMBIA: REBEL TALKS
Delegations representing 21 nations, including European and United Nations
diplomats, began two days of meetings with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, the country's main left-wing guerrilla group, in a demilitarized area
controlled by the rebels. The topic of the conference is drug trafficking: the
guerrillas are heavily involved in the cocaine trade but say they would favor
alternative crop-substitution programs. The United States did not take part
because of a ban on official contacts with the group.  Larry Rohter (NYT)

CANADA: JAILED AGAIN
An upstate New York judge has jailed a Vancouver man who fled a penal work camp
29 years ago while serving up to 4 years for selling $20 worth of LSD to an
undercover agent. Allen Richardson told the Rochester judge he fled in 1971
because a guard told him he was about to be returned to Attica prison, where a
deadly riot had just occurred. The case was a cause celebre in Canada.  James
Brooke (NYT)

ASIA

KOREAS: TALKS PROGRESS
North and South Korea appeared close to a landmark agreement on the issues of
the repatriation of former prisoners and family reunions. The North Korean Red
Cross has agreed to hold reunions in August for families who were separated in
the Korean War, and South Korea would repatriate former North Korean prisoners
in September, reports from both sides said. Talks between the two, being held in
North Korea, are scheduled to wind up today.  (Reuters)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: PALESTINIANS COMPLAIN
Saeb Erekat, a senior peace negotiator, said the Palestinians had lodged
complaints with the Americans and the Europeans about increasing Israeli
reinforcements of settlements in Gaza and the West Bank. Palestinians report
seeing tanks moving into certain settlement areas, which they say is creating
panic among Palestinians.  Deborah Sontag (NYT)

IRAQ: SECURITY STEPPED UP
The United Nations is tightening security in Iraq after the shooting deaths of
two of its staff members at an office in Baghdad, a United Nations official in
Baghdad said. She said these procedures included checking again that all United
Nations employees had their identity cards and that a thorough verification of
visitors' identities should be made before they enter United Nations offices.
According to officials, Fowad Hussein Haydar, above, opened fire after entering
the building and demanding an end to sanctions against Iraq.  (Reuters)

AFRICA

SIERRA LEONE: PEACEKEEPERS FREED
Liberia said rebels in Sierra Leone had freed 21 Indian United Nations
peacekeepers and handed them over to the Liberian authorities. The statement did
not make clear whether the 21 were a group seized in Kuiva on June 5 or came
from a separate contingent surrounded in nearby Kailahun since early in May.
(Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); ARMENIA (93%); TURKEY (93%); FRANCE (92%); COLOMBIA
(92%); UKRAINE (92%); AUSTRIA (90%); AZERBAIJAN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (91%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN
UNION (56%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%);
EUROPEAN UNION (56%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (94%); ARMENIA (93%); TURKEY (93%); FRANCE (92%); COLOMBIA
(92%); UKRAINE (92%); AUSTRIA (90%); AZERBAIJAN (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (79%); ARGENTINA (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);   ALSACE, FRANCE
(91%);   VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
LITIGATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (86%); EUROPEAN UNION (79%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); POLITICS
(78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); EMERGING MARKETS (75%); LAWYERS

 (75%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(74%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(67%); WAR & CONFLICT (66%); ARMED FORCES (64%); NAVIES (64%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (63%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (61%);

PERSON: BERTIE AHERN (50%);

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              82 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 19, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A Says Chilean General in '76 Bombing Was Informer

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 870 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 18


The former chief of Chile's secret police, convicted of masterminding a lethal
car bombing here in 1976, was an informer for the Central Intelligence Agency
when the bombing occurred, a year after he had received a one-time payment for
his cooperation, newly released documents show.

The official, Gen. Manuel Contreras Sepulveda, former head of DINA, the secret
police, under the 17-year military dictatorship in Chile, was enlisted by the
C.I.A. beginning in 1974, a year after Gen. Augusto Pinochet led a coup that
toppled the elected government of President Salvador Allende Gossens, the
documents show.

The American spy agency maintained its contacts with General Contreras until
1977, a year after General Contreras and his deputy, Brig. Gen. Pedro Espinoza
Bravo, organized the attack on Embassy Row in Washington, according to the
documents released today by the agency in a declassified report to Congress.

The bombing killed Orlando Letelier, Mr. Allende's former ambassador to the
United States, and a 25-year-old American associate, Ronni Moffitt.

The spy agency's relationship with General Contreras continued although "almost
immediately after the assassination, rumors began circulating that the Chilean
government was responsible," and "at that time, Contreras's possible role in the
Letelier assassination became an issue," the report says. It also says the
C.I.A. later received "specific detailed intelligence reporting concerning
Contreras's involvement in ordering the Letelier assassination" but does not
make clear when that information was obtained.

In 1993 in Chile, Generals Contreras and Espinoza were sentenced to seven and
six years, respectively, in prison for the crime, one of the worst cases of
foreign-sponsored terrorism on American soil.

"During a period between 1974 and 1977, C.I.A. maintained contact with Manuel
Contreras Sepulveda, who later became notorious for his involvement in human
rights abuses," said the intelligence agency report.

The relationship with General Contreras was viewed as "necessary to accomplish
the C.I.A.'s mission, in spite of concerns that this relationship might lay the
C.I.A. open to charges of aiding internal political repression," the report
said.

Although the C.I.A. said it had warned General Contreras that it would not
support any of his repressive activities, it ultimately issued a one-time
payment to him, even after it had found that "Contreras was the principal
obstacle to a reasonable human rights policy" in the military government.

The payment, an unspecified amount in 1975, was made in error, the report said,
after leaders of the C.I.A. had overruled their agents' recommendations to
establish a paid relationship with General Contreras, "citing the U.S.
government policy on clandestine relations with the head of an intelligence
service notorious for human rights abuses."

Peter Kornbluh, a senior analyst at the National Security Archive, a
nongovernmental clearinghouse for declassified documents, said the report sheds
light on the contacts with forces that toppled a democratic government and
killed thousands of people. "This is in fact the unraveling of a cover-up of
U.S. ties to repression during the Pinochet dictatorship," Mr. Kornbluh said.
"This is the first step toward a candid disclosure of the truth about that dark
era."

Central Intelligence Agency officials could not be reached for comment late this
evening.

The spy agency acknowledged in the report that its behavior in Chile would not
meet more rigorous standards in place today.

"As a result of lessons learned in Chile, Central America and elsewhere, the
C.I.A. now carefully reviews all contacts for potential involvement in human
rights abuses and makes a deliberate decision balancing the nature and severity
of the human rights abuse against the potential intelligence value of continuing
the relationship," the report said.

"These standards, established in the mid-1990's, would likely have altered the
amount of contact we had with perpetrators of human rights violators in Chile
had they been in effect at that time," it said.

In a similar case in Guatemala in 1996, the CIA acknowledged that it had
maintained a paid relationship with Col. Julio Roberto Alpirez, during a time in
which it concluded that the Guatemalan officer had been involved in covering up
the 1990 murder of an American citizen, Michael DeVine, and Efrain Bamaca, a
captured Guatemalan guerrilla.

The C.I.A. report on Chile, which was required by legislation written by
Representative Maurice D. Hinchey, a New York Democrat, said the spy agency was
"not involved in facilitating Pinochet's accession to president nor the
consolidation of his power as Supreme Leader."

But Mr. Hinchey, after studying the report, reached a different conclusion. "The
C.I.A. funneled millions of dollars to strengthen opposition political parties
working against the Allende government," he said. "That can cover a multitude of
sins."

Mr. Hinchey called the relationship with General Contreras a mistake. "It just
shows the zeal with which the C.I.A. operators at that time proceeded," he said.
"They made league with some very vicious people."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (96%);

COMPANY: ;CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (94%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%);

ORGANIZATION: ;CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (94%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (96%);

SUBJECT: BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; INFORMERS; COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  COUPS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS

 (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); SENTENCING (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); PUBLIC POLICY (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES
(74%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); PRISONS (69%);
MILITARY RULE (89%); CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: ALLENDE GOSSENS, SALVADOR (1908-73); SEPULVEDA, MANUEL CONTRERAS (GEN);
MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); LETELIER, ORLANDO
(1932-76); MOFFITT, RONNI (D1976)  ORLANDO LETELIER  (92%);

LOAD-DATE: September 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              83 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Says Asylum in Panama Helped Avert a Coup in Peru

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 756 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 25


American officials today defended their role in pressing Panama to give refuge
to the ousted intelligence chief of Peru, asserting that his departure was
necessary to avoid a coup by officers loyal to him.

Administration officials confirmed that the intelligence chief, Valdimiro
Montesinos, has had a longstanding relationship with United States intelligence
agencies. But they said the contacts were informal and had no bearing on the
efforts to help him settle in Panama.

Even as administration officials insisted that Mr. Montesinos's departure was
important to helping Peru remain on a path toward democracy, human rights groups
voiced skepticism. They criticized the United States for seeking to arrange a
soft landing for Mr. Montesinos outside Peru, where it may be more difficult to
prosecute him for widespread abuses that were reportedly carried out under his
command.

Mr. Montesinos, who was a top adviser to President Alberto K. Fujimori, sought
political asylum in Panama on Sunday, 10 days after the release in Peru of a
videotape in which he apparently sought to bribe an opposition lawmaker. Mr.
Fujimori has announced that he will step down next year after holding new
elections and that he will abolish the National Intelligence Service. Mr.
Montesinos had headed agency, which was implicated in numerous cases of human
rights abuses.

Panamanian authorities have granted Mr. Montesinos a 30-day tourist visa and
have retained his passport, officials said. The decision to let him remain was
made after appeals from the Organization of American States and six Latin
American presidents, as well as telephone calls from Under Secretary of State
Thomas R. Pickering.

A senior American official said Peruvian officers loyal to Mr. Montesinos had
given numerous signs, beginning last week, that they would attempt a coup
against Mr. Fujimori unless they received an "ironclad guarantee" that Mr.
Montesinos would be given safe haven outside Peru. American officials were
specifically concerned about a military celebration, Armed Forces Day, that was
held as planned on Sunday.

Last week, as United States and Latin American diplomats struggled to defuse a
confrontation between supporters of Mr. Fujimori and Mr. Montesinos, army
leaders loyal to Mr. Montesinos sounded out the nation's two vice presidents to
gauge their support for a coup, but were rebuffed, the officials said.

Mr. Montesinos's loyalists in the army and the national police agreed to sign a
document in support of Mr. Fujimori's government only after they had seen United
States and Latin American leaders' efforts for Mr. Montesinos.

Some experts on Peru and human rights advocates voiced skepticism about the
rationale for granting him Montesinos safe haven. Cynthia McClintock, a
political scientist at George Washington University, said Mr. Montesinos's
military support in Peru was shallow, limited to several senior army officials.
She raised the prospect that the Central Intelligence Agency might have been
eager to remove Mr. Montesinos from Peru as he increasingly faced the prospect
of prosecution there.

A spokesman for the C.I.A., Mark Mansfield, declined to discuss Mr. Montesinos's
ties. An American official insisted, however, that the intelligence agency did
not play a role in arranging Mr. Montesinos's exit.

A regional specialist for Human Rights Watch/Americas, Jose Miguel Vivanco,
called the coup threat groundless and said the United States and other nations
of the region were promoting impunity for a major violator of human rights.
"This shows how powerful Montesinos is, how he managed to get full support of
the Peruvian government and the sympathy of key governments in the region,
including the U.S., to find a nice sweet deal for him," Mr. Vivanco said.

Mr. Vivanco's organization said Mr. Montesinos had ordered numerous crimes,
including the "disappearances," torture and executions of nine students and a
professor from La Cantuta University in 1992.

Despite such allegations, Mr. Montesinos drew praise from some American
officials for helping eradicate a threat posed by guerrilla organizations in
Peru and cooperating with American anti-drug efforts.

A spokesman for the State Department, Richard A. Boucher, acknowledged
Washington's role in persuading Panama to accept Mr. Montesinos. But he
challenged the idea that the administration was standing up for antidemocratic
forces in Peru. He also left open the possibility that Mr. Montesinos could
eventually be prosecuted.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PANAMA (95%); LATIN AMERICA (90%);

COMPANY: GEORGE WASHINGTON UNIVERSITY HOSPITAL (50%);   ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
STATES  (54%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (54%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  (54%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
STATES (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; PANAMA;   UNITED STATES (95%); PANAMA (95%); LATIN AMERICA
(90%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; ASYLUM (POLITICAL); COUPS D'ETAT
AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; PERU-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; PANAMA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PERU; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  COUPS
(91%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); ARMIES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (86%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); POLITICS (73%); POLITICAL
SCIENCE (68%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (68%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO; MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER  ALBERTO K FUJIMORI (71%);
JOSE MIGUEL VIVANCO (58%);

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              84 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Persecution Charged in Ex-Soviet Republic

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1560 words

DATELINE: TASHKENT, Uzbekistan


Beneath the silk head scarf, her eyes were filled with thought and prayer, grief
and anger. Her voice was soft and urgent, as if spilling out the story of her
husband might somehow bring him home.

"He was just the imam in the mosque," Munira Nazarov said, patting the youngest
of her six children, a boy of 7. "He used to talk to people about studying the
Koran and other good books. He didn't talk about politics."

Her husband, Obidhon Nazarov, the chief religious figure at one of Tashkent's
largest mosques, went into hiding in March 1998 after being followed for days by
the security police. Unable to find him, the authorities imprisoned his two
brothers, a brother-in-law and an uncle. They detained his wife for 10 days, and
men still pound on the door of his house with the butts of their Kalashnikov
rifles in the middle of the night.

A largely unnoticed war is being waged in this Central Asian nation of 24
million. According to foreign and Uzbek human rights advocates and religious
leaders, 4,000 to 5,000 Muslim men have been imprisoned in the last three years.
There is evidence of systematic torture, from beatings to extracted toenails.
Some prisoners have died.

Religious leaders and human rights advocates say the only crime of the thousands
detained is that they are pious Muslims. They contend that the government of
President Islam Karimov, which has already banned opposition parties and
silenced the independent press, is using a trumped-up threat of radical Islam to
stamp out the last vestige of dissent.

"The repression of religious people is worse than it ever was during the Soviet
era," said Mikhail Ardzinov, chairman of a banned human rights group who was
detained and beaten in 1999, when three members of his organization were
imprisoned.

Government officials deny using torture, but they justify other harsh steps by
saying they are battling religious extremists determined to turn the country
into a state like Iran or, worse, Afghanistan. President Karimov vowed in
September to press the crackdown, telling state television, "This plague and
sickness are capable of infecting the minds of young people."

Since the Soviet Union collapsed, there has been a slow resurgence of Islam in
traditionally Muslim Central Asia. The governments have tried to control its
growth, sanctioning mosques and overseeing religious schools. But officials
across the region, who tend to have an authoritarian bent, fear Islamic
extremism, though the nature and seriousness of the threat are not always clear.

Some dangers are concrete. Tajikistan fought a five-year civil war against
Islamic insurgents that ended in 1997, leaving at least 50,000 dead. This
summer, soldiers from Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan battled 100 to 200 rebels from
the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan. American officials say the group has ties to
the Taliban in Afghanistan and to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi financier suspected
of responsibility for terrorist attacks.

But in Tashkent, the targets of Mr. Karimov's campaign are members of
Hizb-ut-Tahrir, or the Party of Liberation, which says it promotes Islam as a
religious and a social force. Its leaders urge Muslims to pray five times a day
and to study the Koran to prepare for a future Islamic government.

The Hizb-ut-Tahrir criticizes the Uzbek government for corruption and repressing
Muslims, but has not, Western diplomats say, promoted violence.

Chaasime Minovarov, deputy director of Uzbekistan's State Committee on Religious
Affairs, which monitors religious groups, said thousands of men had been
arrested for advocating replacing the current government with an Islamic state.
He said that Hizb-ut-Tahrir has the same ideology as the gun-toting Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan, but that the religious party may ultimately be more
dangerous because its members appear nonviolent.

"When the time comes, they will become warriors and they will start using
weapons," Mr. Minovarov said. "The government of Uzbekistan is trying its best
to bring the influence of this group to zero."

The Uzbek crackdown began in 1992, after the start of the Tajikistan civil war.
An Islamic-oriented political party and two human rights groups were outlawed,
and the government tightened control over mosques. Imams were required to
conclude their sermons by praising Mr. Karimov, the former Communist Party boss
who has solidified his authority since he became the country's first elected
president in 1991.

Women wearing head scarves and men with beards, signs of Muslim piety, were
banned from state universities in 1997. Mass roundups started the next year and
increased after five car bombings in February 1999 killed 16 people. The Islamic
Movement of Uzbekistan was blamed for the bombings, but any overtly observant
Muslim was in danger of arrest.

Some of the convictions of the thousands of detained people were based on
anti-state activities like distributing religious material and proselytizing.
Others were on narcotics offenses, which human rights advocates and family
members denounced as spurious. In some instances, older men have been imprisoned
in what Interior Minister Zokiron Almatov described as a policy of fathers
paying for the sins of their sons.

Often the suspects are tried in groups of 10 to 15, with guilty verdicts
virtually certain. A Western diplomat who monitors the issue said he did not
know of a single instance in which someone has been found innocent.

Sentences have been harsh, sometimes including death.

Azim Khodjaev, a father of two, died in prison last year. His body showed signs
of severe torture, including extracted fingernails, said people who saw it. The
family of Jurakhon Azimov said that half of his face was smashed and that his
body was covered with bruises and razor-blade cuts. The official cause of death
was heart failure.

Furkhat Usamanov, 42, was convicted of possessing a Hizb-ut-Tahir pamphlet and
died in prison. People who saw his body said he was bruised severely, but the
authorities said he, too, died of heart failure.

There are no reliable figures on how many prisoners have died in custody, or how
many are held. Acacia Shields, the Tashkent representative of Human Rights
Watch, which monitors abuses worldwide, estimated that at least 4,000 had been
arrested; others put the figure at 5,000 or higher.

Reviews of court cases and interviews with families of inmates produced evidence
of torture, and Western diplomats have raised the issue with the Uzbek
authorities. Still, it is difficult to know how widespread the torture may be or
whether, as the families claim, drugs and other evidence are routinely planted
by the police.

Mrs. Nazarov came to an apartment near the center of Tashkent the other night,
bringing her young son and another woman. Other groups trickled in as darkness
fell and finally there were about 20 people.

A dozen have husbands or sons in prison. Several knew one another from
worshiping at Mr. Nazarov's mosque, and some were strangers.  The details of the
arrests and torture were remarkably consistent.

Mukhabat Deminova said her son, Bakhtiyor, 31, had been taken away with his
friends, whom he had known since school days. "They played football and went on
picnics," she said. "The police said they were planning a jihad, a holy war.
They were in court Oct. 2, and all 10 showed bruises and broken bones and nails
torn out."

Umida Azimova said her husband, Toyir Abdusamatov, had eluded the police for
several months and gave himself up after being promised amnesty. Instead, he was
convicted on anti-state charges and sentenced to 16 years, though he said in
court that he was tortured into confessing.

"He was taken to prison, and I will be able to see him only once a year for two
hours," she said. "So many people die in these prisons, and I am scared that he
could be murdered."

The most notorious prison is in Zhaslyk in western Uzbekistan, a place where
international monitors are forbidden. Prisoners have told their families that
they are confined to their cells 23 hours a day and spend hours squatting, with
their hands behind their heads. Whenever they move a limb, they are required to
recite their thanks to President Karimov, their relatives say.

Suraye Ergashev's husband, Tulkan, was an imam arrested after the February 1999
bombings and sentenced to six years for distributing religious tracts. His uncle
was sentenced to eight years for the same crime.

"After he was arrested, the militia didn't allow my children to go to school for
a month, and they registered everyone who came to visit us," Mrs. Ergashev said.
"I have to take my four children and go to the police every 10 days now."

Few devout Muslim women in Uzbekistan work outside their homes. They said that
they had little money and that the government refused to pay the assistance owed
to their children. They are ostracized, and some have been forced to attend
neighborhood rallies where they are denounced as traitors.

Last month, Mr. Karimov signed an amnesty for political prisoners, but it
excluded people convicted of crimes against the state, which covers the
religious inmates. Sultan Isokhodjaev went to the prosecutor who had convicted
his son, Abdu Rashid, and pleaded for help.

"He told me, 'If he killed somebody, maybe I could help, but not for this
crime,' " Mr. Isokhodjaev said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ASIA (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%);
TAJIKISTAN (79%); KYRGYZSTAN (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%);

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (90%);

COMPANY: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (66%);

ORGANIZATION: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (66%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UZBEKISTAN (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ASIA (92%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%);

 TAJIKISTAN (79%); KYRGYZSTAN (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%);   TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   RELIGION (94%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING
(90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%); TORTURE (87%); DISEASES & DISORDERS
(78%); CHILDREN (77%); QURAN & ISLAMIC TEXTS (77%); POLITICS (75%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (73%); TALIBAN (72%); CIVIL WAR (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); AL-QAEDA (71%);
CORRECTIONS (74%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%);

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Suraye Ergashev, left, a mother of four, says her husband was
sentenced to six years in an Uzbekistan jail for distributing Muslim literature.
(Staton R. Winter for The New York Times)

Map of Uzbekistan shows the location of Tashkent: Muslims in Tashkent have
accused officials of corruption.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              86 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

East Timor Violence Requires an Accounting, U.N. Official Says

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Page 29; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 537 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Nov. 23


The top human rights official for the United Nations voiced support today for
Indonesia's efforts to try the perpetrators of violence last year in East Timor,
but held open the possibility of convening an international tribunal if the
guilty were not brought to justice.

The official, Mary Robinson, high commissioner for human rights, said she
welcomed "the serious commitment of the attorney general and of the Parliament"
to bring to trial military and civilian suspects in the wave of violence that
swept East Timor after its people voted for independence.

But speaking after talks with Attorney General Marzuki Darusman on Jakarta's
progress in prosecuting, she said rights violators in East Timor could not
expect impunity.

"There has to be a real accountability once there has been a conviction for
serious offenses," Ms. Robinson said.

"There cannot be impunity for those who have been convicted for gross human
rights violations."

She added that it was important, first of all, that they be brought to trial,
and that the accountability be meaningful.

She also said she would not rule out convening an international tribunal to try
those behind the violence.

The Indonesian government has named 22 suspects -- several of them high-ranking
army officers -- in the violence that preceded and followed the United
Nations-supervised ballot in East Timor in August 1999.

On Nov. 6, the lower house of Indonesia's Parliament passed a human rights bill
that would enable the trial of past human rights abuses.

It provides for a maximum penalty of 25 years in jail for major rights
violations, including genocide and crimes against humanity.

Under the bill, any ad hoc rights tribunals set up to address rights cases would
first have to win both presidential and parliamentary approval.

Ms. Robinson also said her office would provide technical assistance in the form
of training for Attorney General Darusman's office.

That would enable Indonesian judges "to be fully trained to try cases involving
human rights violations," she said, adding that the assistance would also
include trips for Indonesian judges to the international tribunal at The Hague.

"I think it's very important, if a country is committed to establishing a human
rights court that meets international standards and is prepared to have the
training of judges to ensure that they fulfill their role," she said. "To me,
that is the best solution."

Mr. Darusman said the new court -- which would try cases involving four major
attacks and the murder of a Dutch journalist in East Timor -- would probably be
established in January.

Some 250,000 East Timorese fled or were forced from their homes during last
year's wave of terror and arson, blamed on militias raised and trained by the
Indonesian army, after the territory voted for independence from Jakarta.

Witnesses and rights activists have said the military either actively or tacitly
backed the pro-Indonesian militia in the deadly rampage in East Timor, a former
Portuguese colony that was invaded by Indonesia in 1975.

Hundreds of people were killed, and of the thousands who wereforced to flee to
neighboring West Timor, some 120,000 remain in squalid camps.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (91%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA (95%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); NETHERLANDS (79%);   JAKARTA,
INDONESIA (91%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (89%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(78%); LAWYERS (77%); ARMIES (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%); JAIL SENTENCING (72%); ARSON
(71%);   CORRECTIONS (77%);

PERSON: MARY ROBINSON (73%);

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              87 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

In Land Feud, Ruling Favors Greek Royalty

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 358 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, Nov. 23


The European Court of Human Rights ruled today that former King Constantine of
Greece and members of his family are entitled to compensation for palaces and
estates seized when he was dethroned three decades ago.

A panel of 17 judges at the court in Strasbourg, France, ruled 15-2 that the
confiscation of the royal family's property violated a portion of Europe's human
rights convention that guarantees property rights.

The court said it would examine the question of compensation for the former
monarch, his sister, Irene, and their aunt Catherine at a later date.
Constantine, 60, has lived in exile since he was deposed in 1967. The monarchy
was abolished in 1973, and Greece passed a law in 1994 confiscating the royal
properties.

Lawyers for the Greek government had told the court that the estates were never
the private property of Constantine and his relatives, and that they should
remain in government hands because they contain historical and archaelogical
sites.

The three properties at issue are the Mon Repos summer retreat on the island of
Corfu, an estate in Tatoi near Athens, the site of the royal cemetery, and real
estate in Polydendri in the foothills of Mount Olympus.

At a hearing in June, the deposed king's lawyers argued that he and his
relatives had indeed owned the disputed property as private individuals rather
than as royal family members. They asked for $1.4 billion in compensation if the
property was not returned. But Greece maintains that it wants to collect taxes
on the properties if the royal family wins a compensation award.

The Greek deputy foreign minister, Elisabet Papazoi, told Greek radio that the
former royal family owed $49.6 million in back taxes. She said that the
properties were worth about $464 million.

Constantine, who lives in London, lodged his complaint with the court (set up to
deal with allegations of violations of the 1950 European Convention on Human
Rights) in 1994, following passage of the law confiscating his property. A Greek
special supreme court upheld that law in 1997, which left the former king with
no avenue of appeal inside his former country.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GREECE (95%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (92%);

STATE: ALSACE, FRANCE (90%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%);

COMPANY: MOUNT OLYMPUS WATERS (55%);   EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (91%);
EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (91%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREECE (95%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (92%);   ALSACE, FRANCE (90%);
LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (89%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); APPEALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); PROPERTY LAW
(77%); TAXES & TAXATION (75%); LEGISLATION (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%);

 STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%);
CEMETERIES (52%);

PERSON: KING CONSTANTINE (94%);

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              88 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Palestinians And Right of Return

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

Re "Mr. Clinton's Mideast Peace Plan" (editorial, Dec. 27):

Do not be too quick to dismiss the right of Palestinian refugees to return to
the vicinity of their former homes, whether this is in Israel or a new
Palestinian state.

Legitimate security concerns must be addressed in a manner consistent with
internationally recognized human rights, including the right to return.
Compensation and resettlement packages negotiated by governments can offer
additional choices but do not extinguish this right.

Palestinian refugees should have real options, whether they choose to return, to
be integrated in the countries where they now reside or to resettle in other
countries. Redress for past injustices should not create new ones.

HANNY MEGALLY
Exec. Dir., Middle East
and North Africa Division
Human Rights Watch
New York, Dec. 27, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); MIDDLE EAST (93%); ISRAEL (93%);



COMPANY: NORTH AFRICA DIV (63%);   HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH

 (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL;   PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); MIDDLE EAST (93%);
ISRAEL (93%);

SUBJECT: PALESTINIANS  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); PEACE PROCESS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (68%);

PERSON: MEGALLY, HANNY  TZIPORA LIVNI (95%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (74%);
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (74%);

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              91 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Death Row Justice: View From Texas

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 163 words



To the Editor:

Texas not only leads the country in total executions (front page, Jan. 7), but
it is also the worldwide leader in putting juvenile offenders to death. In the
last decade the state carried out five death sentences against people who
committed crimes when they were below age 18, and it has scheduled three more
executions of juvenile offenders in the next two months.

The state has put itself at the forefront of a select group that includes Iran,
Nigeria, Pakistan and Saudi Arabia, the only countries other than the United
States that defy the international prohibition on executing juvenile offenders.

No one should be executed for crimes committed as a child. Governor Bush should
use his leadership to bring Texas in line with worldwide consensus and into
conformity with a basic principle of international justice.

MICHAEL BOCHENEK
Fletcher, Vt., Jan. 10, 2000

The writer is counsel, Children's Rights Division, Human Rights Watch.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PAKISTAN (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); NIGERIA (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (91%);

COMPANY: CHILDREN'S RIGHTS DIV (80%);   HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TEXAS;   PAKISTAN (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); NIGERIA
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);   TEXAS, USA (91%);

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT; CHILDREN AND YOUTH  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (91%);
JUVENILE CRIME (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); CHILD WELFARE (67%);

PERSON: BOCHENEK, MICHAEL

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              93 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

January 9-15;
Openly Gay in the Military

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 3; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 83 words


Britain unveiled a new code of conduct for its armed forces that ends its
practice of barring gay men and lesbians from the military. The government said
it had no choice after the European Court of Human Rights ruled last fall that
Britain's ban violated the basic human right to privacy. The code, which applies
to gays and heterosexuals, says "unacceptable social conduct," including sexual
harassment and overt displays of affection, will result in disciplinary action.
   SARAH LYALL


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (91%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); ETHICS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(87%); NEWS BRIEFS (86%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (85%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (84%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (83%);

PERSON: SARAH LYALL (57%);

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              94 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 20, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

DuPont Awards Focus on Foreign News

BYLINE: By BILL CARTER

SECTION: Section E; Page 3; Column 1; The Arts/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 533 words


With a strong emphasis this time on international reporting, the Alfred I.
duPont-Columbia University Awards for broadcast journalism were announced
yesterday, and many of the top honors went to prominent television journalists
for work ranging from South Africa to Eastern Europe to Rwanda.

Bill Moyers and his production company, Public Affairs Television, won the gold
baton, the duPont Awards highest honor, for a two-hour documentary on efforts by
South Africans to heal the wounds left by apartheid. The film was broadcast on
PBS.

Diane Sawyer and the ABC News program "20/20" won a silver baton for a report on
the neglect and abuse of handicapped children in Russian orphanages that are
little more than warehouses. The report was produced in cooperation with the
organization Human Rights Watch.

Bob Simon and the CBS News program "60 Minutes" also won a silver baton for
international reporting on what has been identified as the worst atrocity of the
war in Bosnia, the massacre of 8,000 Muslims by Serbs in 1995 in Srebrenica.

In another award for international coverage, the PBS series "Frontline" and its
PBS station sponsor, WGBH-TV, won a silver baton for a story of a far larger
massacre, the slaughter of 800,000 Tutsi by their Hutu enemies in Rwanda in
1994.

A small independent radio organization, Youth Radio in Berkeley, Calif.,
received honors for work with an international theme: broadcasting e-mail
exchanges between a schoolgirl in Kosovo and a California high school student
that documented the girl's struggles to stay alive in a deteriorating, dangerous
situation.

In the domestic area, Candy Crowley and CNN won a silver baton for their work
covering the impeachment of President Clinton, which was cited for intelligence
and fairness.

The television station KTVX in Salt Lake City won a silver baton for
investigative reports on the bribery scandal involving the Salt Lake City
Olympic Organizing Committee. The station's reporter, Chris Vanocur, did much of
the original reporting that created national interest in the scandal.

A regional cable news channel, New England Cable News, won a silver baton for
in-depth reporting on a range of regional issues.

Another television station, WTHR in Indianapolis, was honored for a series of
investigative reports revealing court-appointed guardians' abuses of an elderly
heiress to the Lilly pharmaceutical fortune.

The television station WMTW in Auburn, Me., and its reporter Christine Young won
a silver baton for investigative reports on a conservative lobbying group, the
Christian Civic League, which revealed violations of I.R.S. rules on funneling
its donations into campaigns against gay rights and abortion.

A radio production company, SoundVision of Berkeley, Calif., won an award for a
nine-hour series on National Public Radio covering a range of issues raised by
genetic research.

The PBS series "P.O.V." and its producer, Walter Brock, won a silver baton for a
portrait of Arthur Campbell, a disabled man fighting to live independently.

An independent producer, Stanley Nelson, won a silver baton for a 90-minute
documentary tracing the history and impact of black-owned newspapers.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: DUPP (PAR) (93%); DD (NYSE) (93%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS325510 PAINT & COATING MANUFACTURING (93%); NAICS325320 PESTICIDE
& OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (93%); NAICS325211 PLASTICS MATERIAL
& RESIN MANUFACTURING (93%); SIC2879 PESTICIDES & OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS
(93%); SIC2851 PAINTS, VARNISHES, LACQUERS, ENAMELS & ALLIED PRODUCTS (93%);
SIC2821 PLASTICS MATERIALS, SYNTHETIC & RESINS, & NONVULCANIZABLE ELASTOMERS
(93%); NAICS515111 RADIO NETWORKS (50%); SIC4832 RADIO BROADCASTING STATIONS
(50%);

COUNTRY: RWANDA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); EASTERN EUROPE
(73%);

STATE: UTAH, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); INDIANA, USA (79%);

CITY: SALT LAKE CITY, UT, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%);
INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (72%);

COMPANY: PUBLIC AFFAIRS (CO)  E I DU PONT DE NEMOURS & CO (93%); NATIONAL PUBLIC
RADIO INC (50%);   COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY  (91%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: PUBLIC AFFAIRS (CO)  COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY  (91%); COLUMBIA
UNIVERSITY (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH AFRICA;   RWANDA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (91%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(79%); EASTERN EUROPE (73%);   UTAH, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); INDIANA,
USA (79%);   SALT LAKE CITY, UT, USA (92%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA
(92%); INDIANAPOLIS, IN, USA (72%);

SUBJECT: NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA; AWARDS, DECORATIONS AND HONORS; TELEVISION;
DUPONT, ALFRED I-COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY AWARDS  JOURNALISM (91%); NEWS REPORTING
(90%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (90%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (90%); NETWORK TELEVISION
(90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); MOVIE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (89%); MOVIE INDUSTRY

 (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (89%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); WRITERS (78%); CABLE TELEVISION (78%);
TELEVISION NEWS SHOWS (78%); SPONSORSHIP (78%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (76%); CHILD
ABUSE (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%);
BIOETHICS (74%); SCANDALS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CONSERVATISM (72%); LGBT
RIGHTS (68%); IMPEACHMENT (68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (67%); RELIGION (67%); PUBLIC
RADIO (66%); LOBBYING (64%); DISABLED PERSONS (54%); BIOTECHNOLOGY & GENETIC
SCIENCE (50%); GUARDIANSHIPS (50%); ABORTION (50%);   CHILD RESIDENTIAL HOMES
(74%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%);

PERSON: CARTER, BILL; MOYERS, BILL  BOB SIMON (58%); DIANE SAWYER (58%);

LOAD-DATE: January 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                              95 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Groups Reconsider Bookings at Hotels Accused of Racial Bias

BYLINE: By SOMINI SENGUPTA

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 842 words


The Adam's Mark hotel chain, facing a federal racial discrimination suit, has
lost the patronage of two national organizations, and two other groups that had
booked rooms for national conferences are considering cancellations.

Last month, the Episcopal Church of America, which had planned to use the Adam's
Mark in Denver as its headquarters for a convention in July, canceled its
contract with the company. The Human Rights Campaign, a national gay and lesbian
political organization, has canceled a fund-raising dinner it had planned at the
Denver hotel later this month.  Officials with the Evangelical Lutheran Church
in America are discussing whether to continue to rent rooms at the Adam's Mark
in St. Louis for two huge youth conventions this summer. And the Organization of
American Historians has found itself divided by an unusually intense internal
debate over whether to proceed with its annual gathering next month, also in St.
Louis.

As one executive board member of the historians group, Kenneth T. Jackson of
Columbia University, put it, "This issue is causing many of us to lose sleep."

The federal suit accuses the hotel chain of charging black customers higher
prices than white customers and segregating them in less desirable rooms as part
of a corporate pattern of discrimination.

It is not clear to what extent the chain, which is based in St. Louis and has 21
large hotels in 13 states, will suffer financial losses, because each
organization that reneges on its contract, company officials insist, will have
to pay cancellation fees.

The Episcopalians stand to lose a hefty $1.2 million, or 3 percent of their
annual operating budget. But a church spokesman said its leaders were
unequivocal. "Given the church's public posture on racism issues," the
spokesman, Jim Solheim, said, "it would be a contradiction to stay in a hotel
that's part of that chain."

The stakes are arguably highest for the historians. Canceling the contract,
organization officials say, will cost them at least $425,000, about a third of
the group's operating budget. Making matters particularly difficult is the
urgency of a decision: the conference starts on March 30. Also, the question of
doing business with the Adam's Mark has unearthed a delicate dilemma for the
9,000 members of the group, many of whose leaders specialize in the study of
race. If the historians cancel their contract, they risk bankrupting their
treasury, but if they go ahead, some members insist, they stand to lose
something greater -- a longstanding reputation as scholars with a record of
civil rights leadership.

"This kind of division has not occurred before," said William Chafe, an
executive board member and dean of the faculty of arts and sciences at Duke
University.

Some conference speakers have pledged not to attend a convention at the hotel, a
few panels have already been canceled, and there has been talk of demonstrations
by people inside and outside the group.

Now, in a departure from its initial position, which was to proceed with the
convention as planned, the board plans to urge hotel executives to reach a
settlement agreement with the Justice Department, in a telephone conversation
scheduled for tomorrow. If the hotel does not agree, board members say they will
consider other options.

"If we go ahead with the convention we will be doing it under protest," David
Montgomery, the group's president and a professor emeritus at Yale University,
said in an interview. "We will be using the convention not only to pursue the
academic work to which we are devoted and which is the purpose of our existence,
but also to use it as a moment for public methods of teaching about the past,
present and future of racial discrimination in the United States."

The suit is the first to charge a national hotel chain with a companywide
pattern of racial discrimination. It was filed in December after the Justice
Department failed to persuade hotel owners to settle, an agency spokeswoman
said.

The federal case was prompted by a lawsuit filed by five black college students
who rented rooms at the Daytona Beach hotel last spring for an annual social
gathering called Black College Reunion. The plaintiffs complained that the hotel
overcharged them for rooms, required extra deposits to have their room
telephones turned on and forced them to wear orange plastic wristbands to
indicate that they were guests. Justice officials also contend that the company
had a policy to limit the number of minority patrons in its bars and
restaurants.

Fred Kummer, chief executive of HBE Corporation, which owns the chain, has
maintained that race had nothing to do with its policies. "It's 100,000 young
people trying to have a lot of fun," he said, referring to the reunion. "The
fact that they're black is absolutely incidental."

Julian Bond, chairman of the N.A.A.C.P., which joined the students' suit, said
his group had not called for a boycott but was encouraged that the groups
voluntarily considered not patronizing the hotels.

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7011 HOTELS & MOTELS (90%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: DENVER, CO, USA (57%);

COMPANY: ADAM'S MARK HOTEL & RESORTS; EPISCOPAL CHURCH OF AMERICA; HUMAN RIGHTS
CAMPAIGN; EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AMERICA; ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
HISTORIANS  ADAM'S MARK HOTELS & RESORTS (90%);   ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
HISTORIANS  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (83%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN
HISTORIANS (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (83%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY  (55%);
COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (55%);

ORGANIZATION: ADAM'S MARK HOTEL & RESORTS; EPISCOPAL CHURCH OF AMERICA; HUMAN
RIGHTS CAMPAIGN; EVANGELICAL LUTHERAN CHURCH IN AMERICA; ORGANIZATION OF
AMERICAN HISTORIANS  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN HISTORIANS  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS
CAMPAIGN  (83%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN HISTORIANS (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS
CAMPAIGN (83%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY  (55%); COLUMBIA UNIVERSITY (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   DENVER, CO, USA (57%);



SUBJECT: HOTELS AND MOTELS; BLACKS; DISCRIMINATION; SUITS AND LITIGATION  RACE &
RACISM (91%); RELIGION (91%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); HOTEL CHAINS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); HOTELS & MOTELS
(90%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); HISTORY (89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL
SCIENCE (88%); BUDGETS (86%); LITIGATION (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (78%);

 GAYS & LESBIANS (78%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FUNDRAISING (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); POLITICS (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (67%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (91%);

PERSON: SENGUPTA, SOMINI

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             100 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

IN BRIEF;
Commission Nominees

BYLINE: By ELSA BRENNER

SECTION: Section 14WC; Page 7; Column 2; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 134 words


From among a stack of more than 100 resumes, County Executive Andrew J. Spano
has nominated 14 residents to serve on the county's first Human Rights
Commission. The eight men and six women -- among them three African-Americans,
two Hispanics, an Irish-American and an Italian-American -- will review
complaints of bias and be empowered to fine violators of human rights laws as
much as $10,000.

Among those nominated -- and yet to be approved by the Board of Legislators --
are Chevon Fuller, a former civil rights prosecutor for the state Attorney
General's Office; Paul Redd, president and chief operating officer of the
Westchester-Putnam Affirmative Action Program; and Maria Gagliardo, an associate
professor of Spanish language and culture at Purchase College.   ELSA BRENNER




http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: WESTCHESTER-PUTNAM AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM (63%); PURCHASE COLLEGE
(63%); BOARD OF LEGISLATORS (63%); ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE (63%); HUMAN RIGHTS
COMMISSION (63%);

ORGANIZATION: WESTCHESTER-PUTNAM AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PROGRAM (63%); PURCHASE
COLLEGE (63%); BOARD OF LEGISLATORS (63%); ATTORNEY GENERAL'S OFFICE (63%);
HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (63%);

GEOGRAPHIC: WESTCHESTER COUNTY (NY);   UNITED STATES (95%);   NEW YORK, USA
(92%);

SUBJECT: FINES (PENALTIES); DISCRIMINATION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  CAUCASIAN
AMERICANS (90%); COUNTIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (88%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(88%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (88%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (82%); EXECUTIVES (73%);
APPROVALS (72%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (71%); LANGUAGE & LANGUAGES (70%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (65%);

PERSON: SPANO, ANDREW J (COUNTY EXEC); BRENNER, ELSA  ANDREW J SPANO (68%); ELSA
BRENNER (63%); MARIA GAGLIARDO (63%); PAUL REDD (63%); CHEVON FULLER (63%);

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             101 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Rebel Ambush In Chechnya One of Worst For Russians

BYLINE: By CELESTINE BOHLEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 769 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 1


As many as 32 Russian commandos were killed in Chechnya last Wednesday when
their convoy was attacked in a rebel ambush, the Defense Ministry said today.
Earlier reports had put the death toll at 7, with about 30 missing.

The deadly attack, one of the worst in a widening partisan war, took place as a
convoy of 41 elite Interior Ministry troops, on their way to the village of
Dargo, was attacked near Zhani-Vedeno, deep in the mountains of southern
Chechnya. Another group from Vedeno came to their aid, and many of them were
seriously wounded. Altogether, only five or six officers managed to break
through the ambush, according to various published reports.

The news agency Itar-Tass, quoting Viktor Medveditskov, a top Interior Ministry
official, said today that 32 bodies had been tentatively identified. According
to Interfax, quoting unidentified sources, only 19 bodies had been recovered in
the heavily mined terrain. One wounded man was found three days after the
attack.

The ambush was the second against an elite unit since an attack in the Chechen
capital, Grozny, against a unit from the Moscow region that left 20 dead. An
entire company of paratroopers, based in the city of Pskov, was wiped out early
last month in southern Chechnya, and 84 servicemen were killed.

At a news conference yesterday, Lt. Gen. Valery L. Manilov said the number of
servicemen killed in the north Caucasus had reached 2,036, with 6,076 wounded.
The figures include military and Interior Ministry troops killed last September
in the region of Dagestan after it came under attack by Chechen rebels, as well
as those who have died or been wounded in fighting in Chechnya.

"One shouldn't underestimate the enemy," said General Manilov, who not long ago
said the rebel forces were disorganized and hampered by a lack of communication.

The United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Mary Robinson, arrived
today in the region, on an inspection tour that will take her to detention
facilities where Russian troops have allegedly beaten and tortured Chechen
civilians. Mrs. Robinson has said she will investigate the evidence for alleged
human rights abuses committed by both sides in the six-month war.

Mrs. Robinson began today by touring refugee camps in neighboring Ingushetia,
where more than 200,000 Chechens have fled since the Russian military began its
campaign in their breakaway home region last fall.

Human rights groups and Western journalists have reported a series of atrocities
committed against civilians by Russian troops as they moved through Grozny and
other towns and villages in Chechnya to clear out rebel fighters. Human Rights
Watch, which last week documented 120 cases of civilians executed by Russian
troops, on Friday added another 7 to the list with a detailed report of
executions that it said took place in the village of Gekhi-Chu on Feb. 7.

Russia's conduct of the war in Chechnya is now being debated at the United
Nations Commission for Human Rights in Geneva, and will be taken up at the
parliamentary assembly of the Council of Europe on Monday.

President-elect Vladimir V. Putin, who has taken responsibility for the war,
which was started soon after he became prime minister last August, has said that
Moscow had to use military means to take back control of a region that had
become a haven for terrorists, bandits and kidnappers.

Today, Russian news agencies reported that experts were examining the body of a
hostage found in Chechnya which may be that of Maj. Gen. Gennadi Shpigun, the
Interior Ministry's representative in Chechnya who was kidnapped a year ago from
his car at Grozny airport.

The brazen kidnapping had a big impact in Moscow, where top officials --
including then Interior Minister Sergei V. Stepashin -- vowed publicly to use
any means necessary to get back their colleague.

In later interviews, Mr. Stepashin, who was briefly prime minister before Mr.
Putin, said the Shpigun kidnapping had led to preparations for a military
operation that was to occupy the northern half of Chechnya, and establish a
cordon sanitaire along the Terek River, which divides Chechnya roughly in two.

Sergei Yastrzhembsky, Russia's chief spokesman on Chechnya, said today that
forensic experts were examining the body retrieved in Chechnya, but that no
certain identification had been made. A German newspaper reported today that the
body believed to be that of General Shpigun had been found near the village of
Duba-Yurt, in the Argun gorge. According to Suddeutsche Zeitung, General Shpigun
had eluded his captors and frozen to death in the forest.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

COMPANY: INTERIOR MINISTRY (69%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERIOR MINISTRY (69%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); GROZNY (CHECHNYA); ZHANI-VEDENO
(CHECHNYA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%);   MOSCOW,
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);

 CIVIL WAR (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); REFUGEES (77%); JOURNALISM (77%);
TORTURE (77%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (72%); MOUNTAINS (71%); WRITERS (69%);
PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%);

PERSON: GENNADI SHPIGUN (68%); MARY ROBINSON (55%);

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             102 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Aide, in Chechnya, Urges Study of Abuses

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 293 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, April 4


Despite unusual restrictions placed on her tour of the ruined Chechen capital of
Grozny on Monday, the United Nations high commissioner for human rights, Mary
Robinson, said today that she had heard and seen "shocking" evidence of
extensive human rights atrocities by Russian military forces in Chechnya.

But she also reported a "constructive" ending to her trip, saying she had
received a pledge from Russian leaders to consider setting up an independent
national inquiry to investigate the accusations.

Asserting that "there must be a day of reckoning regarding the situation in
Chechnya," Mrs. Robinson indicated that Moscow was not likely to end its
isolation in the interntional community over its brutal campaign to subdue the
northern Caucasus without purging its own ranks of those troops and commanders
found to be guilty of atrocities.

Mrs. Robinson spoke at a news conference here after touring the parts of
Chechnya, Ingushetia and Dagestan affected by the war.

"I found it devastating to see Grozny and I was very affected by the depth of
misery and distress," she said.

In Nazran, the refugee center in Ingushetia, Mrs. Robinson said she met
witnesses who relayed "truly shocking accounts" of summary executions, rape,
looting and other attacks on civilians during the seven-month military campaign
by Russian forces.

Mrs. Robinson said that in a meeting with Foreign Minister Igor Ivanov, she had
urged the Russian leadership to consider "the importance of establishing an
independent, national commission of inquiry as a special measure that recognizes
the scale of human rights violations in Chechnya."

Mr. Ivanov, she said, indicated that Moscow was interested and that he pledged
to examine the proposal.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); CAUCASIAN STATES (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED
NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);
UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); CAUCASIAN
STATES (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%);

 MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);

 WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); ARMED
FORCES (77%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (77%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%); REFUGEES
(73%);

PERSON: ROBINSON, MARY; TYLER, PATRICK E  MARY ROBINSON (94%);

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             107 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Brazil Opens Files on Region's Abuses in Age of Dictators

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 974 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, June 8


Throughout the 1970's, the military dictatorships of South America organized a
secret program, known as Operation Condor, to kidnap and kill one another's
opponents. Now the democratic governments that succeeded them are joining
together, albeit tentatively and somewhat reluctantly, in an effort to untangle
the true extent and toll of that sordid collaboration.

The sudden burst of activity is the result of an Argentine judge's request, made
last year, for information about three Argentine citizens who disappeared here
when both countries were under military rule. To the surprise of almost
everyone, Brazil's highest court recently ordered that all documents relating to
the case and to Operation Condor be supplied to Argentine authorities.

According to historians and human rights groups, Operation Condor was a
cooperative effort that involved the military, the police and intelligence
forces of Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay. Each nation's
"apparatus of repression" exchanged information with its counterparts in
neighboring countries and kidnapped, tortured and killed guerrillas and other
exiles from those countries on behalf of its colleagues.

In Argentina, for example, at least 118 exiled Uruguayans, 51 Paraguayans, 49
Chileans and 9 Brazilians were "disappeared," according to tallies compiled by
human rights groups.

Operation Condor, named for the large bird that flies above the peaks of the
Andes, appears to have been a Chilean initiative, and interest in its activities
has heightened as a result of the judicial case against Gen. Augusto Pinochet,
that country's former dictator.

Fewer exiles were killed here than in Chile or Argentina. But Brazil's military
dictatorship began much earlier, in 1964, and recently unearthed documents
indicate that Brazil's security apparatus began training police and military
intelligence from neighboring countries as early as 1969.

The issue is one of particular interest to President Fernando Henrique Cardoso
and his cabinet. As Georges Lamaziere, the president's press secretary, noted
recently of the current administration, "a good number of its members were
victims of previous governments," including Mr. Cardoso himself, who spent
several years in exile in Chile and France.

"Fortunately, even though the memories are painful, we can regard this as a page
that has been turned but should not be forgotten," Mr. Cardoso said last month
in his first public comment on the matter. His government has also said that
Brazil would pay a $72,500 indemnity to the families of the three missing
Argentine leftists, who are said to have been executed here.

Rights groups, however, have complained that the Cardoso government has been
slow to produce documents that would clarify other incidents still being
investigated. Brazil's armed forces, backed by the minister of defense, Geraldo
Quintao, have said variously that requested documents never existed, that they
appear to have been destroyed, or that to make them public would violate a law
requiring that such records be kept secret for 30 years.

"I don't see why they should be opened," Mr. Quintao, a civilian, said last
week. "No country opens its intelligence archives immediately after the fact."

The inability of the armed forces to produce relevant records is surprising in
view of the spate of investigative reports that in recent weeks have filled the
pages of Brazilian newspapers and magazines. All of the accounts are based on
official documents that have been leaked to reporters, and some include detailed
interviews with former military officers who remember specific episodes of
cooperation with Argentine, Paraguayan and Uruguayan authorities.

None of the material that has come to light thus far indicates the direct
involvement of any American government agency in Operation Condor. But the
United States was clearly aware of the effort: the first known mention of
Operation Condor came in a 1976 cable from the American Embassy in Buenos Aires,
and American agents worked closely with security officials in the region, many
of whom had studied at the United States-run School of the Americas.

Lawyers and human rights groups, along with relatives of the disappeared who
want to make peace with the past, are eager to examine the Brazilian records.

Though Paraguay made public thousands of pages of police files in 1992, no
country involved in Operation Condor has yet opened its military archives for
inspection, and the originals of many documents are believed to have vanished.

Inspired by the Pinochet case and using the Paraguayan records and material
recently uncovered here, Brazilian and Paraguayan lawyers and human rights
groups are seeking to bring Gen. Alfredo Stroessner, Paraguay's former dictator,
to justice. Overthrown in 1989 after 35 years in power, General Stroessner now
lives in exile in Brazil, but an effort is under way here to have him expelled
or extradited to Paraguay.

The flurry of investigations has also revived speculation about the death of
Joao Goulart, who was president when the military seized power here in 1964.

Mr. Goulart died in exile in Argentina in December 1976 of what was officially
said to be a heart attack, but no autopsy was performed, and his family had only
limited access to his body when it was returned to Brazil for burial.

The Goulart family has always suspected that the former president may have been
poisoned or that someone tampered with his medicine, fears that have been fed by
the recent publication of a September 1976 document that shows the military here
was convinced that he was about to return to Brazil. In an effort to clarify the
circumstances of Mr. Goulart's death, a congressional inquiry has just begun,
and family members this week authorized the exhumation of his remains.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (56%);

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (98%); ARGENTINA (94%); CHILE (94%); PARAGUAY (92%); URUGUAY
(92%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); FRANCE (79%); BOLIVIA (79%);

STATE: ANDES (79%);

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (79%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: LATIN AMERICA; BRAZIL; ARGENTINA;   BRAZIL (98%); ARGENTINA (94%);
CHILE (94%); PARAGUAY (92%); URUGUAY (92%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%); FRANCE (79%); BOLIVIA (79%);   ANDES (79%);   RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL
(79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; OPERATION CONDOR; INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
KIDNAPPING; MISSING PERSONS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); TORTURE (78%);
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); MISSING PERSONS (75%); LIBERALISM (74%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); HISTORY (69%);   MILITARY
RULE (90%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; CARDOSO, FERNANDO HENRIQUE (PRES)  FERNANDO HENRIQUE
CARDOSO (66%);

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             110 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 937 words



EUROPE

AUSTRIA: EUROPEAN PANEL PICKED -- The European Court of Human Rights appointed
three men to a panel that will study Austria's human rights record and the
political nature of Jorg Haider's far-right Freedom Party, a step that seems to
be ending Austria's political isolation. They are diplomats from Finland and
Spain and a professor from Germany. France then indicated it was inviting
Austria's envoys to its Bastille Day celebrations, on Friday, and Belgium said
it was making a similar invitation for its national day.   Victor Homola (NYT)

BRITAIN: SPEAKER TO QUIT -- Betty Boothroyd, the first woman to be Speaker of
the House of Commons, whose cries of "Order! Order!" are familiar to television
viewers in Britain and abroad, announced that she will retire this fall. Ms.
Boothroyd, 70, a Labor Party lawmaker since 1973 and Speaker since 1992, said
"Be happy for me!" in response to groans of disappointment. She received a round
of applause, rarely heard in Parliament.   Warren Hoge (NYT)


GERMANY: PROTESTANT ADMISSION -- The Protestant church admitted it used forced
laborers in World War II and said it would pay $4.9 million to a $4.9 billion
compensation fund for Nazi-era victims. The acknowledgment came after
disclosures that from 1943 to 1945, 26 Protestant and 2 Catholic parishes in
Berlin ran a camp for about 100 forced laborers from eastern Europe and Russia
for work in graveyards. A Catholic spokesman said the church had no plans to
contribute to the fund.   Victor Homola (NYT)

GREECE: GERMAN PROTEST -- Germany lodged a protest with Greece as bailiffs,
guarded by the police, moved to assess the value of German property in Athens to
be seized and sold in compensation for the massacre of 218 Greek villagers by
Nazi forces in 1944. The properties include the Goethe Institute. The Supreme
Court sanctioned the move in an April ruling awarding $30 million to the
victims' families.   Anthee Carassava (NYT)

GREECE: ANTITERROR MESSAGE -- Greek television broadcast a message against
terrorism at noon as lawmakers and civil servants held a minute's silence in
tribute to terrorist victims. The message, reading "Terrorism is an insult to
Greeks, and a threat to Greece," comes a month after the assassination of Brig.
Stephen Saunders, Britain's top military envoy to Athens.
   Anthee Carassava (NYT)

SPAIN: BOMB WOUNDS 9 -- Suspected Basque rebels set off a car bomb in central
Madrid, wounding nine people. Callers saying they were from the Basque
separatist group E.T.A. warned authorities the bomb was to go off in 30 minutes,
but it exploded after 15 minutes, leading officials to believe the police
officers clearing the area were the intended target.   Benjamin Jones (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: ABORTION ALERT -- The police have warned abortion providers to be on
alert after a man entered the office of a Vancouver gynecologist who performs
abortions and stabbed him in the back. Dr. Garson Romalis was hospitalized after
he was attacked by a young man in his 20's whose face was obscured by a black
sweatshirt hood. In 1994 a sniper shot and wounded Dr. Romalis at his home.
James Brooke (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: GUERRILLAS STAY JAILED -- A Tel Aviv court ruled two Lebanese guerrillas
abducted and held for years as bargaining chips for a missing Israeli airman
should remain in jail for three more months, until the case is decided. The
court accepted government arguments that Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid of Hezbollah
and Mustafa Dirani of the Amal movement were a security threat. The state raised
the security issue after the Supreme Court ruled prisoners could not be held as
bargaining chips.   Joel Greenberg (NYT)

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: POLITICAL MERGING -- A month after the two leading white political
parties announced plans to merge, officials from the Inkatha Freedom Party, the
country's second largest black political party, said they would consider merging
with the governing party, the African National Congress. No formal decisions
have been made yet. But the suggested merger comes as parties position
themselves for local elections, scheduled for November.   Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)


UNITED NATIONS

U.S. PAYS DUES -- The United States paid some of its back dues to peacekeeping
operations, including $40 million for Kosovo and $53 million for East Timor. By
international agreement, Washington is billed 31 percent for every peacekeeping
mission, but Congress has ruled that 25 percent is the limit, and arrears
continue to build. United Nations accounts show the United States debt totals
$1.65 billion.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

ASIA

CHINA: COHEN VISITS -- Defense Secretary William S. Cohen met China's vice
president, defense minister and senior military leaders in the first of three
days of talks. Mr. Cohen had a friendly reception, reflecting China's desire to
patch up relations with the United States, though it expressed vehement
opposition to Washington's proposed national missile defense.   Erik Eckholm
(NYT)

PHILIPPINES: EUROPEAN PLEA -- Three European foreign ministers will press the
government in person to secure the release of hostages held by Muslim rebels,
Foreign Minister Hubert Vedrine of France said. Mr. Vedrine said he and Joschka
Fischer of Germany would team up today in Manila with Erkki Tuomioja of Finland
for meetings with officials and hostage negotiators. France, Germany and Finland
are the three European Union countries with citizens held captive on the
southern island of Jolo.   (Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); GERMANY (94%); SPAIN (94%); FRANCE (92%); GREECE (92%);
AUSTRIA (92%); FINLAND (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); CANADA (79%); BELGIUM (79%);

 EASTERN EUROPE (59%);

CITY: ATHENS, GREECE (92%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (94%); GERMANY (94%); SPAIN (94%); FRANCE (92%); GREECE
(92%); AUSTRIA (92%); FINLAND (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); CANADA (79%); BELGIUM

 (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (59%);   ATHENS, GREECE (92%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);
MADRID, SPAIN (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (90%);
TERRORISM (89%); APPOINTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TELEVISION
INDUSTRY (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); BASTILLE DAY (76%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT
(75%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); SUPREME COURTS

 (73%); CIVIL SERVICES (72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); WORLD WAR II (71%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (71%); BOMBINGS
(71%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); RELIGION (71%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (68%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (67%); APPROVALS (61%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (60%);   FORCED
LABOR (90%);

LOAD-DATE: July 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             111 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Kurds Warily Welcome Turkey's Changes in Human Rights Policy

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 444 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Aug. 18


Turkey's decision to end a 34-year holdout and sign two United Nations
conventions this week guaranteeing the social and political rights of minorities
was greeted with tempered enthusiasm among the country's Kurds.

Since 15 years of conflict between the army and Kurdish guerrillas ended last
year, Kurdish leaders in southeastern Turkey have been looking to the government
for progress on granting new rights to the region, including assurances that
Kurdish can be spoken freely and that young people can be educated in Kurdish.

Allowing the language to be used officially remains a sensitive issue for
Turkey, and Parliament can attach restrictions to the conventions before
ratifying them. But the government is intent on improving its human rights
record in hopes of joining the European Union, and better relations with the
country's 12 million Kurds is regarded as crucial, in part because the Kurds
have vocal political allies in Europe.

"Certainly it is a step of maximum importance for Turkey to sign these
conventions," Serafettin Elci, a Kurdish political leader and former government
minister, said. "However, what usually happens here is that the implementing of
the conventions doesn't take place. If they can manage to put these conventions
into practice this time, it will help Turkey in bringing tensions down and in
solving the Kurdish question."

The United Nations covenants date to 1966, and 130 countries have signed them.
The signers agree to protect freedom of speech, adhere to restrictions on
torture and forced migration, and promote economic and social rights of
minorities.

Volkan Vural, Turkey's ambassador to the United Nations, signed the agreements
in New York and said they signified the importance Turkey attributes to human
rights. Mr. Vural returns to a new post in Ankara next week to help oversee
Turkey's effort to join the European Union.

Turkey's Constitution does not recognize Kurds as a minority, defining them
instead as Turks. The government has argued that they have the same rights as
other citizens, while Kurds demand the right to use their language and culture
to maintain an ethnic identity.

The worst human rights abuses in recent years occurred in the predominantly
Kurdish southeastern part of the country, where the army fought a brutal war
with the outlawed Kurdistan Workers Party.

Since the cease-fire last year, the state of emergency has been lifted in most
of the region and police and military checkpoints have been relaxed. But human
rights advocates said the authorities had refused to loosen the tight rein and
Kurdish activists are still being arrested and tortured regularly.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); UNITED
STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN
UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (97%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(92%); UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);   ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);
ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: KURDS; KURDISH LANGUAGE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT  HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); POLITICS (89%);
CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ARMIES (89%); EUROPEAN UNION
(89%); TORTURE (88%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); LANGUAGE &
LANGUAGES (75%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%); ARRESTS (60%);   STATES OF EMERGENCY
(64%);

PERSON: FRANTZ, DOUGLAS

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             112 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

G.I.'s to Arrive in Nigeria This Week to Train Locals

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


The first American soldiers will arrive in Nigeria this week to train Nigerian
troops as peacekeepers for Sierra Leone, though there are concerns about
instructing troops from an army known for recent serious human rights
violations.

The American soldiers, who are being rushed to Nigeria to be there when
President Clinton arrives for a state visit on Saturday, will immediately start
training and equipping a Nigerian battalion of about 800 men, administration
officials said.

In all, several hundred Americans are set to train about 3,000 Nigerians, who
will then be sent to serve under the United Nations command in Sierra Leone,
where ruthless guerrillas have specialized in chopping off the limbs of civilian
victims.

But because Nigerian troops were accused by the United Nations and human rights
groups of summary executions of alleged members of the rebel group, the
Revolutionary United Front, and their civilian sympathizers last year,
administration officials said they are aware that training Nigerian soldiers
will not be easy.

The Clinton administration was criticized for its failure to provide serious
support for the United Nations peacekeeping mission when, despite a peace pact,
peacekeepers ran into trouble against the rebels in Sierra Leone earlier this
year. As a result, the Clinton administration recently decided to take a new
tack and help build a regional force to fight under the United Nations command.

The switch has been largely welcomed in Congress as a sign of backing words of
sympathy for Africa with some muscle. But some members have asked how the
American public would react if American-trained Nigerian troops, using American
equipment, commit serious rights abuses.

The rebels in Sierra Leone have proven themselves particularly vicious and are
skilled at using women and children as human shields, making the task for forces
fighting them extremely complex and creating the temptation for troops to kill
civilians in order to kill rebels.

A report last year by the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, detailed
some abuses by Nigerian troops in Sierra Leone, including the summary execution
of an 8-year-old boy for possessing a pistol, an execution at a major hospital
and other "summary executions of alleged rebels or rebel sympathizers."

A senior administration official who worked on the decision to send the American
troops said that there would be "a significant component" in training the
Nigerians that would emphasize the rules of war. Referring to the Nigerian
troops, he added, "The aim is not to detoughen them but to keep them legal."

The chairman of the House International Relations Committee, Representative
Benjamin A. Gilman, Republican of New York, said he was pleased that the
administration had decided to take an active role against the rebels. But, he
said, "In the past the R.U.F. has attacked women and children and used them as
human shields. Are we prepared for the prospect of U.S.-trained and equipped
forces facing that situation?"

White House officials said that Mr. Clinton was not planning to meet with the
American troops in Nigeria. A small contingent of about 14 American soldiers
will arrive in Nigeria from their base in Germany on Thursday. The training will
take place near Lagos, officials said, and Mr. Clinton will be in Abuja, the
glistening new capital.

It was decided not to bring the troops and their trainers to the capital as
"window dressing," an official said.

Indeed, much of the focus of Mr. Clinton's visit in Nigeria will not be on
Sierra Leone but on showing support for the new civilian leader, Olusegun
Obasanjo, who is trying to instill effective civilian control of the military.
Mr. Clinton will also focus on AIDS and emphasize that Nigeria is a good place
for Americans to do business.

The Nigerian Army's past human rights abuses in Sierra Leone presented "a
sensitive issue," an administration official said.

In the fight to save the Sierra Leone capital, Freetown, from being overrun by
the rebels in early 1999, Nigerian troops were known to have gone on a "rampage"
when one of their soldiers was killed, and soldiers had sought revenge by
killing civilians, the official said.

The Pentagon acknowledged the need to make training in human rights a part of
the mission, the official said, and one of the most important elements in the
American training would be to bring discipline to the troops.

"Fighting this war may not be too clean but we are going to make sure the troops
remain disciplined," the official said. The United Nations Security Council
recently strengthened the mandate of the peacekeepers in Sierra Leone, which
will help define the military goals of the Nigerians.

The Nigerian troops chosen to be trained by the Americans are being closely
monitored to weed out soldiers who have violated human rights, another official
said. This is being done by the American Embassy in Lagos in accordance with a
congressional measure sponsored by Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont.

The United Nations will monitor their activities in Nigeria, but the senior
United Nations representative in Sierra Leone, Oluyemi Adeniji, is a Nigerian.
That could make it difficult to get unbiased assessments of the Nigerian
soldiers, a State Department official said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (98%); UNITED STATES (96%); SIERRA LEONE (95%); AFRICA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (91%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NIGERIA; SIERRA LEONE;   NIGERIA (98%); UNITED STATES (96%); SIERRA
LEONE (95%); AFRICA (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (91%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  ARMED FORCES (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); CHILD
SOLDIERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PEACE PROCESS (54%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (52%);   LAW OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); OBASANJO, OLUSEGUN; PERLEZ, JANE  BILL CLINTON
(90%);

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             113 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 7, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Advance the Cause Of Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 225 words



To the Editor:

You reported (news article, Aug. 30) about Australia's reaction to criticism of
its policies by United Nations human rights monitors. Today, leaders from more
than 150 countries are gathered at the United Nations to discuss a wide range of
global challenges, especially the universal protection of human rights.

It is imperative that these countries commit to increasing support for critical
United Nations human rights monitoring activities, even in the face of
Australia's recent actions. It is unfortunate that Australia would react
defensively to issues raised by the committee that monitors the United Nations
Race Convention, which Australia ratified in 1975.

Prime Minister John Howard argues that democracies should not be the subject of
criticism because they have internal checks that ensure the enjoyment of human
rights in those societies. This argument undermines the concept of a universal
system in which all governments are scrutinized according to the same standard.

Because treaty bodies have no enforcement powers, their only function is to
assess how well governments are living up to the standards to which they agreed.
For a democracy to denounce a United Nations committee's findings only gives
abusive governments an excuse to bow out of the process.

JIMMY CARTER
Atlanta, Sept. 5, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AUSTRALIA (96%); UNITED STATES (64%);

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (64%);

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (64%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRALIA;   AUSTRALIA (96%); UNITED STATES (64%);   GEORGIA, USA
(64%);   ATLANTA, GA, USA (64%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; DISCRIMINATION
HUMAN RIGHTS (94%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
POLITICS (69%);

PERSON: CARTER, JIMMY  JIMMY CARTER (64%); JOHN HOWARD (58%);

LOAD-DATE: September 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             117 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 21, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

$8 Million Gift by AOL's Case Draws Protest

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 365 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 20


Gay rights advocates expressed concern today over an $8.35 million donation by
Stephen M. Case, the chairman of America Online, and his wife, Jean, to a
Florida school that is affiliated with a church that seeks to "cure"
homosexuals.

The school, which is Mrs. Case's alma mater, is the Westminster Academy in Fort
Lauderdale. It is a private Christian elementary and high school that was
established by the Rev. D. James Kennedy, a Presbyterian television evangelist
whose Coral Ridge Ministries advocates converting gay people to the heterosexual
lifestyle.

Mr. Kennedy's organization took out full-page newspaper advertisements two years
ago that challenged the idea that homosexuality is immutable and that gays merit
protection under anti-discrimination laws.

Elizabeth Birch, the executive director of the Human Rights Campaign, the
nation's largest gay and lesbian advocacy organization, on Thursday wrote to Mr.
Case expressing concern about the donation, a spokesman for the group said.

"The school is owned and operated by Coral Ridge Ministries, which is a
notorious anti-gay institution," said David Smith, a spokesman for the Human
Rights Campaign.

Repeated efforts to contact Mr. Kennedy or Westminster Academy officials were
unsuccessful tonight.

In a statement, Mrs. Case said the gift, which aides say was made more than a
year ago, was intended for campus improvements and financial aid "for
underserved youth in the Fort Lauderdale area."

The donation was not made to benefit the Coral Ridge Presbyterian Church or its
programs, she said. It was virtually identical to a gift Mr. Case sent to his
alma mater, Punahou school, a nonreligious school in Hawaii.

Aides to the Cases said the donation came from private funds, and not from the
$125 million Case foundation, which supports programs for poor youth.

"In no way was the gift intended to send a message of intolerance," Mrs. Case
said. "Steve and I strongly oppose discrimination in any form."

Mr. Smith said the gift was surprising because America Online has long been
supportive of gay rights. "They have excellent corporate policies and we want to
give them the benefit of the doubt," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: AOL (NYSE) (84%);

INDUSTRY: SIC7379 COMPUTER RELATED SERVICES, NEC (84%); SIC7375 INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL SERVICES (84%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%);

CITY: FORT LAUDERDALE, FL, USA (88%);

COMPANY: AOL INC (84%);   HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN  (83%); HUMAN RIGHTS CAMPAIGN (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   FLORIDA, USA (92%); HAWAII, USA (79%);   FORT
LAUDERDALE, FL, USA (88%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   GAYS & LESBIANS (94%); LGBT RIGHTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); MAJOR GIFTS (90%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); RELIGION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
MARKETING & ADVERTISING (75%); FOUNDATIONS (73%); EXECUTIVES (69%); NEWSPAPER
ADVERTISING (55%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (69%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(78%);

PERSON: STEVE CASE (92%); JAMES KENNEDY (75%); ADAM SMITH (58%);

LOAD-DATE: October 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             119 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 27, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Farmer Learns About Mexico's Lack of the Rule of Law

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1336 words

DATELINE: EL MAMEYAL, Mexico


Rodolfo Montiel, a farmer from this dirt-poor town up a lawless road in the
southern mountains, saw the forest around him being destroyed.

The cause, he said, was clandestine logging, financed by corrupt deals cut by
local political bosses in league with army officers. So two years ago, he and
100 friends and neighbors formed the Organization of Peasant Farmer Ecologists,
protesting against the deforestation of their land and the destruction of their
lives.

A violent reaction followed. The politically connected men who control the land
and their allies in the army, which polices this part of the world, have
apparently killed four of Mr. Montiel's friends, tortured others and struck fear
into the peasant farmers for miles around. No one has been prosecuted. No one
here expects that.

"This is a place were people can kill without fear," said Albertano Penaloza,
39, a farmer from nearby Banco Nuevo.

Mr. Montiel and a friend, Teodoro Cabrera, are in prison -- framed by the army,
according to the government's human rights commission, but convicted
nonetheless.

"Here there's no justice," said Jesus Sanchez, 37, who runs the local cantina.
"The strongest one, the one who can kill someone else, is the one who makes the
law."

This kind of tale can be heard all over Mexico. The lack of the rule of law is
"the theme that worries Mexicans most," said the nation's next president,
Vicente Fox Quesada. And that is "the most difficult problem that Fox will face"
when he takes office on Dec. 1, said a senior diplomat in Mexico City.

Members of the police and the military can bend and break the law without much
fear of punishment. Killing, torture, kidnappings and false arrests by
law-enforcement authorities are prominent features of the legal landscape,
charted in recent reports by the United Nations, the United States State
Department, the Organization of American States and human rights groups.

Mexican soldiers increasingly act as police officers. In the last two years,
Mexico's leaders have ordered at least 5,000 soldiers to take the place of
law-enforcement agencies that the government concedes are corrupt or
inefficient.

In southern states like Guerrero, they are often the only law enforcers and are
apparently all but immune from civilian justice.

Mexico's former governing party, ousted from the presidency by Mr. Fox after
seven decades, often used crooked police officers and corrupt courts to protect
its loyalists and punish its enemies. Many Mexicans now perceive the justice
system as little but a political tool.

In Guerrero, Mr. Montiel said in a jailhouse interview, justice is whatever the
politically powerful and their backers in the armed forces say it is. "They're
who people are afraid of," he said. "They have a lot of power. Because they have
made money from the wood, they can hire gunmen and pay off the government."

El Mameyal, a town of 400 people, stands far back in the soaring sierra, 40
miles up a very rough road from the Pacific Ocean, a long way from the modern
world. It has no running water, no plumbing, no school, one store and one
street, resembling a dry riverbed, trafficked mainly by pigs and chickens.

The richest people in town own a few cattle and scratch out a living selling
milk or cheese or meat or tacos. The poorest have almost nothing but the land
around them. By law, they own the land. In reality, it is being stolen.

In 1998, Mr. Montiel and his friends saw the land being systematically stripped
of trees. With the trees went their way of life. The denuded hills were eroding,
the arable land below was washing away, the springs that were the only source of
drinking water were choking.

What Mr. Montiel perceived has been confirmed by satellite photographs. They
show that 38 percent of the forest, 215,000 acres, around El Mameyal has
disappeared in eight years.

"People can see with their eyes that everything's being destroyed," said Jesus
Cortez, 32, El Mameyal's folk-singing bard, who has composed traditional songs
about the wasting away of the land.

Mr. Montiel's protests soon made him a target. First he and his wife, Uvalde,
were illegally searched by soldiers and robbed of their savings in the process,
she said. Death threats followed. They fled with their six children to Mr.
Cabrera's house in Pizotla. On May 2, 1999, soldiers burst into the house,
arrested Mr. Montiel and Mr. Cabrera and killed a friend of theirs, Salome
Sanchez, another farmer.

"There's been no investigation, there's been no justice, there's been no
consequences -- there's been nothing, nothing," said Mr. Sanchez's wife,
Hermalinda, 41.

The two arrested men were convicted in August of possessing drugs and guns --
despite the fact that the National Human Rights Commission found in July that
they had been framed. They were unarmed at the time of their arrest, the
commission found, soldiers planted guns and drugs on them, and they were
tortured into confessing. The judge who is weighing their appeal is widely
expected to rule in days.

Edgar Cortez, director of the Miguel Agustin Pro Juarez Human Rights Center in
Mexico City, the organization defending Mr. Montiel, said that throughout
Guerrero "soldiers are carrying out investigative work, taking on the role of
the police and prosecutors, a role that does not belong to the army."

The farmers' group is in disarray. A friend of Mr. Monteil here, Senso Figueroa,
38, said: "We live in fear of the law here. They can accuse us of anything."

The federal judge who convicted Mr. Montiel, Maclovio Murillo Chavez, said it
was an ordinary criminal case. "I see a lot of weapons possession cases," he
said in an interview. "They're all the same. The police testify that the accused
were in possession of a weapon. The prosecutors file an affidavit. And there is
always a confession."

Law-enforcement workers in Mexico regularly obtain information through torture,
and prosecutors use that evidence in courts, which accept confessions extracted
with the help of electric shocks, beatings or sexual abuse, human rights groups
say.

Amnesty International, which has named Mr. Montiel a prisoner of conscience,
says the torture and arbitrary detention that he experienced are widespread in
Mexico. The worst violators have been the federal and state judicial police, the
rights groups say.

President Ernesto Zedillo has conceded that is true. "Instead of preventing,
investigating, fighting crime," the judicial police have become "cruel and
dangerous criminals," more so "because of the impunity that follows their
actions," he said two years ago.

Mr. Fox's aides have proposed doing away with the judicial police and creating a
new national police force under a new federal prosecutor's office. A top adviser
to Mr. Fox, and a possible member of his cabinet, Jose Luis Reyes, a former
federal prosecutor, said the aim was to create "a true rule of law" in which the
police and the military would be "genuine protectors of society and not the
source of fear for its citizens."

The fear here has been growing since 1995, when 17 peasant advocates in Guerrero
were killed by the authorities in a military-style ambush. A commission formed
by the Supreme Court found that the governor of Guerrero had helped cover up the
killing. Nothing became of the accusation.

The fear became stronger after Mr. Montiel's arrest, when military patrols began
serving as the law in El Mameyal. Now a platoon of soldiers camps outside town,
its presence felt by every villager.

Mrs. Montiel, who now lives in Iguala, where her husband is imprisoned, said
even if he was freed, they would be afraid to return home.

Mr. Penaloza, the farmer, said: "We're losing our land. We're losing our lives,
and we don't even have anyone to complain to. We go to the local authorities,
and they say it's not their problem. And when we go to the governor, we have
even less chance of an answer. We sure won't get it from the president. Maybe
it's better for us to be quiet now."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO; MAMEYAL (MEXICO);   MEXICO (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);
MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%);

SUBJECT: FORESTS AND FORESTRY; LOGGING INDUSTRY; AGRICULTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; FARMERS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; POLICE; POLICE BRUTALITY
AND MISCONDUCT; DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS  POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); FORESTRY &
ENVIRONMENT (90%); ARMIES (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CORRUPTION (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); FORESTRY & LOGGING (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); TORTURE (89%);
LOGGING INDUSTRY (78%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (78%); DEFORESTATION (78%);
MOUNTAINS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
POLITICAL CORRUPTION (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (74%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (73%); MISCONDUCT (72%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); INTERVIEWS (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(67%); ARRESTS (63%); RIOTS (63%);   RULE OF LAW (90%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CORRECTIONS (72%);

PERSON: WEINER, TIM; FOX QUESADA, VICENTE  VICENTE FOX QUESADA (89%);

LOAD-DATE: October 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Albertano Penaloza, a farmer near El Mameyal, visiting a
clandestine logging site. "Maybe it's better for us to be quiet now," he said.
(Tim Weiner/The New York Times)

Map of Mexico highlighting El Mameyal: About 38% of the forest near Mameyal has
disappeared in 8 years.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             120 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 4, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Doctors Back Many Palestinian Accusations, but Not All

BYLINE: By WILLIAM A. ORME Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 899 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Nov. 3


An independent investigation into the past month's violence, reported today,
echoed many Palestinian accusations against Israel. Still, Palestinian officials
criticized the study for finding that one publicized Palestinian death was a
result of a traffic accident, rather than a killing.

The inquiry, by the Physicians for Human Rights, based in Boston, documents what
it said was a pattern of the Israeli Army's using live bullets to wound and
disperse unarmed rioters, a practice prohibited by army guidelines unless
Israeli lives are at risk.

But the army did not use exploding bullets or other internationally banned
ammunition, as Palestinian officials have contended, according to the American
forensic pathologists who conducted the investigation.

An examination of hundreds of Palestinian casualties also found that scores had
been killed or badly injured by rubber-coated steel bullets fired at close
range, another contravention of army rules, the report said. The army "used live
ammunition and rubber bullets excessively and inappropriately," the report said,
adding that soldiers "appeared to be shooting to inflict harm, rather than
solely in self-defense."

Although the investigation appeared to corroborate many Palestinian accusations
against Israeli forces, its findings about one contested case were angrily
dismissed by Palestinian officials and human rights advocates.

The death of Issam Judeh on Oct. 8 was a result of a traffic accident, as the
army had originally reported, rather than a killing by the army, as Palestinian
officials asserted, according to the doctors, who made an extensive study of
photographic evidence, X-rays, hospital reports, Mr. Judeh's clothing and his
damaged automobile.

Mr. Judeh's death had been the most widely cited example in Palestinian news
media of a killing by Israeli settlers and soldiers. The Ramallah hospital where
Mr. Judeh's body was taken said the body showed signs of torture, including
deliberate burns.

Photographs of the disfigured corpse were given prominence in Palestinian
newspapers and television reports. Israeli and Palestinian officials said anger
over Mr. Judeh's death led to the mob deaths of two Israeli soldiers in Ramallah
days later.

Dr. Robert Kirshner and Dr. Nizam Peerwani, forensic pathologists who have
studied torture deaths in Africa, the Balkans and Central America, said they had
found no indications of torture or burns. As is common in Muslim and Jewish
cultures, where burials traditionally occur shortly after death and marring the
body is frowned upon, there was no autopsy, and the available evidence showed
injuries consistent with an automobile accident, the experts said. Mr. Judeh's
wife found the body on a roadside near his damaged car.

"I don't think that the hospital was trying to mislead people," Dr. Kirshner
said in a telephone interview from Chicago. "I think it is because of ignorance
of the injuries, the lack of forensic training. You see this all over the world.
But what concerns me is that even after we told them it was an accident, some
officials continued to portray it as a murder."

Dr. Peerwani said in a telephone interview from Texas that he presented their
conclusions to Muzer Sharif, the Palestinian deputy health minister, who had
said Israelis had killed Mr. Judeh. But Mr. Sharif said tonight that without an
autopsy, the pathologists' report was simply speculative.

"We are still committed to what we announced," Mr. Sharif said. "We are fully
convinced that he was killed as a result of torture."

A private Palestinian rights organization, LAW, sent copies of the photographs
and medical records to a British forensic specialist, Dr. Christopher Milroy,
who also concluded that Mr. Judeh had died in a car accident. Abrasions had been
misinterpreted by Ramallah doctors as burns, Dr. Milroy said.

LAW, which also characterized the death as a slaying, has questioned Dr.
Milroy's finding, as well as the new report by the Physicians for Human Rights.

"What we received is an opinion, said Khader Shkairat, the director of LAW. "It
is not a report. "We are still committed to the version that he was killed
deliberately."

The examination into Mr. Judeh's death was part of a broader investigation that
included a detailed analysis of 31 deaths over 24 days in Gaza, including that
of Muhammed el-Dura, 12, whose televised killing became a global symbol of the
conflict.

Like most of the dead in Gaza, the boy, shot in the chest and abdomen, was
killed in Netzarim junction by high-velocity bullets from an M-16, the standard
Israeli Army rifle, the report said. Thirty-eight percent of the deaths were of
children younger than 18 and 14 percent younger than 15, the report said.

"Obviously, this is not a genocide, but in a setting of civil violence this is
tremendous amount of casualties," said Dr. Peerwani, whose research in Bosnia
and Rwanda has been used in war crimes prosecutions.

The Boston group said half the fatal gunshots in the Gaza cases that it studied
were to the head. The investigation was primarily based on hospital records,
including posthumous X-rays.

"Most Palestinian casualties were unfortunately shot in the upper body for the
simple reason that they committed shootings and terrorist acts against Israeli
solders and citizens," the Israeli Army said tonight in response to the report.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (57%); AFRICA (52%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%);

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

COMPANY: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS  (58%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (58%);

ORGANIZATION: PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS  (58%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
(58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL (96%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); UNITED STATES
(92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (57%); AFRICA (52%);   MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%);
BOSTON, MA, USA (92%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   INVESTIGATIONS (92%); ARMIES (90%);

 ARMED FORCES (89%); TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS (89%); FORENSICS (89%); CORONERS COURTS &
OFFICES (89%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (89%); AUTOPSIES (89%); TORTURE (89%); ACCIDENTAL INJURIES (89%); JEWS
& JUDAISM (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); RIOTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
PATHOLOGY (77%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%);

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (95%);

LOAD-DATE: November 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             122 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

PINOCHET'S ARREST ORDERED BY JUDGE

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Dec. 1


A Chilean judge formally charged Gen. Augusto Pinochet today in the kidnappings
of opponents after he overthrew the Socialist government of Dr. Salvador Allende
in 1973, and ordered him placed under house arrest.

The former dictator, who recently turned 85 and is ailing, remains many legal
steps away from spending time in prison. And before any trial can begin, he will
have to undergo medical tests and probably months of defense appeals.

General Pinochet was in a country house and might need to be transferred to his
home in the capital. Tonight, his lawyers said they would appeal for a stay to
the arrest order.

Nevertheless, the decision by Judge Juan Guzman Tapia, who under Chilean law
serves as prosecutor, to charge General Pinochet represents a major blow to the
man who has long claimed to have saved Chile from Communism. After months of
legal maneuvering and hundreds of criminal complaints, this was the first time
General Pinochet had been charged in his homeland. It is the most important
legal action brought against the 17-year dictatorship by Chile's judicial
system, which until recent years remained controlled by judges appointed by the
military.

The announcement was issued suddenly, without an expected interrogation of the
general and before an examination to ensure that he is fit to stand trial. But
an arrest order had been widely predicted since the Supreme Court stripped the
general of his senatorial immunity in August.

The arrest was cheered by human rights advocates, but the commanders of the
armed forces were meeting behind closed doors to consider the situation. They
continue to support their former leader, although more in words than in action.

"This decision is a huge step forward in the attempt to make Pinochet
accountable for atrocities committed under his rule," said Jose Miguel Vivanco,
a Chilean lawyer who heads the Americas division of Human Rights Watch. "It
helps re-establish the credibility of the Chilean judiciary, and it will help
push forward other cases."

The general has been the object of 177 criminal complaints in the last several
years by human rights groups, families of people who disappeared and torture
victims. The case against him began to gain currency in Chile only after General
Pinochet was arrested two years ago in London on a Spanish warrant. Last March,
he was allowed to return on the grounds that he was not healthy enough to stand
trial. But he has been besieged by legal problems since then.

The central case under investigation by Judge Guzman involves a death squad
known as the Caravan of Death, led by an important aide to General Pinochet in
the months after the United States-supported coup that overthrew President
Allende. The helicopter-borne squad traveled around northern Chile, picking out
political prisoners from military installations. The prisoners were never seen
again alive. Most of the victims were functionaries in Dr. Allende's government,
members of leftist parties or union leaders.

Judge Guzman has concentrated on the case because it offers a loophole in an
amnesty decreed while General Pinochet was in power to cover the most violent
years of repression. The bodies of 19 of the 74 people seized by the caravan
group have not been recovered, leaving Judge Guzman with the argument that the
missing people might be alive as the victims of kidnappings.

As a continuing crime, at least theoretically, the 19 kidnappings cannot be
covered by the amnesty, Judge Guzman has argued for two years.

Judge Guzman's interpretation was affirmed by high-level courts last year, while
General Pinochet was under house arrest in London. General Pinochet's supporters
say that the loophole is based on a lie, because it is clear that the victims
have long been dead, and that it signifies a politicization of justice.

"This is an aberration of jurisprudence," said Fernando Barros, a lawyer who has
spoken in defense of General Pinochet on a radio program. "Without even
questioning him, Pinochet is being put on trial."

A lawyer for General Pinochet, Pablo Rodriguez, accused Judge Guzman of
overstepping his powers and ignoring due process, saying that the arrest order
"expressly contravenes legal processes that he cannot ignore as a judge of the
republic."

Judge Guzman did not speak at length about his arrest order, but he told
reporters that he would also press a case that General Pinochet was the
"intellectual author" of the deaths of 55 people picked up by the caravan group
whose bodies were found in mass graves around northern Chile.

A government report has documented that 3,197 people died or disappeared in
political violence in the Pinochet years. Apart from 90 members of the security
forces, all are considered victims of the army, the police or paramilitary death
squads. Tens of thousands of leftists were tortured by the security forces.

The judge ordered the house arrest a week after General Pinochet had released a
partial and diffident admission of responsibility for excesses committed in his
government. "As a former president of the republic," he said in a taped message
released on his birthday, "I accept all the facts that they say the army and the
armed forces did."

But he added that many of the criticisms were based on propaganda.

The statement was part of an effort to appeal to the estimated one-third of the
population that still condones his rule.

Judge Guzman will probably next try to have General Pinochet examined to see
whether he is mentally fit for a trial. Family members say that a mental test
would be humiliating. They say the general is physically unfit to stand trial
after having suffered a series of strokes while being held in London. The
general, who recently recovered from pneumonia, also suffers from diabetes and
has a history of heart problems.

But Judge Guzman has argued that under Chilean law only mental disability can be
considered to avoid a trial.

General Pinochet faces other legal problems outside Chile. In October, Argentina
requested that Chile extradite him on suspicions that he was involved in the
car-bomb killing of a retired Chilean general in 1974 in Buenos Aires.

President Ricardo Lagos, the first Socialist to govern since the 1973 coup, said
from Mexico, where he was at Vicente Fox's inauguration, that the arrest was "an
expression of the strength of our democratic system."

                             --------------------


Spain Lawyers Praise Action

MADRID, Dec. 1, (Reuters) -- The human rights lawyers who led efforts to
prosecute Gen. Augusto Pinochet in Spain hailed a Chilean judge's decision today
to arrest and try him.

"It is a positive step for universal justice and the citizens of Chile to affirm
their independence and their ability to apply the law to the biggest criminal in
the history of Chile," said Joan Garces, a Spanish lawyer.

General Pinochet was arrested in Britain in October 1998 at the request of a
Spanish judge who wanted him to stand trial on charges including torture. He
eventually escaped prosecution here when Britain ruled him unfit for trial.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); PERU (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);   LIMA, PERU (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (98%); PERU (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);   LONDON,
ENGLAND (79%);   LIMA, PERU (59%);

SUBJECT: COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  ARREST WARRANTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); HOUSE ARREST (90%); COUPS (90%); JUDGES (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%);
LAWYERS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LIBERALISM (78%); POLITICS (78%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); ARMED FORCES (71%); TORTURE (69%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); ALLENDE, SALVADOR
(1908-73); GUZMAN TAPIA, JUAN (JUDGE)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (98%); JUAN GUZMAN TAPIA

 (91%);

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Augusto Pinochet on his 85th birthday last Saturday.
(Reuters)(pg. A5)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             124 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Rightist Squads in Colombia Beating the Rebels

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1665 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Dec. 4


They began as a gang of thugs backed by the once-powerful Columbian drug
cartels. But when the guerrilla war intensified, they evolved into
quasi-independent right-wing paramilitary squads that killed peasants suspected
of supporting Colombia's leftist rebels.

Now the paramilitary forces have demonstrated with alarming clarity that they
have become something else again: an army of combat-ready fighters that is
directly engaging guerrillas and winning wide swaths of territory.

The United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia, as the paramilitary groups are known
formally, or A.U.C. by the Spanish initials, are also gaining an important
degree of popular support from Colombia's middle class, say experts on the
conflict and government officials here and in the United States.

As the government tries to restart frozen peace talks this week, the right-wing
militias may well have a role in the process.

With 11,000 fighters, nearly double what they boasted a few years ago, and the
backing of landowners, businessmen and coca growers, the paramilitary forces
have beaten guerrillas on their own turf.

Through intimidation, massacres and, increasingly, direct confrontations, the
militias have tightened their hold on the northern provinces of Antioquia,
Bolivar and Cordoba and expanded into other regions, especially the coca-growing
strongholds in the south.

They have also thrust themselves into the roiling world of Colombian politics,
upsetting peace negotiations between President Andres Pastrana's administration
and the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, the nation's largest
rebel group.

Through savvy public relations efforts by its straight-talking leader, Carlos
Castano, and intimidation aimed at Colombia's establishment -- notably the
kidnapping of seven congressmen in October in a successful attempt to broker a
meeting with a top government official -- the paramilitary fighters have shown a
determination to be heard.

Military success is widely believed to be strengthening Mr. Castano's hand in
his quest for political recognition. Achieving military victory would make it
more difficult for the government to prosecute him and other paramilitary
leaders for war crimes if the conflict comes to an end. For the first six months
of this year, the government's ombudsman has reported that 512 unarmed civilians
were killed by paramilitary gunmen, compared with 120 killed by guerrillas.

Despite criticism from human rights groups, the public relations drive appears
to be working. A large group of congressmen and several influential Colombians
are publicly suggesting that the paramilitary units should have a role in the
peace talks, a possibility that others say could produce years of conflict
because of rebel opposition.

The debate comes as Colombia prepares to spend $1.1 billion in mostly military
aid from the United States and other Western allies to curtail coca production
in prime coca-growing regions like Putumayo Province in the south, an area where
guerrillas and the paramilitary units have been battling for control.

"They are an unquestioned reality," said Senator Miguel Pinedo, who was among
those kidnapped in October. "There's going to have to be a moment when they will
have to be a part of the negotiating table, either independently or together
with the rebels, but they have to be a part of it."

Phillip Chicola, director of Andean affairs for the United States State
Department, agreed recently in a radio interview here. The paramilitary forces
"are at some moment going to have to be part of a process," he said, "and I
think the government and Colombian society are going to have to decide how to
manage this issue."

Their growth can be attributed in part to the failure by the Pastrana
administration to advance the peace effort in the last two years. The government
is trying to resume talks before Thursday, when Mr. Pastrana must decide whether
to reclaim by force the Switzerland-sized swath of territory ceded to the FARC
guerrillas two years ago to lure them to the peace table. The talks have
sputtered, but the guerrillas control the land.

Max Alberto Morales, who has served as an intermediary between the government
and Mr. Castano, the paramilitary leader, said that Mr. Castano had been
prepared to allow the peace talks with the FARC to proceed but that Mr. Castano
had become concerned when the talks stalled, the FARC took control of a major
chunk of territory and guerrilla violence continued.

"We had hope for a year that the peace process would get rolling, but what
happened in that year is kidnappings became more common, roadblocks increased,
they began to hijack airplanes and people were taken from churches," Mr. Morales
said. "I think that all this touched the hearts of Colombians, and they said,
'We won't take this anymore.' For that reason the people in this country love
Castano so much."

Beloved or not, Mr. Castano has been quick to take advantage of the shifting
moods in Colombian society.

In two highly emotional televised interviews last spring, he cast himself as a
protector not of the large landowning class that has helped finance the
paramilitary forces, but rather of middle-class workers fearful of kidnappings.
"The ones who have no one to defend them are the middle classes," Mr. Castano
said. "The Self-Defense Forces are looking out for the interests of the middle
class."

After the interviews, a poll in El Tiempo, Colombia's most respected newspaper,
showed that 38 percent of those questioned said their image of Mr. Castano had
improved. Seventy-two percent said the paramilitary forces should take part in
the peace talks.

"Castano is the only Colombian who has the nerve to attack the guerrillas, and
that makes him the good guy," said Luis Jaime Cordoba, a Bogota teacher.

Mario Fernando Hurtado, a geographer, said he had come to agree with Mr.
Castano's logic after watching him on television. "He knows the reality of the
problems of the country, and though he justifies his actions with force, he's
convincing in his arguments," he said. "I'm not in accordance with many of his
methods, but in this country they're necessary, because having a peace dialogue
with the guerrillas when they're not interested doesn't make sense."

Colombia is a poor country, but its cities have large middle-class communities
that feel little kinship or connection to the peasant farmers in the countryside
who are most often the victims of the paramilitary units' violence. With
Colombia's unsteady political situation and a harsh economic downturn worsening,
the vacuum was open for Mr. Castano to step in.

"Against this backdrop of deepening chaos and the absolute lack of the rule of
law, then a charismatic and articulate individual has risen to the level of
leadership," said Bruce Bagley, an expert on the conflict at the University of
Miami who is worried about a deepening conflict if the paramilitary forces gain
political support.

"Carlos Castano, the fixture, the man, has found the right time for his
leadership to emerge as powerful and important in Colombia," he said. "He has
resonance among important sectors in Colombian society."

Mr. Castano has also expanded his forces' reach into sparsely populated regions
where they had only occasionally operated in the past, notably Putumayo Province
along the Ecuadorian border.

"It's remarkable, from a military perspective, that he's been able to push into
new areas without any concern about his rear flanks," said Robin Kirk, who has
interviewed Mr. Castano for her work as the Colombia researcher for Human Rights
Watch.

"He's able to project a force way beyond his base of strength, which is northern
Colombia, and he has the E.L.N. on the ropes, and that is very new," she said,
referring to the National Liberation Army, the second-largest leftist guerrilla
group, by its Spanish initials.

In Putumayo, the paramilitary fighters have so unnerved the FARC in a series of
brutal entanglements since September that the rebels responded by closing off
the province's roads.

The FARC's tactics have created an embarrassing crisis for the Pastrana
administration, because it is in Putumayo that much of Plan Colombia, a
multibillion-dollar effort backed by the United States to root out drug
trafficking, is focused.

Mr. Castano's efforts to push deep into Putumayo are aimed at controlling the
region's lucrative coca production. It remains unclear if the paramilitary
forces have been able to gain the upper hand in the conflict there, but a top
State Department official said intelligence reports showed that "at a minimum
they've held their own against men who've had a full run of the place."

Human Rights Watch and other human rights groups insist that the paramilitary
forces should not be allowed into peace talks until the government fully
investigates their connections to the military, which the rights groups accuse
of having provided munitions and tactical support to the paramilitary units. A
Human Rights Watch report in February showed that half of Colombia's 18
brigade-level army units had links to paramilitary units.

"They have to disappear as an armed force and submit themselves to justice,"
said Senator Jaime Dussan, an outspoken opponent of including the paramilitary
units in the talks. "How can we give amnesty to those who have killed, those who
have massacred?"

Still, even among those who have aggressively pushed for the government to rein
in the paramilitary fighters, there is a sense that it may be too late, that the
right-wing forces have grown so large and independent that they cannot easily be
disbanded.

"Today, the paramilitaries have grown too much," said German Martinez, the legal
officer in Puerto Asis who has investigated paramilitary killings in Putumayo.
"It is a monster created by the state, but now it's at the point where it's free
of the state. It's a lion that the state controlled, but it has freed itself,
broken away."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (73%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (71%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (57%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (71%); UNITED SELF-DEFENSE
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
(73%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (94%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); PEACE PROCESS (89%); REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); FARM
LABOR (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMIES (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (74%); CARTELS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (71%); POLITICS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); PUBLIC
RELATIONS (64%);

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN  CARLOS CASTANO (78%); ANDRES PASTRANA (64%);

LOAD-DATE: December 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The United Self-Defense Forces, a right-wing paramilitary
group, is gaining popular support from Colombia's middle class, officials and
experts say. A paramilitary chief gave orders to his troops in the Jamundi
region southwest of Bogota last summer. Carlos Castano, below, is the group's
national leader. (Photographs by Associated Press)

Map of Colombia shows the location of Putumayo Province: Putumayo Province, a
coca-growing region, is a battleground for guerrillas and paramilitary forces.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             126 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Needed: A World Criminal Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 140 words



To the Editor:

Re "A World Criminal Tribunal" (editorial, Dec. 13):

There is another reason why President Clinton should sign the International
Criminal Court treaty.

To prevent unwarranted prosecutions of Americans, the United States government
has secured numerous procedural safeguards, although its efforts to exempt
Americans altogether from the reach of the court have rightfully been rejected.
Today, Washington's best remaining strategy would be to help shape the culture
of the court in its critical formative stage to ensure scrupulous respect for
due process.

Short of ratifying the treaty, for now a political impossibility, the best way
for Washington to do that would be to embrace the court through the president's
signature.

KENNETH ROTH
Executive Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, Dec. 13, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT  (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT  (91%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(83%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (98%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; TREATIES; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS  INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);

 LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); DUE
PROCESS (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); EXECUTIVES (72%);

PERSON: ROTH, KENNETH; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (72%);

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Sergio Ruzzier)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             127 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Burmese Sales To the PX Are Provoking Rights Protest

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 753 words


A Pentagon agency that runs stores on American military bases imported $138,290
in clothing made in Myanmar at a time when the Clinton administration had banned
new investments in that country, documents show. While such purchases are not
illegal, they violate the spirit of the administration's economic sanctions,
critics in Congress and in human rights groups are saying.

Shipping documents show that the agency, the Army and Air Force Exchange
Service, imported the clothing from Myanmar, the former Burma, in October when
the administration was stepping up its criticism of human rights violations by
the country's military government.

Human rights groups, labor activists and Cynthia A. McKinney, a Georgia Democrat
on the House Armed Services Committee, have criticized the agency, saying that
its imports of goods helped prop up Myanmar's military.

"This is obscene," said Maureen Aung-Thwin, director of the Burma Project at the
Open Society Institute, a New York-based foundation pushing for democracy in
Myanmar. "For the Pentagon to support this illegitimate military junta is
absurd, especially when the nation's official foreign policy is to help end the
repression there."

But Fred Bluhm, a spokesman for the Army and Air Force Exchange Service, which
had $7.3 billion in sales last year at its 1,400 stores, said: "We're aware of
the sanctions against Burma, but they have nothing to do with the sale or
purchase of goods or services. What they have to do with are new investments,
which we're not involved with."

In 1997, President Clinton announced a ban on new investment in Myanmar,
following a law that required sanctions if the military there engaged in "large
scale repression." The Clinton administration has not prohibited trade with
Myanmar although it has often discouraged Americans from doing business with
that country.

In obtaining goods from Myanmar, the Army and Air Force Exchange Service
followed a strategy embraced by many American apparel companies, which, seeking
to benefit from low-wage labor, have greatly increased imports from that
country. Some studies have found that Myanmar's apparel workers earn just 8
cents an hour, making them among the world's lowest paid manufacturing workers.

In the first nine months of this year, American apparel companies imported $308
million in goods from Myanmar, more than double the level in the same period a
year earlier.

An administration foreign policy official criticized the exchange services'
imports from Myanmar, saying, "It's not consistent with the spirit of the
administration's policy, which is very confrontational toward the regime."

The documents showing that the Army and Air Force Exchange Service imported
goods from Myanmar were obtained from the National Labor Committee, a New
York-based labor rights group that seeks to improve factory conditions overseas.

The documents show that the exchange service had about 10,000 pounds of garments
made by the Newest Garment Manufacturing Company sent from Yangon, formerly
Rangoon, to Los Angeles, arriving Oct. 19. The documents did not specify what
garments had been sent.

When President Clinton announced the ban on investment, he said he was seeking
to deny any economic support to Myanmar's regime. The military refused to
recognize the 1988 election victory by the opposition party and its leader, Daw
Aung San Suu Kyi, the Nobel Peace Prize winner, who has been under house arrest
for 6 of the last 11 years.

Two weeks ago, the president awarded the nation's highest civilian honor, the
Medal of Freedom, to Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi. Her son accepted the award.

Several days earlier, four Senators -- Jesse Helms, Republican of North
Carolina; Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky; Tom Harkin, Democrat of Iowa;
and Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont -- wrote to President Clinton to urge
him to ban all apparel imports from Myanmar as a way to advance Mrs. Aung San
Suu Kyi's efforts to restore democracy.

They wrote, "The 1997 U.S. sanctions law on new investment in Burma primarily
was clearly intended to deprive the Burmese military junta of funds with which
to perpetuate human rights abuses and ethnic cleansing campaigns and to pressure
the junta into commencing a dialogue with Suu Kyi's political party and ethnic
minorities. Unfortunately, the new surge in apparel exports to the U.S.
undermines the spirit of that law, allowing the regime to enrich itself and take
advantage of unsuspecting American consumers."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE  (56%); OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (56%);

ORGANIZATION: OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE  (56%); OPEN SOCIETY INSTITUTE (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MYANMAR;   MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (96%);   NEW YORK, USA
(92%);

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; APPAREL;
UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
MYANMAR-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; APPAREL; INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD
MARKET  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); IMPORT TRADE
(90%); ARMIES (90%); CLOTHING LABELS (89%); AIR FORCES (89%); APPAREL MFG (89%);

 MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%);
US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); GARMENT WORKERS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); WAGES & SALARIES (74%); FACTORY WORKERS (74%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (74%);

 FOREIGN POLICY (71%); SALES FIGURES (70%);   MILITARY RULE (78%); MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (74%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); GREENHOUSE, STEVEN  BILL CLINTON (79%);

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             129 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Pact Against Oil Company Abuses

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 498 words


Oil and mining companies do not have the luxury of relocation. They often find
themselves working in poor and violent places where protecting a mine or
pipeline is a challenge. Occasionally the security forces hired by American or
European corporations have gone too far. In the Indonesian province of Irian
Jaya in the mid-1990's, military men hired as guards at Freeport-McMoRan's
Grasberg gold and copper mine were accused of killing civilians. The security
forces contracted by British Petroleum in Colombia, Shell and Chevron in
Nigeria, among other companies, have been accused of similar abuses.

This week these corporations, along with Texaco, Conoco and the Rio Tinto mining
company, signed an agreement with the British and American governments and human
rights groups on standards for security. The pact is a modest step toward
reducing a major source of abuses committed by corporations in the third world.
For now, compliance is voluntary, and the only penalty for violation is public
exposure by human rights groups and journalists. But at least the companies have
endorsed rules that can be used to measure their behavior.

In general, the companies agreed to use their influence to see that their
security forces respect human rights. For example, they will attempt to ensure
that people implicated in abuses are not hired as guards and that security
forces respect local residents' rights to free assembly and collective
bargaining. Perhaps the most controversial provision of the agreement says that
companies should report human rights abuses to the host government and urge
investigations and measures to prevent a recurrence. Most corporations have long
resisted speaking up on human rights, fearing it would hurt their business.

It is no coincidence that countries with oilfields or gold mines frequently
suffer from repressive regimes, political instability or guerrilla forces.
Sudden wealth from natural resources can become a curse, distorting the economy,
fostering corruption or financing wars that are little more than a grab for the
minerals. Too often the drilling has spoiled the local environment and given
little back to the people who live nearby, thus breeding unrest. Oil drilling in
Nigeria's delta region is an example.

While the agreement has been signed by some of the businesses most burned by bad
publicity about their behavior in the past, it does not include some major
American companies, among them Unocal and Exxon Mobil. Unocal has been accused
of benefiting from the repression by government forces at a gas pipeline in
Myanmar. Exxon Mobil is beginning work on a pipeline through Chad and Cameroon
where the possibilities of abuse are rife.  Nor does the pact address the larger
question of whether oil and mining companies should be working with some
governments at all. While companies cannot control where oil is found, they
should refrain from exploiting those resources when to do so produces misery as
well as energy.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: RIOS (BRU) (58%); RIO (NYSE) (58%); RIO (LSE) (58%); RIO (ASX) (58%); BP
(NYSE) (58%); BP (LSE) (58%); FCX (NYSE) (57%); XOM (NYSE) (51%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS324110 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (58%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (58%); NAICS212221 GOLD ORE MINING (58%); SIC1041 GOLD
ORES (58%); NAICS212210 IRON ORE MINING (58%); NAICS212112 BITUMINOUS COAL
UNDERGROUND MINING (58%); NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES
(58%); NAICS331410 NONFERROUS METAL (EXCEPT ALUMINUM) SMELTING & REFINING (57%);

 NAICS213114 SUPPORT ACTIVITIES FOR METAL MINING (57%); NAICS212234 COPPER ORE &
NICKEL ORE MINING (57%); NAICS212222 SILVER ORE MINING (57%); SIC3341 SECONDARY
SMELTING & REFINING OF NONFERROUS METALS (57%); SIC3331 PRIMARY SMELTING &
REFINING OF COPPER (57%); SIC1081 METAL MINING SERVICES (57%); SIC1044 SILVER
ORES (57%); SIC1021 COPPER ORES (57%); NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING
(51%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); INDONESIA (92%); NIGERIA (92%); COLOMBIA (79%);
MYANMAR (79%); CAMEROON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CHAD (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: RIO TINTO GROUP (58%); BP PLC (58%); FREEPORT-MCMORAN COPPER & GOLD INC

 (57%); EXXON MOBIL CORP (51%);   FREEPORT-MCMORAN INC (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); INDONESIA (92%); NIGERIA (92%); COLOMBIA (79%);

 MYANMAR (79%); CAMEROON (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); CHAD (79%);   NEW YORK,
USA (92%);

SUBJECT: OIL (PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE; EDITORIALS; THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES; MINES AND MINING  MINES & MINING (91%); COPPER MINING (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (90%); PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS (90%); OIL & GAS EXTRACTION (89%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION
(89%); OIL EXTRACTION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); NATURAL RESOURCES
(79%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (79%); GOLD MINING (78%); NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); CORRUPTION (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%);

 DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (74%); JOURNALISM (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (71%);
HOMICIDE (71%); ARMED FORCES (56%); COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (50%);

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             133 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Indonesian General Denies Guilt in Timor Abuses

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 591 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 1


Indonesia's most prominent general denied today that he was responsible for
human rights abuses in East Timor and sidestepped a suggestion by President
Abdurrahman Wahid that he resign.

"As a soldier, I am going to continue to fight to reveal the truth," the
general, Wiranto, declared, relaxed and smiling at a news conference.

He said he had not yet read a report by an Indonesian human rights commission,
issued on Monday, that placed him at the top of a list of 33 officers and
civilians responsible for a wave of violence and destruction in East Timor last
year.

The former Portuguese colony voted for independence in August after nearly a
quarter-century of occupation by Indonesia.

"What I know about the report I learned through the television and the
newspapers," he said. "There are a few things that I do not like and do not
agree with."

He said he had done his best to try to curb a wave of terror carried out by
military-backed militias after East Timor's vote on Aug. 30 to break away from
Indonesia. He said the commission "does not care about this positive activity at
all."

The release of the report and the likelihood of prosecutions by the attorney
general raised fears of a backlash by the disgruntled military. The stock market
and the Indonesian currency, the rupiah, faltered slightly today in reaction to
the news, although most political analysts here doubt that the military will
move against the government.

Sounding typically confident, President Wahid, who is on a trip abroad, brushed
aside the speculation on Monday and said General Wiranto should resign from his
cabinet post as coordinating minister for political and military affairs.

The general, who was chief of the armed forces during the violence in East
Timor, responded today by saying he would wait to talk with Mr. Wahid when the
president returns to Jakarta in two weeks.

Defending his record in East Timor, the general said he had sent extra troops to
maintain security, had arranged for rival groups to sign peace treaties and had
declared martial law when the situation worsened.

His critics have said much of that activity did not amount to a sincere effort
to halt the abuses of local militias, which were created, armed and guided by
the Indonesian military.

General Wiranto, who like many Indonesians uses one name, has retained prominent
human rights lawyers to defend him. His chief lawyer, Adnan Buyung Nasution,
attacked the report today, saying, "There is no evidence, no witnesses and no
documents to show that Wiranto has done anything wrong."

The report and the general's legalistic defense are themselves encouraging signs
that Indonesia is taking steps toward normalizing the role of the politically
powerful military, several analysts said.

In Tokyo, the speaker of Indonesia's Parliament, Amien Rais, said: "You couldn't
imagine two years ago Mr. Wiranto being sacked by a civilian leader. Now, I
think Mr. Wiranto and his colleagues understand very, very well that democracy
always demands that the military is subordinated under the civilian."

At a meeting of international aid donors in Jakarta today, Jean-Michel Severino,
the World Bank's vice president for Asia, said, "There is a new sense of
optimism that Indonesia can indeed resume the path of real development led by a
democratic and transparent government and based on a competitive and just
economy."

But he added a warning: "The events of the past year have also taught us how
fragile these political and economic gains can be."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (99%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); JAPAN (64%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (89%); TOKYO, JAPAN (64%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EAST TIMOR; INDONESIA;   INDONESIA (99%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); JAPAN
(64%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (89%); TOKYO, JAPAN (64%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INDEPENDENCE
MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; SUSPENSIONS,
DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); POLITICS (89%);
LAWYERS (86%); RESIGNATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); PRESS CONFERENCES (71%); WITNESSES (70%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (51%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (50%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(50%); PEACE PROCESS (50%);   MARTIAL LAW (78%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; WIRANTO (GEN); WAHID, ABDURRAHMAN (PRES)

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             135 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

An African Pinochet

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 517 words


Even as British courts ponder whether the former Chilean dictator Augusto
Pinochet should be excused from trial in Spain on human rights charges because
he is medically unfit, the enduring legacy of his case has been demonstrated on
another continent. Last week a Senegalese court indicted the exiled former
dictator of Chad, Hissene Habre, on torture charges. It was the first time that
a former African head of state had been charged with human rights violations by
a court in another country, and it opens a welcome new chapter in the evolution
of international criminal law.

The case against Mr. Habre grew out of a criminal complaint filed by
international human rights groups and Chadian survivors of torture. It
represents the first application of the most important legal precedents
established in the Pinochet case, namely that former heads of state no longer
enjoy impunity for crimes against humanity, and that they can be brought to
trial in any country on the basis of "universal jurisdiction" for such crimes.
The court placed Mr. Habre under house arrest in the Senegalese capital, Dakar,
where he has lived since he was ousted from power in 1990. A trial could begin
later this year.

During Mr. Habre's eight-year rule in Chad, his notorious secret police killed
thousands of opponents -- the exact number is still unknown -- and tortured many
more. The United States helped install Mr. Habre in power and supported him
through much of his rule as a buffer against the Libyan leader, Muammar
el-Qaddafi. Mr. Habre was finally removed from office by the current president
of Chad, Idriss Deby.

Mr. Habre is but one of several exiled tyrants who, under the Pinochet
precedent, could one day face justice. Idi Amin of Uganda is in Saudi Arabia.
His less notorious but no less wanton successor, Milton Obote, is in Zambia.
Paraguay's Alfredo Stroessner is in Brazil. Haiti's Jean-Claude (Baby Doc)
Duvalier is in France. The former Ethiopian tyrant Mengistu Haile Mariam is in
Zimbabwe.

It is particularly welcome that an African dictator will be tried in Africa. No
continent has paid more dearly than Africa for the absence of legitimate
institutions of law and accountability and a resulting culture of impunity.
Ideally, Mr. Habre would be tried in Chad itself, but the government of Mr.
Deby, replete with former allies of Mr. Habre and with a record of its own
abuses, has made no effort to bring its former dictator to trial. Senegal is one
of the few countries in Africa that has a credible independent judiciary.

This case will be another test of the ability of the world to fashion an
effective system of accountability for mass atrocities. Considerable progress
has been made over the last decade with the establishment of international
criminal tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, an agreement to
establish a permanent International Criminal Court and the indictments of
General Pinochet and Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia. But bringing people to
trial is harder than indicting them. That is why the trial of Mr. Habre will be
so important.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHAD (96%); SENEGAL (94%); AFRICA (93%); SPAIN (92%); CHILE (92%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); RWANDA (79%); PARAGUAY
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); UGANDA (79%); HAITI (79%);
ZAMBIA (79%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); FRANCE (52%);
LIBYA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHAD; SENEGAL;   CHAD (96%); SENEGAL (94%); AFRICA (93%); SPAIN
(92%); CHILE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); ETHIOPIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); RWANDA
(79%); PARAGUAY (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); UGANDA (79%);
HAITI (79%); ZAMBIA (79%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); FRANCE
(52%);   LIBYA (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS

 HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); JURISDICTION (78%);

 CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HOUSE ARREST (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
ARRESTS (73%); POLITICS (70%);

PERSON: HABRE, HISSENE  HISSENE HABRE (93%);

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             137 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Adjourns Treason Trial of Kurdish Rebel

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 258 words

DATELINE: ANKARA, Turkey, Feb. 23


A Turkish court today opened and quickly adjourned a second trial against
Abdullah Ocalan, the Kurdish rebel leader who is already on death row for
treason and separatism.

Judge Ihsan Akcin adjourned the trial until April 24 in the case against Mr.
Ocalan, his estranged wife, Kesire, and 99 other members of his organization.
All of the accused face death for separatism. Judge Akcin said the court must
learn the whereabouts of 82 of the defendants before the trial can continue.

Mr. Ocalan was sentenced to death in June. His lawyers fear that the new charges
could increase pressure in Turkey to hang him. The first trial was based on
charges related to the armed insurgency of Mr. Ocalan's Kurdistan Workers Party,
which peaked in the early 1990's. The current charges relate to events before
the 1980 military coup in Turkey, a period when guerrillas were working to
recruit members and fill coffers.

Turkey was named as a candidate to join the European Union in December, but
European Union countries have said Turkey cannot be accepted if Mr. Ocalan is
hanged.

Parliament must approve any death sentence in Turkey. The government has
postponed debate on Mr. Ocalan's execution until the European Court of Human
Rights reviews his appeal. Turkey has not executed anyone since 1984.

Since his capture by Turkish commandos early last year, Mr. Ocalan has called on
his fighters to lay down their weapons and pursue a peaceful campaign for
Kurdish rights. Earlier this month, the group announced an end to its armed
rebellion.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); EUROPE (91%);

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  (83%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS  (55%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  (83%); EUROPEAN UNION (83%); EUROPEAN COURT OF
HUMAN RIGHTS  (55%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); EUROPE
(91%);   ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: KURDS; TERRORISM; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (92%); TREASON
(91%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); SENTENCING (78%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS
(78%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); COUPS (73%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (69%); ARMED FORCES (68%); TERRORISM (59%);   EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION
(77%);

PERSON: OCALAN, ABDULLAH  ABDULLAH OCALAN (94%); IHSAN AKCIN (67%);

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             139 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Turks Debate Human Rights And Links With Europe

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, March 22


Three months after Turkey was offered a chance to join the European Union, the
country is caught up in a fervent debate over whether it should make the
profound political changes necessary for membership.

The government, press and military command all seem consumed by this debate. Its
vigor suggests that the battle for Turkey's soul that has been under way at
least since the republic was founded in 1923 may be reaching a new level of
intensity.

Some influential Turks, backed by European leaders, say their country must
radically improve its human rights record, repeal limits on free expression and
give more cultural rights to Kurds in the impoverished southeast. But others
fear that these changes would expose the country to separatist terror, religious
fundamentalism and other dangers.

Hardly a week now passes without some sign of this conflict. Every decision that
touches on issues of concern to Europe is considered a test of the government's
will.

The next such test may come on Thursday, when the country's most prominent human
rights advocate, Akin Birdal, is to be imprisoned. Mr. Birdal has been convicted
of making subversive speeches, but he has many friends in Europe who would be
angered by his imprisonment. His lawyers have asked that he be allowed to remain
free as long as he needs medical care for the effects of a 1988 assassination
attempt.

Turks have been trying to pry their way into the European Union for years,
convinced that membership would guarantee them generations of prosperity and
democracy. Their efforts have been repeatedly blocked by conservative Europeans
who believe that Turkey does not qualify to join their club culturally,
economically or politically.

But last December, the union finally reversed itself and made Turkey an official
candidate for membership, setting off ecstasy here.  One Istanbul newspaper
pronounced it "the most important event since the founding of our state."

Turkish leaders enthusiastically took up the task of proving themselves ready to
join Europe. Officials pledged to repair ties with Greece, curb human rights
abuses and launch ambitious privatization and inflation-fighting programs.

Suddenly, however, it has become clear that powerful forces in Turkish society
consider the compromises they must make to join the European Union too high a
price even for so great a prize.

"We Don't Want Your E. U.!" screamed a recent headline in one right-wing Turkish
newspaper. No prominent Turks have yet voiced such a sentiment, but some
security officers, prosecutors and others apparently share it. Rather than
openly express their opposition to Turkey's European dream, they have begun
taking steps to undermine it.

"They seem to be everywhere," lamented a European diplomat posted in Ankara who
has spent years trying to nudge Turkey and Europe closer. "Within every leading
personality in this country is a nationalist impulse that seems to be becoming
stronger and more suspicious."

Perhaps the most vivid example of the government's conflicting impulses came
last month, when the mayors of three mostly Kurdish cities were arrested on
charges of supporting terror. The arrests were widely interpreted as a victory
for hard-liners, and they seriously hurt Turkey's image in Europe. A week later,
after pro-European forces carried out a bureaucratic counterattack, the mayors
were released and allowed to resume their posts.

Soon afterward, former Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan was sentenced to a
one-year jail term on charges growing out of a speech he made in 1994. European
leaders who believe the sentence violates Mr. Erbakan's right to free speech are
closely watching his appeal, as well as a separate case aimed at banning his
Islamic-oriented political party.

The law under which Mr. Erbakan was convicted forbids "incitement to hatred by
observing differences of class, race, religious creed or origin." Some prominent
Turks are calling for the law's repeal on the grounds that it is vague and
anti-democratic. But a leading prosecutor, Vural Savas, warned that repeal
"would seriously damage the fight against subversion."

Government officials are considering a variety of steps that would please the
European Union, from abolishing the death penalty to reopening the long-closed
land border with Armenia. But conservatives resist such proposals, fearing they
will endanger Turkey's security and stability.

Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit says he strongly supports his country's drive for
membership in the European Union, but he has also complained about what he says
are unreasonable demands. "The E. U. countries have a plan to put us under
harsher pressure than before," Mr. Ecevit said. "We won't be part of this game."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (96%); EUROPE (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); GREECE
(79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (73%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%); ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (93%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (93%); EUROPEAN UNION (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (96%); EUROPE (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(94%); GREECE (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (73%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (92%); ANKARA,
TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION; KURDS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (90%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
PRIVATIZATION (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CONSERVATISM
(77%); POLITICS (77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (77%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (72%); FUNDAMENTALISM (69%); LAWYERS (65%); ASSASSINATION
(52%);   EUROPEAN UNION ACCESSION (90%);

PERSON: KINZER, STEPHEN; BIRDAL, AKIN  NECMETTIN ERBAKAN (57%);

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             140 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD;
Pinochet's Revenge: Oliver North, You'd Better Watch Out

BYLINE: By JAYSON BLAIR

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1138 words


IMAGINE that the year is 2005 and that Oliver North, the retired Marine
lieutenant colonel and former National Security Council staff member in the
Reagan White House, is on trial in Lebanon. He has been arrested while
vacationing in Switzerland on an international murder warrant issued by Lebanon.
The charge is that he helped direct the 1986 bombings of Libya that killed 31
people.

Libya had long sought his arrest, but in the end it was a Lebanese judge who
obtained it, by joining the case and requesting that the Swiss authorities
detain Mr. North and then extradite him to stand trial in Beirut on charges of
crimes against humanity and aggression.

Imagine further that Mr. North is then convicted and the headline in one
American newspaper roars: "Military Aide to Reagan Convicted of Murder for
Official Act."

The events have not happened, of course, but international legal experts say
that in the wake of the near-extradition of Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile to
Spain, it is no longer so hard to imagine a situation in which a former high
American official could be arrested while traveling and then tried in any
foreign country, for crimes alleged to have been committed anywhere in the
world.

Notwithstanding the notion, the likelihood that any nation would be so brazen is
another matter. Issuing an indictment as a propaganda ploy is one thing; indeed,
Libya has one out already on Mr. North. But these days, following through on it
could subject the Libyans to far more than a writ of habeas corpus.

That is because a law of force still operates in the world, and it is not hard
to imagine another set of headlines: "U.S. Demands Release of North; Economic
Sanctions Threatened; Warships Maneuver."

Still, it is worth considering what might happen to someone like Mr. North when
thinking about the recent rulings -- and precedents set -- in the Pinochet case
by the British House of Lords. In 1998 General Pinochet, in London for medical
treatment, was arrested after a judge in Spain issued an international warrant
based on charges related to his actions while he was the leader of Chile. The
Lords ruled that he was not immune from prosecution.

If the British home secretary, Jack Straw, had not freed General Pinochet
earlier this year because of his deteriorating health, he would have had to face
trial in Spain on charges of torture and political killings during his 17-year
rule in Chile.

Widely praised by human rights organizations, the rulings have more quietly
raised some eyebrows among former American officials who now wonder whether they
too could some day be extradited -- let us say, if the United States lost its
position as the world's sole superpower -- and tried any time any judge in the
world accuses them of human rights violations.

In an interview, Mr. North said, "It limits my travel to certain countries."

It has some legal experts asking: Could Henry A. Kissinger be put on trial
overseas as an architect of policy during the Vietnam War, which included
bombings of Cambodian villages and intensive bombings of Hanoi?

What about President George Bush or his secretary of state, James A. Baker III?
Could they be held responsible for deaths tied to economic sanctions related to
the Persian Gulf war in Iraq? Or what about President Clinton? After he leaves
office, could he face trial for the bombings of a factory in Sudan that was
mistakenly believed to be a chemical weapons plant?

Some Congressional Republicans have argued against the expansion of
international criminal courts, which they say could hamstring American leaders
who fear being prosecuted after they leave office for official acts they
committed. The legal rulings in the Pinochet case rejected an argument that the
general was immune from prosecution by virtue of his official status, and legal
experts say the case also expands the power to criminally prosecute certain
human rights violations -- that occur anywhere -- to the courts of every nation.

"What we have done is restricted the travel opportunities for people like Henry
Kissinger, Wesley Clark and Bill Clinton," said Michael Byers, a professor of
international law at Duke University. "We have reduced their options in
traveling to rogue states and their allies."

Robert Vieteretti, the managing director of Kroll Associates, the New York-based
international security firm that provides personal protection, said his company
is now much more concerned "with a country's laws, its alliances and anything
our clients may have done to anger those nations."

Privately, some former American officials said that the F.B.I. has warned them
not to travel to some countries, including some in Europe, where there is a risk
of extradition to other nations interested in prosecuting them.

For now, Professor Byers says that former American officials do not need to
worry "unless they are foolish enough to travel to some place like Iraq."
Experts say that the reason is simple. If, as the saying goes, to the victor go
the spoils, so too with history: the triumphant get to tell the story of what
happened and to name the heroes, the pardonably mistaken and the villains when
the conflict has ended.

"The political reality is that it is very remote," said Jonathan Charney, a law
professor at Vanderbilt University and the editor of the American Journal of
International Law. "Why? Because we are the superpower. It would be dangerous
for another country to do that economically, politically and otherwise."

In an interview last week, Mr. Kissinger said he believed that the "very
complicated" issues surrounding the Pinochet rulings needed further study. But
he added that he was not concerned. "I don't think the well-known people are as
much in danger," he said. "I certainly don't worry."

But Mr. North said that all it would take would be the slightest change in the
political winds.

GENERAL PINOCHET was supported by the British when he was their ally in the war
against Argentina over the Falkland Islands. "Here is this person who aided and
abetted their cause, helped bring about democracy," Mr. North said. "And now
because of this political sea change in Great Britain, now the country is going
to turn him over to a third-party country to have him prosecuted. That's
disgusting."

Patricia Derian, the first assistant secretary of state for human rights, said
she could foresee the day when American officials would be prosecuted for acts
similar to those that might be attributed to Mr. Baker, Mr. North or Mr.
Kissinger.

"It is a stretch right now with the current rules of war and diplomacy, but I
think it is going to come," said Ms. Derian, a Carter appointee. "It would be
interesting to see what would happen if Kissinger went to Cambodia, or they just
put out an international warrant for his arrest."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (94%); CHILE (94%); SPAIN (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (92%); SWITZERLAND (91%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (67%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);



GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; SPAIN;   UNITED STATES (94%); LEBANON (94%); CHILE (94%);
SPAIN (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); SWITZERLAND (91%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%);
BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (67%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-SPAIN; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  ARRESTS (91%); EXTRADITION
(91%); MURDER (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); ARREST WARRANTS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); NEWS BRIEFS (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HABEAS
CORPUS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); JUDGES (77%); INDICTMENTS (77%); TORTURE
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); INTERVIEWS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
IMMUNITY (72%); BOMBINGS (71%); MILITARY VESSELS (69%); NAVAL VESSELS (69%);
BRITISH PARLIAMENT (66%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (66%); POLITICS (60%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: BLAIR, JAYSON; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN)  RONALD REAGAN (92%); JACK STRAW
(50%);

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lt. Col. Oliver North in traveling mode in 1986. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             141 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Conservationists Under Siege

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 693 words


Some of the world's most dedicated human rights activists have started as
campaigners for the environment. Ken Saro-Wiwa's initial cause, for example, was
the devastation that Royal Dutch/ Shell's oil spills inflicted on Ogoni land in
Nigeria's delta region. As the dictatorship fought back, he found himself taking
on more traditional human rights battles -- for the rights of the Ogoni, against
the military's burning of delta villages and its shooting of protesters and,
finally, against the sham judicial process that led to his execution in 1995.

In many countries, environmental activists are finding that the line between
their causes and human rights has blurred. To protect the environment, they need
both the right to speak out and fair enforcement of the law. Many are enduring
the harassment that human rights activists have long experienced.

The best-known examples are in Russia. The domestic intelligence service -- the
heir to the K.G.B. -- has tried to silence scientists and naval officers who
document the radioactive pollution emitted by decommissioned nuclear submarines.
The service has spent years harassing Aleksandr Nikitin, a former Soviet
submarine captain who wrote about the problem. Although Mr. Nikitin apparently
used entirely public sources and has been acquitted of espionage, he could still
face more prosecutions. His case goes to Russia's supreme court later this
month.Acting President Vladimir Putin has supported the crackdown on
environmentalists, whom he has accused of spying for foreign countries.

In other nations, the activities most likely to incur the wrath of governments
or powerful groups are protests aimed at large, lucrative projects -- such as
oil production in Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon and Ecuador, toxic waste dumping in
Cambodia, logging in Kenya and Mexico and new dam construction in China and
India.

The activists tend to emerge from the same isolated communities that suffer most
from pollution. Typical is Rodolfo Montiel, a peasant who organized small
farmers in rural Guerrero State, Mexico, against the clear-cutting of local
forests, which was threatening their harvests and way of life. In May, he and a
bystander were arrested and charged with weapons possession and drug
trafficking.

Amnesty International and the Sierra Club, which have begun a joint campaign to
draw attention to the persecution of environmentalists, say the two men were
tortured into confessing. The arrests are part of a pattern in Guerrero. Five
years ago, 17 unarmed peasants protesting logging were shot by the state's
judicial police. Another member of the peasant organization was reportedly
abducted at gunpoint last month.

The interest and intervention of large environmental organizations is especially
helpful to rural activists, who usually lack the connections enjoyed by their
urban counterparts. What makes the rural activists particularly vulnerable is
that they live in out-of-the-way places that happen to be rich in the very
resources that governments and powerful interests hope to exploit. For that
reason, they can get in the way of a lot of money. To most developing nations,
the economic promise of forests, mineral deposits or oil and gas outweighs
environmental concerns. Such projects can also produce a river of graft for
government officials.

European and American groups like Amnesty International and the Sierra Club can
also play an important supporting role. Many of the oil and gas companies, as
well as the big customers for foreign timber and minerals, are based in the
industrialized world. These companies, in turn, can influence how the
governments they work with treat environmental dissidents. The worldwide
opprobrium heaped on Shell for its failure to help Mr. Saro-Wiwa has sensitized
corporations to the public relations costs of silence.

The next test is in Chad, where a consortium led by Exxon Mobil is about to
drill, and Cameroon, where the pipeline will lead. Amnesty International and the
Sierra Club say that several people who have raised environmental concerns have
been threatened and silenced, even though digging has not yet begun.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: RDSA (LSE) (91%); RDSA (AMS) (91%); RDS.B (NYSE) (91%); RDS.A (NYSE)
(91%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS447110 GASOLINE STATIONS WITH CONVENIENCE STORES (91%);
NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (91%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM &
NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (91%);

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (93%); MEXICO (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); INDIA (79%);
KENYA (79%); CHINA (79%); CAMEROON (79%); CAMBODIA (79%); CHAD (79%);

COMPANY: SIERRA CLUB; AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  ROYAL DUTCH SHELL PLC (91%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (59%); SIERRA CLUB (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%);

ORGANIZATION: SIERRA CLUB; AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (59%);
SIERRA CLUB (59%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NIGERIA (93%); MEXICO (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); INDIA (79%);
KENYA (79%); CHINA (79%); CAMEROON (79%); CAMBODIA (79%); CHAD (79%);

SUBJECT: ENVIRONMENT; EDITORIALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (93%);
ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (91%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (91%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); FORESTRY & ENVIRONMENT (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
COMMUNITY ACTIVISM (89%); LOGGING INDUSTRY (88%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (86%);
FORESTRY & LOGGING (86%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); MILITARY VESSELS
(76%); NAVAL VESSELS (76%); NAVIES (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (75%); OIL SPILLS
(72%); ESPIONAGE (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%);
SUPREME COURTS (70%); FARM LABOR (70%); ARRESTS (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (68%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (67%); HAZARDOUS WASTE (67%); WEAPONS
DECOMMISSIONING (66%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (65%); ACQUITTAL (65%); FARMERS &
RANCHERS (64%); INFRASTRUCTURE (51%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (51%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (50%); CONSTRUCTION (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (86%);

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (55%);

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             145 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Forum on Torture Hears of U.S. Efforts to End Police Brutality

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 554 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 10


In its first report on its compliance with the United Nations Convention Against
Torture, the United States today defended its efforts to eliminate any such
practices, including police brutality and inmate abuse, which human rights
advocates maintain are regular occurrences in America.

The United States, like the 117 other countries that have signed the 1984
convention, is obliged to detail to the body's review committee every four years
incidents of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment of its
citizens and to describe the steps taken to stamp out such practices.

Although the United States ratified the convention in 1994, this was its first
report to the United Nations committee monitoring compliance. Still, Harold H.
Koh, the assistant secretary of state for human rights, told the committee that
the 74-page report "makes clear our unequivocal and unambiguous condemnation of
torture as a tool of governmental policy."

Human rights groups disagreed. On Tuesday, Amnesty International filed its own
45-page report with the torture committee that described specific cases that it
said violated the international pact.

Since 1994, Amnesty officials said they had documented "numerous instances of
the torture or ill treatment of men, women and children by U.S. police or
custody officials as well as cruel, inhuman and degrading prison conditions,"
and mistreatment "disproportionately directed at racial and ethnic minorities."

Such incidents are "fast becoming institutionalized across the country," said
William F. Schulz, executive director of Amnesty's United States branch.

Mr. Koh conceded today that there are "continuing areas of concern within the
United States."

"Although our commitment is unambiguous, our record is not perfect," he told the
committee. "Torture does not occur in the United States, except in abberational
situations and never as a matter of government policy. When it does occur, it
constitutes a serious criminal offense."

The American report acknowledges that there have been instances, "and in some
cases even patterns or practices of" police abuse, brutality and unnecessary or
excessive use of force, that included tear gas, pepper spray, stun guns, stun
belts, police dogs, handcuffs and leg shackles.

The report also listed racial bias and well as sexual abuse of prisoners by
guards and other prisoners as problem areas, along with lack of police
accountability, overcrowded prisons and confinement of children in substandard
or abusive correctional facilities.

Frank admissions of possible treaty violations before the United Nations
committee are unusual, but this did not spare the American officials from
extensive questioning. The committee's chairman, Peter Thomas Burns, a Canadian
law professor, labeled the reported use of stun guns and belts by federal
marshals "quite alarming." This was particularly true, he said, because they can
be set off accidentally and administer a substantial voltage and serious pain.

Mr. Koh insisted that no legal cases had been brought to substantiate any
charges of deaths or serious injuries to prisoners as a result of stun belt use.
The belts are used only in transporting dangerous prisoners, he said. Misuse of
stun guns by local police departments can be challenged in court, he added.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (79%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS
(93%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); CANADA (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION AGAINST TORTURE;
TORTURE; POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT  POLICE MISCONDUCT (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(92%); TORTURE (92%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%); MISCONDUCT (78%); REGULATORY
COMPLIANCE (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); MARSHALS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%);

 PUBLIC POLICY (74%); DOGS (72%); SEX OFFENSES (72%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (72%);
RACE & RACISM (70%); ETHNICITY (65%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (65%); EXECUTIVES (65%);

 ETHNIC GROUPS (65%);   CORRECTIONS (89%);

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH  HAROLD H KOH (68%);

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             147 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

France Adopts Limits on Photographers

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 230 words

DATELINE: PARIS, May 30


France's Parliament adopted some of the toughest restrictions on news
photography in the West today in a move aimed at protecting the dignity of
people snapped in an incriminating or humiliating pose.

Under the terms of the law, photographers will not be allowed to take pictures
of suspects wearing handcuffs or of crime scenes where a victim's dignity is
jeopardized.

Photographers, newspapers and magazines said the measures, included in a broader
bill expanding the rights of criminal suspects and crime victims, amounted to
censorship.

The weekly magazine Paris Match said today that it would ignore the legislation
and battle it in the European Court of Human Rights if challenged by the
authorities. "France will become the only country in the European Union where
publication of certain news photographs will be forbidden under threat of heavy
fines," it said in an editorial.

Ignoring months of protests, the French Senate gave Justice Minister Elisabeth
Guigou's proposal virtually unanimous backing.

It will be up to editors to decide whether or not a photograph violates the new
regulations. If a court rules that they have broken the law, they face a $14,280
fine.

The law was prompted by coverage of news events like the death of Diana,
Princess of Wales, in a car accident in 1997, and bomb attacks in Paris in the
mid-1990's.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FRANCE (95%); EUROPE (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);

STATE: ILE-DE-FRANCE, FRANCE (55%);

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (90%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (57%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS
(57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (57%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN
RIGHTS (57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FRANCE;   FRANCE (95%); EUROPE (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%);   ILE-DE-FRANCE, FRANCE (55%);   PARIS, FRANCE (90%);

SUBJECT: NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA; CRIME AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM OF THE PRESS; LAW AND
LEGISLATION; NEWS PHOTOGRAPHY  PHOTOJOURNALISM (91%); LEGISLATION (90%); VISUAL
ARTISTS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (79%); CENSORSHIP (78%);

 FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (78%); NEWS REPORTING
(77%); LITIGATION (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); EUROPEAN UNION COURTS (74%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%);
BOMBINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); FINES & PENALTIES (68%); AGENCY RULEMAKING
(66%);

PERSON: PRINCESS DIANA (50%);

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             150 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

THE SUPREME COURT: A CORPORATE ACTOR;
Trade Ruling Is Victory for Oil Giant

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 19


For years, Unocal, the California-based international oil company, has been
courting criticism by doing business in Myanmar in the face of sanctions imposed
on the military leadership there by the Clinton administration and a growing
list of state and local governments.

So while Unocal was not mentioned in today's Supreme Court decision that struck
down a Massachusetts law that prohibited companies doing business in Myanmar
from receiving state government contracts, the ruling was a significant victory
for the oil giant.

The Myanmar government has been accused of drug trafficking and of numerous
labor and human rights abuses.

It has been the subject of an intense campaign by human rights advocates who
have sought to force reforms on the country by putting pressure on Western
corporations doing business there.

Unocal, which holds a 28 percent interest in a natural gas production and
pipeline project in Myanmar, is the largest American investor in the country,
and has faced lawsuits and protests from human rights advocates and student
groups demanding its withdrawal from the project.

But the company has refused to bow to the criticism.

In fact, Unocal announced a deal with the Myanmar government to expand its
rights to explore and develop gas fields off the nation's coast on the same day
in 1997 that the State Department issued a report condemning the killing and
torture of dissidents and ethnic minorities in the country.

The Clinton administration has imposed sanctions on Myanmar, formerly known as
Burma, banning all new investment.

Unocal's natural gas project was grandfathered in under the federal sanctions,
but the company is prohibited from expanding its investments there.

Human right advocates had also persuaded a number of local governments,
including the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to pass laws prohibiting contracts
with companies that do business in Myanmar.

Unocal was in the background of the suit that made its way to the Supreme Court.

The case was brought against Massachusetts by a Washington lobbying group called
the National Foreign Trade Council. Unocal is one of the group's 550 members,
and is represented on the group's 70-member board.

A spokesman for the trade council said the lawsuit was intended to attack a
broader problem than simply the protests against Unocal in Myanmar.

The group initiated the suit to combat the growing trend among state and local
governments seeking to influence United States foreign policy through local
sanctions.

Myanmar just happened to be the best test case because a state, in addition to
cities and towns, had imposed sanctions against it, said Daniel O'Flaherty, vice
president of the foreign trade council. He said that about a half-dozen
countries are facing similar locally generated sanctions.

He acknowledged that Myanmar has "an unlovely government" that added to the
public relations problems of the suit.

"Did we think about the P.R. aspects of choosing Burma? -- of course," Mr.
O'Flaherty said. "But we were testing the principle of the latitude of
subfederal units" to influence foreign policy.

"The lawsuit was not about Burma," he said. "It was not a crusade on behalf of
Unocal."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: UCL (NYSE) (90%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS 213112 OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (93%);

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%);

COMPANY: UNOCAL CORP; SUPREME COURT (US)  UNOCAL CORP (90%);

ORGANIZATION: UNOCAL CORP; SUPREME COURT (US)

GEOGRAPHIC: MYANMAR; MASSACHUSETTS;   MYANMAR (99%); UNITED STATES (94%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; GAS (FUEL); FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; PIPELINES; LAW AND LEGISLATION  OIL & GAS
INDUSTRY (93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL
GAS EXTRACTION (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); LITIGATION (89%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS
(89%); NATURAL GAS (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (89%); FINES & PENALTIES (89%);
NATURAL GAS PRODUCTS (88%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%);
PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); OIL & GAS PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (77%); SUITS & CLAIMS (77%); PUBLIC CONTRACTING (77%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (77%); TRENDS (77%); VERDICTS (76%); LEGISLATION (76%); APPEALS (76%);

 CONTRACTS & BIDS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); TORTURE (75%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (73%); LOBBYING (72%);
FOREIGN POLICY (65%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (55%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (55%);

 STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (52%); ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS (50%);   OIL &
GAS OUTPUT (78%);

PERSON: RISEN, JAMES  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (92%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
(92%);

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             151 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Parsing Degrees of Atrocity Within the Logic of Law;
To Punish War Criminals, the World Must Define War Crimes. It Isn't Easy.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1586 words


In first-century Rome, where historians knew a glorious war when they saw one,
Lucius Annaeus Seneca raised a troubling question: On the battlefield, do whole
nations go mad and lose their humanity? "We check manslaughter and isolated
murders," he wrote in his Epistles, "but what of war and the much-vaunted crimes
of slaughtering whole peoples?"

Almost since the first rock was thrown in anger, international legal experts
say, people have tried to rein in the excesses of conflict and make them
punishable. Benjamin Ferencz, a legal scholar who was a young prosecutor at the
Nuremberg trials for Nazi war crimes after World War II, goes back to
Ecclesiastes for an early Biblical guide to good behavior. "You weren't supposed
to kill your enemy and his suffering babes," he said. "You take them as slaves.
That was a big advance forward for the time."

In the 19th century, Abraham Lincoln commissioned the first modern war crimes
code, which was duly written by Francis Lieber, the president's chief counsel
during the Civil War. Next came the 1949 Geneva conventions, which codified
rules for the humane treatment of civilians and combatants, including prisoners
of war.

Now another historic step has been taken. A week ago, legal delegations from
more than 100 nations gathered at the United Nations and agreed to an exhaustive
catalog of acts that will constitute war crimes, crimes against humanity and
genocide for the world's first permanent International Criminal Court, now in
the final stages of creation. The definitions of crimes cover dozens of pages in
an effort to list unambiguously the most terrible things that people do to each
other in the course of conflict.

But from the grisly amputations of the hands of innocents in Sierra Leone to the
systematic rapes of women in Bosnia and Rwanda -- or, some would say, to the
bombing of Kosovo refugees by NATO warplanes -- modern conflicts raise new and
complex issues. There still is not total agreement on universally accepted moral
codes.

It was easier at Nuremberg, and at the Tokyo trials for Japanese war criminals.
The war crimes were more or less traditionally defined, and the victorious
Allies were in charge. Today, most experts say, crimes are less easy to define,
violations less easy to agree on. More actors are on the stage as well: human
rights groups and other nongovernmental organizations are now instrumental in
collecting information and lobbying for trials.

"What we've seen in modern wars, especially many internal conflicts, is that war
crimes and crimes against humanity are layered upon each other," said Michael P.
Scharf, the director of the Center for International Law and Policy at the New
England Law School in Boston, who is studying the changing face of atrocity.
"It's not just the military. You get neighbor fighting neighbor." Civilian
culpability in what were once thought of as military crimes is a concept being
thrashed out in tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, Mr. Scharf said. Along the
way, he added, "a whole new jurisprudence is emerging."

Mr. Scharf has been asking questions about how important trials are to peace and
reconciliation. "There is a conventional wisdom that if you could have a
credible, neutral trial for war criminals, that would create a historical record
that everybody could agree on and that would withstand the forces of
revisionism," he said. "This theory really emerges from the Nuremberg
precedent." Mr. Scharf decided to test it in the Balkans.

"In many towns in Bosnia where there was the worst ethnic cleansing," he said,
"the Muslims and Serbs, victims and perpetrators, have moved back into their old
houses and are living once again as neighbors." They know about the war crimes
trials at The Hague, because the George Soros Foundation is having them
broadcast into Bosnia with the idea that if people "actually saw the testimony
of the victims and the perpetrators, they couldn't deny it."

What Mr. Scharf found instead was that both local people and outsiders who spoke
with them could come away with very different interpretations of what the trials
proved or did not prove. Mr. Scharf matched some of these reactions with his own
research on what he calls "the myth of Nuremberg" -- that is, that all you have
to do is establish an international tribunal, create an historical record "and
that's that." He said that polls taken in Germany only 10 years after the
Nuremberg trials, by which time many Nazi sentences had been commuted, showed
that "90 percent of the people thought that these were show trials, political
trials." It took another generation or two to change that perception, he said.

It does not help when governments introduce their own national interests into
the discussion. Mr. Ferencz, who at 80 still writes on war crimes and has been
active in debates surrounding the International Criminal Court, says that during
the cold war neither side wanted itself or its friends or clients held up to
scrutiny. And Mr. Scharf notes that groups defined as "political" are not
protected against genocide because the writers of the genocide convention of
1949 wanted Stalin's Russia on board, and Stalin had annihilated entire
political and social groups. "Your very definition of genocide has been
corrupted from the very beginning by the necessity of cold war politics," he
said.

The cold war is over, but the story continues. Take Saddam Hussein's poison gas
attacks on his troublesome Kurdish minority in 1988, and the world's response.
"Rather than simply going after rebel fighters," said Kenneth Roth, the
executive director of Human Rights watch, Mr. Hussein "would drop chemical
weapons on Kurdish villages, killing some people and driving others out, and
then rounding up those who were fleeing and bringing them to a series of
concentration camps.." But this crime, Mr. Roth said, "was inconvenient for the
international community to address."

The United States was supporting Iraq in a war against Iran at the time. "The
U.S. became interested in the crime only after the gulf war," Mr. Roth said. "At
this stage, the U.S. does support a tribunal, but there is no chance of getting
it past Russia, China and France on the Security Council."

All three have, to one degree or another, backed Iraq in its standoff with the
United Nations and the United States. The Security Council set up tribunals for
the Balkans and Rwanda but not for Mr. Hussein or, for that matter, for Pol Pot,
the Khmer Rouge leader responsible for the deaths of more than a million
Cambodians. "The Security Council can't be trusted to bring criminals to trial,"
Mr. Roth said.

More recently, many have turned their attention to the United States-led bombing
in 1999 of Serbian targets in Yugoslavia to stop Serbian atrocities in Kosovo.
Some groups, like Amnesty International, say they have found evidence of war
crimes. Human Rights Watch, while not accusing NATO of war crimes, has been
concerned about the use of cluster bombs near populated areas, attacks on
civilian targets like factories or a major power plant, the bombing of a bridge
near a busy market during daylight hours and air strikes against mobile targets
(among them a column of refugees) from 15,000 feet without solid assurances that
the targets were military. Mr. Roth said that advanced technologies required new
ways of looking at the conduct of war.

Carla del Ponte, the chief prosecutor of the Balkans war crimes tribunal,
decided against an investigation of NATO's conduct of the war, but even the idea
that she would explore such a move raised tempers in the Pentagon. This only
contributed to the United States military's determination never to have anything
to do with the International Criminal Court, fearing it would single out
Americans for political or ideological reasons.

Ruth Wedgwood, an expert on international law at the Yale Law School, sees some
justification in those fears. She said that it was sometimes harder to make
judgments on military behavior than one might think just by looking at the
results of any given action.

"It's one thing to say that NATO should rethink some of its war plans and find
ways to fight better," Ms. Wedgwood said, "and it's another thing to instantly
criminalize them. There seems to be a rush to the most extreme category." The
issue is complicated, she added, by the absence of military expertise on
criminal tribunals.

Ms. Wedgwood said that attempts to include sanctions -- the Clinton
Administration's weapon of choice after precision bombing -- in the loosely
defined area of war crimes opened another range of issues. Opponents of the
sanctions imposed on Iraqin 1990 after the invasion of Kuwait and still in place
say that they are killing thousands of Iraqis. "People have seriously argued,"
Ms. Wedgwood said, "that just as in the law of war, you can't target civilians
for their own sake, by that same logic, sanctions that try to press civilians to
overthrow their leaders should also be forbidden."

She went on: "Some people will argue that enemy morale as such has always been
and must be a military objective. Other people say that leads you down the path
where you would actually seek to terrorize civilians."

No one says that bringing clarity or universality to an understanding of war
crimes will be easy. "It's all imperfect," said Mr. Ferencz, who has watched the
world grapple with elusive war criminals for half a century. "But I see
progress. We are crawling toward civilization."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); KOSOVO
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); RWANDA (79%); GERMANY
(74%); JAPAN (52%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (74%); NORTHEAST USA (50%);

CITY: BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); TOKYO, JAPAN (52%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT  (82%); UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (82%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%); PRISONERS OF
WAR  (55%); PRISONERS OF WAR (55%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT; UNITED NATIONS  INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT  (82%); UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (82%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%);
PRISONERS OF WAR  (55%); PRISONERS OF WAR (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SIERRA LEONE (79%); KOSOVO
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); RWANDA (79%); GERMANY
(74%); JAPAN (52%);   MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (74%);
NORTHEAST USA (50%);   BOSTON, MA, USA (79%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); TOKYO,
JAPAN (52%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; HISTORY  WAR CRIMES

 (93%); WORLD WAR II (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE
(90%); HISTORY (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);
MANSLAUGHTER (77%); LAWYERS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(73%); REFUGEES (73%); LAW SCHOOLS (71%); GENOCIDE (70%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (61%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (60%); MURDER (57%);   LAW OF WAR (78%); POWS &
MIAS (73%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  MICHAEL P SCHARF (86%);

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Trying to specify what is unacceptable behavior in war goes
back to the earliest conflicts. The first modern war crimes code was
commissioned by Abraham Lincoln. Nearly a century later, the Nuremberg trials of
Nazi officials, above, and the Geneva conventions carried the process further.
(Inset far left, Alexander Gardner; above, The New York Times)(pg. B7); Homes of
Serbian civilians some 200 miles south of Belgrade were hit by a stray NATO
missile. At least 20 people died. Would that be a war crime? (Associated
Press)(pg. B9)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             153 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 14, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Human Rights Disgrace

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 168 words



To the Editor:

Re "Executing the Mentally Retarded Even as Laws Begin to Shift" (front page,
Aug. 7):

Clearly, the abolition of the death penalty for people with mental retardation
is a goal of the international community and is emerging as a customary norm of
international human rights law. Yet the United States, a self-labeled champion
of human rights, continues to disregard the almost universal prohibition against
executing people with mental retardation. In the United States, 25 states permit
the execution of people with mental retardation, and 34 mentally retarded
defendants have been executed since 1976.

Amnesty International believes that while a person must be held responsible for
his or her actions, the execution of an individual who suffers from mental
retardation is a gross violation of international human rights standards.

ENID HARLOW
New York, Aug. 8, 2000

The writer is acting director of the Program to Abolish the Death Penalty,
Amnesty International USA.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL USA (55%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (91%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (91%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (91%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT; MENTAL RETARDATION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
MENTAL RETARDATION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (91%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%);

PERSON: HARLOW, ENID  ENID HARLOW NEW YORK (55%);

LOAD-DATE: August 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             156 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
American Justice Tackles Rights Abuses Abroad

BYLINE: By JOHN SULLIVAN

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 896 words


AS the soldiers raped and beat her in front of her two children, a Bosnian
refugee recalled, they taunted her, saying there was nowhere she could turn for
help.

They were wrong.

Last month, a jury in a Manhattan federal court awarded the woman and a group of
other refugees from the Balkans war $745 million in their case against the
former leader of Serbian forces in Bosnia, Radovan Karadzic, charging him with
masterminding a campaign of genocide, rape and torture in the early 1990's.

That is just one of a series of recent cases in which American courts have
agreed to hear civil cases involving human rights violations outside American
territory.

Last week, the Center for Constitutional Rights -- a nonprofit organization in
Manhattan that successfully argued the first such case more than 20 years ago --
served papers on Li Peng, the former Chinese premier, who was staying at the
Waldorf Towers in Manhattan. Jennifer M. Green, a lawyer with the center who is
arguing the case, said a group of Chinese students has filed suit in federal
court in Manhattan against Mr. Li over the Chinese government's actions during
the Tiananmen Square protests in 1989.

"I think the U.S. courts' acceptance of human rights standards are important
steps forward in an international system in which human rights violators can be
held accountable," Ms. Green said. The Chinese Embassy in Washington did not
return calls requesting comment last week.

In 1978, the Center for Constitutional Rights sued a government official in
Paraguay on behalf of a family who claimed their son had been tortured there.
The case, Filartiga v. Pena, was a landmark attempt to use American courts to
judge a dispute that, on its face, had nothing to do with the United States or
its citizens. To make the argument, Peter Weiss, the center's vice president,
turned to a 1787 law called the Alien Tort Claims Act, which allowed foreigners
to use American courts to sue for violations of international law.

Congress passed the law after an attack on a French diplomat in Philadelphia,
said Anne-Marie Slaughter, a professor of international law at Harvard who
collaborated on a recent article about the law for the journal Foreign Affairs.

"It was what was called a badge of honor," Ms. Slaughter said. "We wanted to
proclaim we were a member of the family of nations."

At that time, international law consisted of conventions between sovereign
states, and covered issues like piracy and diplomatic immunity.

Bert Neuborne, a New York University law professor, views the Nuremberg
Tribunals that followed World War II as a turning point for international law,
because the Nuremburg judges found that even though the Nazis had acted within
their own legal framework, they were not immune from prosecution under a more
general law.

"International law involves individuals and not just governments," Mr. Neuborne
said. "Human rights norms trump the rights of dictators."

That attitude underlies some international criminal cases, like Spain's pursuit
of the former Argentine strongman Gen. Augusto Pinochet, and the indictments
issued by the International War Crimes Tribunal in the Hague.

And since the Filartiga case ended in 1980 -- with a judgment of more than $10
million for the plaintiffs -- there has been a steady increase in the number of
civil cases brought in American courts by foreign plaintiffs against foreign
defendants, Ms. Slaughter said.

Application of the Alien Tort Claims Act, and a handful of similar laws, has
extended beyond individual human cases to broader areas of misconduct, she said,
citing as examples claims against corporations for environmental damage and for
actions during the Holocaust.

Like the Filartiga case and the Karadzic verdict, many such cases bring huge
monetary awards, but few plaintiffs ever collect.

"Most people engaged in this type of litigation would say the power is the power
of publicity and the very important symbolic impact of allowing the victims to
tell their story," Ms. Slaughter said. "If they do recover that would be great
but that is not the point of the litigation."

One of the few cases likely to result in money changing hands was filed against
Ferdinand Marcos, the former leader of the Philippines. Robert Swift, who
represented 9,539 people who sued Mr. Marcos before his death in 1989, won a $2
billion judgment in federal court in Hawaii in 1995. The plaintiffs settled with
Mr. Marcos's estate and with the Philippines' government for $161 million, Mr.
Swift said. But he said the payment has been blocked by a judge in the
Philippines.

Mr. Swift said that while he recognized the political importance of such civil
cases, that was not his main motivation. "My involvement in this whole line of
cases is to try to get compensation for the victims," he said. "I have never
been satisfied with a simple declaration that the abuse occurred."

By far the largest settlements have involved the cases brought in American
courts by Holocaust survivors against banks and corporations they accused of
profiting from the Holocaust.

Although concerns have been raised that the success of the Holocaust suits could
lead to other -- less legitimate -- lawsuits, representatives of the plaintiffs
say it is an important step in the recognition that certain rights do not stop
at national borders.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: 002235 (SZSE) (56%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS322121 PAPER (EXCEPT NEWSPRINT) MILLS (56%); SIC2621 PAPER MILLS

 (56%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); CHINA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); PARAGUAY (79%); FRANCE (68%);
GERMANY (57%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

COMPANY: XIAMEN ANNE CORP LTD  (56%); XIAMEN ANNE CORP LTD (56%);   CENTER FOR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (83%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (83%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (93%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); CHINA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); PARAGUAY (79%); FRANCE
(68%); GERMANY (57%);   NEW YORK, USA (94%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG,
GERMANY (57%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (89%); TORTURE
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (88%); COLLEGE
& UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (87%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (78%); WORLD WAR II
(78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); IMMUNITY (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

 GENOCIDE (71%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (70%); TORTS
(67%); DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY (66%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: LI PENG (56%);

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Besarta Ferataj, a 2-year-old Kosovo refugee, at a congressional
hearing as her mother prepared to testify about abuse by Serbs. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             161 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Justice in Yugoslavia

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 153 words



To the Editor:

An Oct. 12 front-page article addresses the issue of whether Slobodan Milosevic
should face trial before the international war crimes tribunal in The Hague or
before a court in Yugoslavia. Richard H. Haas, a former National Security
Council official, said: "I would not make coughing up Milosevic the No. 1
priority. After all, he was largely killing his own people, and he can be tried
in his own country."

In fact, the vast majority of Mr. Milosevic's victims were not "his own people."
They were residents of Bosnia and Croatia. Even his victims in Kosovo, a part of
Yugoslavia, were mostly ethnic Albanians rather than the ethnic Serbs who
dominate the Yugoslav federation. Given the nature of his crimes and the feeble
state of the Yugoslavian judiciary, an international tribunal is the appropriate
forum.

KENNETH ROTH
Exec. Dir., Human Rights Watch
New York, Oct. 13, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA
(79%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (58%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (58%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL  (58%); NATIONAL SECURITY COUNCIL (58%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NETHERLANDS (91%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); SERBIA
(79%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);   THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (91%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);

PERSON: SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (92%);

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             163 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Accord Being Sought On U.N. Dues And on Court

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A;  Page 6;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 721 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 6


With less than two days to go at a meeting to put finishing touches on the
International Criminal Court, a group of nations friendly to the United States
is scrambling, with diminishing confidence, to strike a deal that would let the
Clinton administration sign on to the tribunal.

"Delegations are twisting themselves into pretzels to bring the Americans in,"
said Richard Dicker, a lawyer at Human Rights Watch and an expert on the court.

A similar drama is being played out this week on the issue of reducing American
dues to the United Nations. On both issues, many nations, especially the
Europeans, have been working overtime to keep the United States from drifting
farther away from international organizations just as world trends become more
global.

This evening, delegations said they hoped that the United States would introduce
some new proposals on the court on Thursday.

The new court will be the first permanent international tribunal for trying
individuals charged with war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity. Since
the Nuremberg trials of Nazis, criminal tribunals have been ad hoc creations
like the courts for war crimes in Rwanda and the Balkans.

This week, several countries -- among them Australia, Britain and Switzerland --
have suggested that a limited exemption given to France in 1998 when the treaty
establishing the court was approved in Rome should be extended to the United
States and other countries who sign. That exemption gave France seven years of
immunity for war crimes in return for a promise to sign and ratify the treaty,
which France subsequently did. The French said they needed time to align their
military training and laws.

The United States poses a different problem, however. It is arguing for a
permanent exemption for itself and for countries that do not sign. The Pentagon
has demanded guarantees that no American soldier or official on duty abroad
could ever be tried by the court, a stipulation that President Clinton, while
professing to support the court, has shrunk from overruling. If the
administration signs before Dec. 31, it does not have to ratify the treaty
immediately. After that date, any country has to both sign and ratify the treaty
to take part.

In Congress, opposition among Republican leaders has been extremely strong.
Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the Senate
Foreign Relations Committee, has repeatedly said the court treaty will not be
ratified on his watch.

"We're not against war crimes tribunals," a spokesman for the committee, Marc
Thiessen, said. But without better checks on the court's jurisdiction and
operation, particularly through the Security Council, the court is
"fundamentally dangerous," he said in an interview.

"This court is the League of Nations of international war crimes," Mr. Thiessen
said. "It is a flawed and failed first effort. Maybe in 30 years it can be
improved."

In both the Senate and the House, a bill was introduced this year that would
prohibit any court and all levels of government in the United States from
cooperating with the International Criminal Court, though officials would be
permitted to deal with ad hoc tribunals. The bill would also require permanent
immunity for Americans before the United States could participate in any
peacekeeping operation.

Moreover, the bill would stop military aid to any country that accepts the
court, with the exception of NATO nations and important allies, virtually all of
whom have already signed the treaty.

On Nov. 29, Congress picked up support from a significant list of former
American officials, among them prominent advisers to Gov. George W. Bush. In a
letter to Representative Tom DeLay, the House majority whip, 12 high-level
officials, including four former secretaries of state, James A. Baker III,
Lawrence S. Eagleburger, Henry A. Kissinger and George P. Shultz, and three
former national security advisers, Richard V. Allen, Zbigniew Brzezinski and
Brent Scowcroft, said the court would infringe basic American constitutional
rights.

The letter writers called the Congressional bill, the American Servicemen's
Protection Act, "an appropriate response to the threat to American sovereignty
and international freedom of action posed by the International Criminal Court."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); FRANCE (87%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (58%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (51%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  UNITED NATIONS  (93%);
UNITED NATIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  UNITED NATIONS
(93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (57%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); FRANCE (87%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (58%);   NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); NUREMBERG,
GERMANY (58%);   ROME, ITALY (51%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); TREATIES
& AGREEMENTS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS
LAW (88%); JURISDICTION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); LAWYERS (74%); GENOCIDE
(73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); WAR & CONFLICT (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (72%);
APPROVALS (67%); INTERVIEWS (67%); MILITARY TRAINING (64%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (78%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  BILL CLINTON (78%);

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             168 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

On Chechnya, A Stifled U.N.

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 181 words



To the Editor:

I applaud William Safire's views regarding how Russian and United States
political shenanigans have threatened innocent civilians in Chechnya (column,
Dec. 27). We should also be concerned about reforming United Nations policies
that have allowed the situation in Russia to continue without debate.

The fact that one Security Council member -- Russia -- can stifle United Nations
discussion of the many possible Russian war crimes and atrocities in Chechnya
demonstrates that the organization is in serious need of change. The permanent
membership of the Security Council should be expanded, and the ability of just
one member to control debate should be abolished.

Currently, the only way to focus world attention on Russia's actions is through
the media and international organizations like Human Rights Watch. For this I am
grateful, but the United Nations needs to become more effective in dealing with
such situations.

CHARLES J. TRIPP
Salt Lake City, Dec. 28, 1999

The writer is a professor of political science at Westminster College.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: SALT LAKE CITY, UT, USA (58%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH
(56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);   SALT LAKE CITY, UT,
USA (58%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (73%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (70%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (87%);

PERSON: WILLIAM L SAFIRE  (74%);

LOAD-DATE: January 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             169 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 135 words



To the Editor:

Re "Kosovo Inquiry Confirms U.S. Fears of War Crimes Court" (news article, Jan.
3): Rather than having an absolute power of judicial review, as your article
implies, the new international criminal court will defer to national legal
systems in the United States and elsewhere that are willing and able to consider
such cases.

American negotiators played a key role in assuring that this essential element,
called complementarity, is in the court's statute. Countries that conduct their
military activities in accordance with international law and that investigate
and prosecute breaches of that law in good faith will not be subject to the
international criminal court's actions.

MICHAEL POSNER
Executive Director, Lawyers
Committee for Human Rights
New York, Jan. 5, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); KOSOVO (92%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS  (56%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS  (56%); PHYSICIANS FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); KOSOVO (92%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); BAD FAITH (67%);

PERSON: MICHAEL POSNER (55%);

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             171 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Pinochet Ruling Could Tip Chile Vote, but Which Way?

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1105 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Jan. 12


The news that Gen. Augusto Pinochet could soon be released from house arrest in
London for health reasons may have a decisive impact on Sunday's close
presidential runoff election, political analysts said today.

Both Ricardo Lagos, candidate of the Socialist-Christian Democratic coalition,
and Joaquin Lavin, candidate of a right-wing coalition, have assiduously avoided
mentioning the former dictator throughout the campaign to play down their own
political pasts and to appeal to centrist voters.

So perhaps it was not surprising that the two candidates offered careful,
nuanced public responses to the announcement by the British government on
Tuesday night that a recent medical examination indicated that General Pinochet,
84, was unfit to stand trial, making his eventual extradition from Britain to
Spain to face charges of human rights violations far less likely.

Some analysts believe Mr. Lagos will benefit because the very emergence of
General Pinochet as an issue will remind many moderate voters who are leaning
toward Mr. Lavin of his past links to the former dictator and drive them back to
the Lagos camp.

But others say those votes could be canceled out by leftists who would have
voted for Mr. Lagos but now may express their anger at the Chilean government's
efforts on the general's behalf in his legal battle by abstaining in Sunday's
election.

Since the two candidates appear to be virtually tied, a shift of a mere 20,000
or 30,000 votes one way or the other could be decisive.

Mr. Lagos, who could become the first Socialist to serve as president since
General Pinochet overthrew Salvador Allende Gossens in 1973, did not celebrate
the news that Britain may now end extradition proceedings. Instead, he merely
recited it with virtually no commentary, even though the Chilean government in
which he served for eight years has been hoping that General Pinochet will not
be extradited to Spain and will be allowed to return to Chile.

For months Mr. Lagos supported the government's policy of seeking General
Pinochet's return. But he is clearly uncomfortable about taking a position that
upset human rights advocates and many Socialists, as well as the 3.2 percent of
the voters who supported a Communist candidate in the Dec. 12 first round and
who he hopes will vote for him on Sunday.

Mr. Lagos said, "The resolution that seems to have been taken is merely a
response to a study by a team of doctors and specialists." He added that General
Pinochet "should face trial" here if a judge currently investigating more than
50 charges against him finds that he committed crimes.

His comments were not very different from those of Mr. Lavin, who was a minor
official in the Planning Ministry of General Pinochet and wrote several books
praising his economic policies.

As mayor of the Santiago community of Las Condes, Mr. Lavin briefly cut off
garbage pickup at the Spanish and British embassies as a protest after General
Pinochet's arrest in Britain in 1998, which came at the request of a Spanish
judge. But since then Mr. Lavin has distanced himself publicly from the general
as he has tried to peel away Christian Democratic voters from Mr. Lagos.

Mr. Lavin's populist campaign has borrowed many of the slogans of the left and
has tried to remodel Chile's right in a more moderate mode. That effort was
aided by General Pinochet's absence, since the former dictator would otherwise
have been expected to voice more conservative positions during the campaign.

Mr. Lavin characterized the news from London as "positive, but one must accept
it cautiously." He added that General Pinochet, once returned, "should face the
law like any other Chilean."

When pressed by a television interviewer to say whether he would meet General
Pinochet at the Santiago airport if he returns, Mr. Lavin said he was not sure
he would have the time.

Marta Lagos, an independent pollster who is not related to the presidential
candidate, said the new development in the Pinochet case "obviously benefits
Lagos and this could undo the tie." She added, "This brings Pinochet back into
Lavin's world, and he has no way of getting rid of him."

Ricardo Israel, a political scientist at the University of Chile, said that news
of General Pinochet's possible return could decide the election, but that it was
difficult to predict which candidate would benefit most. He noted that "a couple
of thousand" of the 300,000 potential voters among active and retired soldiers
and their relatives "could feel grateful to the government" now and vote for Mr.
Lagos.

A moderate Socialist, Mr. Lagos long tried to forge cordial relations with the
military as minister of education and public works. Nevertheless, tallies at
voting stations near military bases heavily favored Mr. Lavin last month, and
backers of Mr. Lagos have complained of soldiers' apparently being coerced by
their superiors.

Mr. Israel also noted that several thousand leftist voters now "feel rage and
anger and the only way they can express that is nullifying their ballots or
abstaining."

The government, human rights advocates and supporters of General Pinochet
generally reacted to the developments in London cautiously. There were no
reports of major demonstrations or arrests as there were in the first months
after the general's arrest in October 1998.

                             --------------------

Spanish Judge Seeks Opinions

By The New York Times

MADRID, Jan. 12 -- The Spanish judge who began proceedings against General
Pinochet today asked for hurried comments on the British ruling that he was
medically unfit to face a trial.

The judge, Baltasar Garzon, gave parties to the case, including rights groups,
until Thursday to offer opinions. He will then send a brief to Britain to meet
the deadline of seven days that Home Secretary Jack Straw set for receiving
arguments in the case.

As has been his pattern, Judge Garzon made no public comment about the case.

Juan Garces, a Spanish lawyer for victims of repression in Chile, complained
that Britain was withholding details of the medical report. He said that
hampered prosecutors who would want to argue that the standard for fitness to
face trial should be the defendant's mental capacity to understand the charges,
rather than physical ailments.

Josep Pique, the government's chief spokesman, said Madrid would "scrupulously
respect" the British decisions. But the leader of the opposition Socialist
Party, Joaquin Almunia, said he felt "sad that a dictator who has committed or
been a protector for so many crimes" may not be held fully accountable at trial.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (96%); SPAIN (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; SPAIN; ;  CHILE (96%); SPAIN (93%); UNITED
KINGDOM (92%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%);

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; ELECTION ISSUES; EXTRADITION;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  EXTRADITION (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (90%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%); HOUSE ARREST (89%); ARRESTS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LIBERALISM (77%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); ECONOMIC NEWS

 (61%); ECONOMIC POLICY (61%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); LAGOS, RICARDO; LAVIN,
JOAQUIN  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (97%); JOAQUIN LAVIN (93%); RICARDO LAGOS (93%);

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: January 15, 2000, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Thursday about the presidential runoff election in Chile tomorrow
referred incorrectly to the actions of Joaquin Lavin, the conservative
candidate, after Gen. Augusto Pinochet was arrested in Britain at the request of
a Spanish judge. Mr. Lavin, at the time mayor of a community in Santiago, did
not suspend garbage collection at the Spanish and British Embassies. The action
was taken by the mayor of a neighboring community.




                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             173 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Gay Troops in Europe

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


The British government has bowed to a ruling of the European Court of Human
Rights and ended its ban on gays in the military. Nearly every NATO member has
now ceased discrimination against gay men and women in the armed forces.
Britain's defense department, like that of the United States, long maintained
that the presence of openly gay troops would hurt morale and discipline. But
there is ample evidence from other European nations, like France, that this is
not true.

The British military will replace the ban on gays with a code of conduct that
applies to all service members, whether homosexual or heterosexual. The
guidelines would still allow commanders to respond to inappropriate conduct like
sexual relations between commanders and subordinates.

Britain's military did not make the change voluntarily. If experience is any
guide, however, lifting the ban will have little impact on military life.
Canada, which also had a ban on gay troops, was compelled by a federal court to
reverse its policy in 1992. There is no evidence that the change in policy has
led to harassment, resignations or unit breakdowns. Australia has had much the
same experience.

The continued resistance of American military leaders to ending the compromise
"don't ask, don't tell" policy is based on the judgment that openly gay
individuals are a risk to unit cohesion and discipline. Yet several academic
studies in recent years examining foreign militaries and paramilitary
organizations such as fire and police departments have found no evidence that
the presence of openly gay individuals compromised performance. Researchers have
also found that even where there is a long history of bigotry, a change in
policy can be smoothly carried out when strong emphasis is placed on conduct and
compliance with clear rules that apply to all.

The change in British practice leaves the United States military nearly alone
among Western nations in its official policy of discrimination. It is another
clear indication that Washington's attitude is behind the times.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (84%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS  (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (84%); EUROPEAN COURT OF HUMAN RIGHTS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED KINGDOM (95%); EUROPE (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ARMED FORCES (93%); GAYS & LESBIANS

 (93%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EUROPEAN UNION
INSTITUTIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); ETHICS
(78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); FIRE DEPARTMENTS (72%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (71%); POLICE FORCES (58%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%);

PERSON: GAY TROOPS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             180 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Aid to Colombia

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 143 words



To the Editor:

Re "Colombian Asks Congress for Aid Not Tied to Human Rights" (news article,
Jan. 26): President Andres Pastrana says it is the policy of the Colombian
government to respect human rights, yet the vast majority of Colombian officers
accused of involvement with paramilitaries have escaped prosecution for their
crimes. Does he expect Congress to ignore the fact that the Colombian Army
continues to collude with paramilitary groups, which are responsible for the
vast majority of political killings?

Until Mr. Pastrana's government can bring these human-rights violators to
justice, what guarantees do Congress and the American people have that our money
is not going into the hands of these murderers?

PAUL PAZ Y MINO
Oakland, Calif., Jan. 26, 2000

The writer is Colombia coordinator for Amnesty International U.S.A.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (75%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (51%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (56%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (93%);   CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (75%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (51%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FOREIGN AID  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (88%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (87%); MURDER (87%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(87%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%);

PERSON: PAZ Y MINO, PAUL  ANDRES PASTRANA (76%);

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             181 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Jakarta's Military Chiefs Accused of Crimes

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 617 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Jan. 31


An Indonesian human rights panel today accused top military officials, including
the former armed forces commander, of involvement in "crimes against humanity"
in East Timor and handed the case to the attorney general for formal
investigation.

The accusation against the once untouchable military leadership intensified a
high-stakes campaign under President Abdurrahman Wahid to reduce the political
power of the armed forces and to make it answerable for its abuses.

"Facts show the civilian and military apparatus, including the police,
cooperated with the militias to create an atmosphere that supported crimes
against humanity," said Djoko Sugianto, one of the members of the government
panel investigating the violence that took place in East Timor in the period
before and after a referendum on independence from Indonesia.

"These were in the form of mass killings, torture, kidnapping, violence against
women -- including rape and sexual slavery -- forced evacuations and total
destruction of property.

The panel's chairman, Albert Hasibuan, said that Gen. Wiranto, the former armed
forces chief, is culpable because he was in that position during the violence in
East Timor last year. "He knew what happened, but did not take effective
measures to handle or prevent the violence," Mr. Hasibuan said.

The Indonesian military has been condemned around the world for its role in the
violence that followed a referendum on Aug. 30 in which the people of East Timor
voted overwhelmingly for independence.

The military invaded the former Portuguese colony in 1975 and it has been widely
accused of human rights abuses ever since as it has fought an endless war to
subdue an armed independence movement.

When former President B. J. Habibie, ignoring warnings of potential violence,
announced early last year that he would allow a referendum, the military set
about to undermine it by forming the militias.

The general made no public comment about the report today. On Sunday he said,
"We should just await the process of investigation." He has claimed in the past
that he lost control of his men on the ground because of their emotional
commitment to East Timor.

Analysts here disagree over whether he was culpable "by omission," as one panel
member put it, or whether he was actively involved in creating, funding and
commanding the militias that carried out most of the violence and destruction.

The general has had an uneasy relationship with President Wahid, who took office
in November and then removed the general as armed forces commander but gave him
the influential cabinet position of coordinating minister for security affairs.

The president's efforts to curb military power have caused rising discontent
among officers. In recent weeks, rumors that he would remove General Wiranto
have mingled with rumors that the military might strike back with some sort of
coup.

Speaking in Davos, Switzerland, where he is attending an economic conference,
Mr. Wahid said today that he would carry out his promise to dismiss the general
if he was cited in the report, The Associated Press reported.

"He should resign at once," Mr. Wahid said. "As soon as I get back home I will
call him and I will ask for his resignation because he is implicated by this
report."

Speaking at a joint news conference here with human rights investigators,
Attorney General Marzuki Darusman said today that state prosecutors would
investigate the allegations. But he did not say when any charges might be
brought.

The United Nations also issued a report on East Timor today calling for an
international tribunal to try military and militia leaders for the East Timor
violence.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); SWITZERLAND (92%);

STATE: GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (76%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA; EAST TIMOR;   INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%);
SWITZERLAND (92%);   GRAUBUNDEN, SWITZERLAND (76%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INDEPENDENCE
MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); REFERENDUMS (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST PERSONS (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); COUPS (78%); TORTURE (78%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (78%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(77%); VOTERS & VOTING (76%); POLITICS (76%); SLAVERY (73%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (73%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; WIRANTO (GEN)

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             182 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Britain's High Court Supports Move to Release Pinochet

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 935 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 31


A High Court judge issued a tough-worded judgment today supporting the British
government's decision to release Gen. Augusto Pinochet and let him return home
to Chile, but Belgium held up any final action by lodging an appeal against the
ruling.

Home Secretary Jack Straw had said on Jan. 11 that he was "minded" -- inclined
-- to set the 84-year-old former Chilean dictator free immediately because of
his deteriorating health but would await the outcome of any legal objections
before issuing a definitive order.

In today's ruling, Judge Maurice Kay turned down appeals from six human rights
groups and the Belgian government contesting the British government's finding
that General Pinochet is medically unfit to be extradicted to Spain to stand
trial on torture charges.

Hopes of Pinochet supporters that Judge Kay's verdict constituted the end of
legal moves in the 15-month-old case were dashed by Belgium, which filed its
appeal this afternoon.

It will be heard by a panel of three High Court judges on Monday and Tuesday of
next week. Amnesty International and the five other rights groups have until
noon Tuesday to file any appeals of their own.

The Home Office withheld all comment on today's actions.

Judge Kay was emphatic in rejecting the arguments presented in two days of
hearings last week, saying they were "inappropriate" and "utterly without
merit." The groups had jointly protested Mr. Straw's refusal to make public
records of a medical examination of General Pinochet conducted by four British
doctors that was the basis for the findings on the general's infirm physical
state.

Judge Kay found that Mr. Straw acted "lawfully, fairly and rationally" in not
disclosing the medical documents. Mr. Straw had argued that to do so would
violate a pledge of doctor-patient confidentiality made to the general before
the Jan. 5 examination. "In legal, if somewhat peremptory terms," the judge said
of the complainants' request, "it is none of their business."

The judge added that he was "conscious that my decision is unavoidably adverse
to, on the one hand, people who have suffered greatly in Chile's recent history,
and, in the case of Belgium, to a friendly state and its judicial authorities."

Belgium, France and Switzerland had joined Spain in seeking General Pinochet's
extradition on behalf of residents who said they suffered under general's
military rule.

General Pinochet's pursuers denounced today's ruling but did so in a way
suggesting that they realized that chances of judicial relief might now be slim.
Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights Watch, said: "We are dismayed by
today's decision, which is a setback for Pinochet's thousands of victims in
their quest for justice. It is a shame that the attempt to prosecute General
Pinochet for the worst international crimes may be halted on the basis of secret
medical evidence examined behind closed doors."

Whatever its ultimate conclusion, the case has already resulted in a fundamental
change in concepts of international law to allow the prosecution of dictators
and leaders of repressive regimes by courts in countries where the alleged
abuses did not occur.

This came about when Britain's highest court, the Law Lords of the House of
Lords, turned aside the general's claim that, under the principle of sovereign
immunity, he could not be tried for acts committed while he was Chile's head of
state, from 1973 to 1990.

General Pinochet has been under house arrest in England for more than 15 months
while complicated legal moves unfolded around a Spanish judge's request that he
be extradited to Madrid to stand trial on charges of genocide, torture,
kidnapping and murder in connection with the disappearance of more than 3,000
people in the years after he seized power in the 1973 coup that ousted President
Salvador Allende.

The judge, Baltasar Garzon, considered something of a maverick in the Spanish
judiciary, had gathered his evidence during an investigation into the so-called
dirty wars in Latin America in the 1970's.

On Oct. 16, 1998, the general was arrested as he lay in a London clinic
recuperating from back surgery.

Twelve days later, General Pinochet won his first legal battle in a ruling by
the High Court that upheld his claim to sovereign immunity. But in the judgment
that was to create the case's legacy, on Nov. 25, 1998, the Law Lords overturned
that decision, saying that being head of state did not excuse crimes against
humanity.

The case returned to the House of Lords after one of the original judges was
found to have had an association with Amnesty International, a party to the
case. But the second Lords' decision, on March 24, 1999, was even more assertive
on the principle than the first one, though it drastically reduced the number of
charges and narrowed their scope to torture and conspiracy to torture.

The case then moved on to the validity of the actual extradition order itself,
which was upheld by a London magistrate last October and is under an appeal from
General Pinochet's lawyers that is likely to become moot because of Mr. Straw's
expected intervention.

In General Pinochet's one court appearance, on Dec. 11, 1998, he maintained the
defiant attitude he adopted from the beginning, saying that he did not recognize
the jurisdiction of any court outside Chile to try him and that he was innocent
of "all the lies of Spain."

During the 15 months, there have been boisterous gatherings outside the House of
Lords and the downtown magistrate's court, with supporters and opponents behind
barricades angrily facing down one another.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (97%); SPAIN (94%); BELGIUM (91%);
SWITZERLAND (78%); FRANCE (51%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (78%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; BELGIUM; SPAIN;   CHILE (97%); UNITED KINGDOM
(97%); SPAIN (94%); BELGIUM (91%); SWITZERLAND (78%); FRANCE (51%);   LONDON,
ENGLAND (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (78%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-GREAT BRITAIN; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-SPAIN; GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-SPAIN; TORTURE  JUDGES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); APPEALS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MEDICAL RECORDS (75%); TORTURE (74%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (73%); PATIENT PRIVACY (69%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (65%); AMNESTY
(52%);   MILITARY RULE (78%);

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); HOGE, WARREN; KAY, MAURICE (JUDGE)  JACK
STRAW (79%);

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: At an anti-Pinochet protest in Brussels yesterday, one of some
200 demonstrators held a banner with a portrait of Salvador Allende. (Agence
France-Presse)



                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             183 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 939 words



EUROPE

GERMANY: CALLS TO QUIT GROW
Wolfgang Schauble, leader of the embattled Christian Democratic Union, faced
growing calls to quit after admitting to a third meeting with a fugitive arms
dealer, Karlheinz Schreiber. Initially Mr. Schauble told Parliament that he may
have "run into" Mr. Schreiber once. Then he acknowledged a second meeting at
which he received 100,000 marks. After consulting his diary he conceded that
there was a third meeting, on June 2, 1995.  Roger Cohen (NYT)


BRITAIN: FINAL PINOCHET PLEA
Six human rights groups joined Belgium in a last legal attempt to block
Britain's plan to free Gen. Augusto Pinochet from house arrest and let him
return to Chile. Next week a three-judge court will hear their joint challenge
of Britain's refusal to make public the doctors' examination that produced a
decision that the former Chilean dictator is medically unfit to be extradited to
Spain to stand trial on torture charges.  Warren Hoge (NYT)

ITALY: GAYS AND CHURCH AT ODDS
Concerned that a gay pride conference July 1-9 in Rome could clash with the Holy
Year mood, Msgr. Ennio Antonelli, secretary of the Italian Bishops Conference,
said the church regards homosexuality as "a moral disorder" and asked Italian
officials to maintain Rome's "decorum." Deborah Oakley-Melvin, international
director of World Pride Rome 2000, said the event would not interfere with
religious ceremonies.  Alessandra Stanley (NYT)

CZECH REPUBLIC: HAVEL AILING
President Vaclav Havel was hospitalized overnight with the flu and a high
temperature, his spokesman said. Mr. Havel, 63, has come close to death in the
past from complications of lung cancer, pneumonia and a perforated colon, but
since he was hospitalized last May for a viral infection he has been
healthy.Steven Erlanger (NYT)

TURKEY: TERROR TOLL RISES
Three more bodies have been found in a police search for victims of a religious
terror group called Hizbullah. The bodies, in the Kurdish city of Diyarbakir,
bring the total found in two weeks to 52. Military and civilian leaders have
rejected charges that security agents cooperated with Hizbullah in their fight
against Kurdish rebels.  Stephen Kinzer (NYT)

BRITAIN: WOMAN'S BIG CHURCH ROLE
Eight years after it first allowed women to be ordained as priests, starting a
huge debate between traditionalists and reformers, the Church of England elected
a woman to a high-ranking post. As the new provost of Leicester, in central
England, Canon Vivienne Faull, 44, is charged with overseeing the region's
cathedrals and churches.  Sarah Lyall (NYT)

ASIA

CHINA: 32 IN FALUN GONG JAILED
Thirty-two members of the outlawed Falun Gong spiritual movement were imprisoned
in secret trials in Beijing, a human rights monitor in Hong Kong reported. Two
sisters considered leaders got six and seven years, while 30 others received
sentences of from four months to two years, according to the Information Center
of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in China.  Erik Eckholm (NYT)

CHINA: SMUGGLING INCREASES
China reported a record number of smuggling cases last year, but the value of
seized goods fell 39 percent compared with 1998, the state news media said. The
number of cases grew by 36.2 percent to 21,117, while the value of goods seized
fell to $1.5 billion, newspapers said. Goods seized included cars, petroleum,
cooking oil and cigarettes, said the reports, cited unidentified customs
officials.  (AP)

THE AMERICAS

DOMINICA: GOVERNMENT OUSTED
The Labor Party ousted the government of Prime Minister Edison James in a
closely contested election, and the victor, Rosie Douglas, left, said he would
halt the Caribbean island's program of raising money by selling passports to
foreigners, a central issue in the campaign. Labor's narrow victory over the
United Workers' Party will force it into a coalition with onetime rivals from
the conservative Dominica Freedom Party.  (AP)

ARGENTINA: ICED-IN TOURISTS FREED
An Argentine Navy ice cutter freed a tourist ship stranded off Antarctica since
Monday while on its way to the Bahamas. The 115 passengers and 71 crew members
of the Clipper Adventurer were all reported to be in good condition.  Clifford
Krauss (NYT)

MEXICO: SMOG WORSENS
Just days after Mexico City announced an improvement in air quality last year,
extraordinarily thick smog settled over the capital, matching the highest levels
of suspended particles in this decade. Authorities said the crisis was caused by
a police protest that snarled traffic in the city center and a fire at a
store.Julia Preston (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: CONSERVATIVE MARKS ANNIVERSARY
A leading conservative candidate in the Feb. 18 election used the 21st
anniversary of the Islamic revolution for a renewed attack on reformers. Hashemi
Rafsanjani, a former president who leads a conservative alliance, urged tens of
thousands of people at Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's mausoleum to reject those
"who question the great decisions" of the late Muslim cleric, who returned to
Tehran from exile in Paris on Feb. 1, 1979.  John F. Burns (NYT)

AFRICA

RWANDA: HELD IN GENOCIDE
The Belgian police said they had arrested the former head of the Rwandan
paramalitary police, Lt. Col. Augustin Ndindiliyimana, charged by a United
Nations tribunal with taking part in the mass killings of Tutsi in 1994. The
United Nations tribunal, based in Arusha, Tanzania, has asked for the
extradition of the former officer, who first fled to Zaire and then to Belgium,
where he was given refugee status.  Marlise Simons (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ITALY (93%); ENGLAND (92%); CHINA (92%); CHILE (92%); EUROPE (91%);
UNITED KINGDOM (90%); GERMANY (90%); SPAIN (79%); ASIA (79%); BELGIUM (79%);
HONG KONG (79%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (65%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (93%); BEIJING, CHINA (50%);

COMPANY: CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION  (84%); CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION (84%);

ORGANIZATION: CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION  (84%); CHRISTIAN DEMOCRATIC UNION
(84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ITALY (93%); ENGLAND (92%); CHINA (92%); CHILE (92%); EUROPE (91%);
UNITED KINGDOM (90%); GERMANY (90%); SPAIN (79%); ASIA (79%); BELGIUM (79%);
HONG KONG (79%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%);   NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (65%);   ROME,
ITALY (93%); BEIJING, CHINA (50%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%);

 CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%); RELIGION (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
CULTS & SECTS (86%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
TORTURE (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (75%); ARRESTS (74%); HOUSE ARREST
(74%); CANCER (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (72%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (70%); JUDGES (69%); PNEUMONIA (68%); TERRORISM (67%); INFLUENZA
(64%); RESPIRATORY DISEASE (52%); LUNG CANCER (50%);

PERSON: WOLFGANG SCHAEUBLE (88%);

LOAD-DATE: February 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             184 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Justice for East Timor

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

The willingness of Indonesia's civilian government to take on its powerful
military is encouraging ("Indonesian General Denies Guilt in Timor Abuses," news
article, Feb. 2), but Indonesia has yet to show that it can follow through with
credible prosecutions. Even if it can, the international community also has a
special responsibility because the human rights abuses in East Timor were
directed at overturning an internationally sanctioned vote on East Timor's
independence.

An inquiry authorized by the United Nations Human Rights Commission recently
recommended a joint Indonesian, East Timorese and international tribunal under
United Nations auspices. That would ensure that all of those seeking justice are
represented.

JOHN M. MILLER
Brooklyn, Feb. 3, 2000

The writer is the media coordinator for the East Timor Action Network.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); UNITED STATES (53%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (53%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (53%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EAST TIMOR; INDONESIA;   INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); UNITED
STATES (53%);   NEW YORK, USA (53%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (53%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(70%);

PERSON: MILLER, JOHN M

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             187 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 11, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Waiting in Guatemala

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

Re "35 Bodies Linked to Guatemala Army Sweep in 1982" (photograph, Feb. 4): You
note that researchers believe that the bodies made up nearly all of the
residents of Xolcuay. Presumably, the families of these 35 people know what has
happened to their loved ones. But the families of some 200,000 people killed or
"disappeared" in Guatemala's civil war wait for answers.

Congress is in a position to help bring closure to these families by passing the
human rights information bill, which mandates review of all documents pertaining
to human rights violations in Honduras and Guatemala and sets deadlines for
their declassification. Using Honduras and Guatemala as examples, the
declassification procedure mandated by the bill allows for other legitimate
human rights investigations while protecting United States security interests.

JULIE SCHIFELING
Metamora, Ill., Feb. 8, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); HONDURAS (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA; XOLCUAY (GUATEMALA); UNITED STATES; HONDURAS;   GUATEMALA

 (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); HONDURAS (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; LAW AND
LEGISLATION; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; BUREAUCRATIC RED TAPE  LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%);

 INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); LEGISLATION (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: SCHIFELING, JULIE

LOAD-DATE: February 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             188 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Next President's Duty to Intervene

BYLINE: By Michael Ignatieff;  Michael Ignatieff is the author of the
forthcoming "Virtual War: Kosovo and Beyond."

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1238 words


Sometime in the next president's term, civilians in a foreign country will be
driven from their homes and massacred. We don't know where the trouble will
start -- the Balkans, the Caucasus, central or western Africa, even the
Indonesian archipelago -- but the results will be horrible, and they will be all
over our television screens. The question is what, if anything, the president
should do.

The main presidential contenders reject isolationism and preach engagement
overseas. John McCain, George W. Bush, Bill Bradley and Al Gore have all
repeated the mantra that America must focus its military commitments around
national interests while never neglecting its values. But when foreigners are
being massacred overseas, interests say, "Stay out." Values cry, "Go in." What
does a president do then?

President Clinton wrestled with this dilemma in Rwanda and has admitted that his
paralyzed inaction, while a million people died, was one of the shaming moments
of his presidency. Since then, he has argued that in the future, America should
use its military power to stop ethnic cleansing and massacres.

The trouble is that when the Clinton administration has tried to intervene
militarily, it has rarely succeeded. This isn't just an American failure. The
West's record in matching its human rights rhetoric with effective military
protection of civilians has been miserable. In 1994, the Security Council
watched a million people die in Rwanda and did nothing. In 1995, the United
Nations promised to protect the citizens of Srebrenica and instead handed them
over to the Serbs; some 7,000 were massacred.

Even in Kosovo, where decisive force was used, air strikes failed to stop the
massacre and deportation of civilians. Now that Kosovo is in the West's hands,
its troops can't seem to prevent Serbs and gypsies from being murdered and
expelled.

This litany of failure makes it easier to stop trying. Sam Donaldson of ABC News
recently asked Mr. Bush what he would do as president to stop genocide or ethnic
cleansing in foreign countries. Mr. Bush replied that he didn't like ethnic
cleansing or genocide, but he didn't think American troops should be used "in
nations outside our strategic interest." Europe lay inside this zone, but
Africa, he made it clear, lay outside.

"So, if, God forbid, another Rwanda should take place," Mr. Donaldson asked,
"you would not move?"

"I would not send U.S. troops to Rwanda," Mr. Bush replied.

The Texas governor added that if genocide occurred, he would work with the
United Nations and "encourage them to move," which is the polite way of saying
he wouldn't do very much at all.

His main opponent in the Republican primaries, Senator McCain, agrees that
America does not have vital strategic interests in Africa, but maintains that
American values commit it to doing something about genocide there. However, he
said, "I've yet to meet a single expert who can tell me how we could have
beneficially affected that situation."

Actually, some experts think that the genocide in Rwanda could have been
prevented. United Nations peacekeepers were on the ground. Their commanding
general, Romeo Dallaire, begged for United Nations authorization to move against
the gangs that were wielding the machetes. It was a low-tech slaughter, and it
could have been deterred by a robust deployment of Western armor and the threat
of air strikes. Instead, the West stood by, and nearly a million people lost
their lives. Many Africans concluded that America and the West cared more about
European lives than African ones.

In his basic foreign policy speech, Mr. Bush says that America can't practice
hard-boiled Kissinger-style realpolitik at the expense of moral values. American
soldiers in World War II, he recalls, weren't just defending American interests;
they laid down their lives for the freedom of others. Mr. Bush even makes a
mawkish reference to the concentration camps: "And when American soldiers hugged
the survivors of the death camps and shared their tears and welcomed them back
from a nightmare world, our country was confirmed in its calling." If these
words represent more than just Holocaust kitsch, they mean that America's
"calling" includes stopping genocide in the future.

Even if Americans accept this calling, they are entitled to know how far their
responsibility stretches. It is right for Mr. Bush to question the assumption
that American military power has to be "the answer to every difficult foreign
policy situation."

Certainly the United States can't be the world's policeman. Mr. Bush, like Mr.
McCain, wants to avoid open-ended commitments because he senses voter disquiet
at "vague, aimless and endless deployments." Both candidates know that the armed
forces are caught between a decreasing share of the national budget and
increasing commitments overseas.

Fair enough. But stopping genocide doesn't commit America to intervene
everywhere. It actually sets the bar to intervention very high and justifies the
use of force only when large numbers of civilians are facing extermination, mass
deportation or massacre and where force can actually turn the situation around.

Values trump interests. When innocent civilians are dying, America may have to
intervene even when its vital interests are not at stake. But values should also
hold America back from intervening too often. Americans value other people's
right to govern themselves, even when they do it badly. That rules out an
American imperialism, even one justified in the name of human rights.

Even so, Americans may ask themselves why stopping genocide is their
responsibility alone. Other allies -- the Canadians, the British, the French --
have peacekeeping experience, and they should play their part. But the truth is
that only the United States can muster the military might necessary to deter
potential attackers and rescue victims.
 Devising an intervention strategy that will work is not easy. Even if
presidential will is there, stopping genocide is not an assignment the military
is ready for. It is still configured for Desert Storm, rather than for the dirty
civil wars of the new millennium. It is still happier righting wrongs from the
air rather than putting troops in on the ground.

Yet the only sure way to stop genocide is to deploy ground forces by sea and
air, well armed enough to open up corridors to evacuate civilians or throw
defensible cordons around them, safeguarding them from attack.

Such assignments would test the emerging doctrine that American forces can be
committed only when America's own casualties are likely to be zero. So the idea
is a tough sell. Human rights groups that call for this kind of intervention
need to narrow the gap between high moralism and on-the-ground reality.

Human rights issues never win or lose presidential campaigns, but they are a
supreme test of presidential authority and wisdom in office. Promising to do
nothing about genocide is easy when you're looking for votes, but doing nothing
when you are in the Oval Office can be costly to a presidential legacy.

Doing nothing also betrays a country's values while eroding the power on which
its interests depend. Mr. Bush calls himself a compassionate conservative.
Conservatism that won't use military power contradicts its commitment to
national strength. And compassion that stops at America's borders is just
self-deceiving callousness.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); RWANDA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (94%); AFRICA (94%);
KOSOVO (92%); INDONESIA (92%); SERBIA (92%); CAUCASIAN STATES (90%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); EUROPE (79%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN BROADCASTING COS INC  (64%); AMERICAN BROADCASTING COS INC
(64%);   UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); UNITED
NATIONS (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%);
UNITED NATIONS (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); RWANDA (94%); WESTERN AFRICA (94%); AFRICA
(94%); KOSOVO (92%); INDONESIA (92%); SERBIA (92%); CAUCASIAN STATES (90%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); EUROPE (79%);   TEXAS, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; GENOCIDE; ELECTION ISSUES;
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS

 (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); DEPORTATION (78%); ELECTIONS
(78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); GOVERNORS (78%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (70%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); MCCAIN, JOHN (SEN); IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL  JOHN
MCCAIN (78%); BILL CLINTON (73%); GEORGE W BUSH (69%); AL GORE (58%);

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Tony Palladino)

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             192 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Logic of Vladimir Putin

BYLINE: By John Lloyd; John Lloyd, based in London, wrote the cover article "Who
Lost Russia?" for the magazine in August.

SECTION: Section 6; Page 62; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 4819 words


'You know," says Igor Shadkhan, as we sit in his office and discuss his longtime
friend Vladimir Putin, "Henry Kissinger came here to St. Petersburg when Putin
was deputy mayor. Putin spoke to him in German."

Vladimir Putin, Russia's acting president, has a few unlikely friends, and one
of them is Igor Shadkhan -- a Jewish documentary film producer who says he was a
quiet anti-Soviet dissident in his day. Any self-respecting K.G.B. officer
should have had three different kinds of alarm bells ringing over these
attributes, but not, it seems, the future president. Shadkhan made a film about
Putin in the early 90's, when the latter was first deputy mayor of Petersburg
and became his friend.

"So Kissinger asks Putin, 'What did you do before this?' And Putin says, 'I was
in the secret service.' And Kissinger says, 'Me, too!' "

Shadkhan has a lot of good stories about Vladimir Putin (pronounced POO-teen),
all seemingly calculated to reveal traits that will play well to a Western
audience. Another one is about a trip to Germany, during which Shadkhan
confessed to Putin that, as a Jew, he could never feel comfortable around
Germans. "He said he understood exactly how I felt, but said: 'You should try to
understand that this is a new Germany. They are not Nazis any longer.' And he
persuaded me to think again."

These stories have at least as much symbolic as real truth. The first exculpates
Putin from his association with the world's great terror instrument, the K.G.B.,
by revealing that, East and West, the power people were all at it, all privy to
dark secrets and darker deeds. The second shows a liberal, humane and decent
European, sensitive to Jewish feelings on the Holocaust, but wise enough to know
these should not be used to prejudge contemporary Germans.

This is quite an extraordinary picture for an officer of a secret police force
that used both Nazi stereotypes and anti-Semitic ("Zionist") conspiracy theories
as part of its quotidian output. Yet it is how many Russians who regard
themselves as liberal wish to see him; and it is how Western leaders hope he
will be. The parade of Western foreign ministers whom he has received have all
been given time over the allotted hour and emerged to spout variations of
President Clinton's upbeat formulation of "a man we can do business with." Robin
Cook of Britain went in with a list of human rights points on Chechnya, only to
be met with a high-octane presentation on precisely that subject. He came out
saying the meeting was "positive" and "good," even as more stories of torture
and mass executions streamed out of Chechnya.

In Moscow, I watched Putin answer questions from the public in a phone-in
organized by the daily Komsomolskaya Pravda. To one caller, who ventured that
"the ideology of Communism was still very dangerous," he said that he felt
"pretty much the same as you . . . people should see in practice the ideas you
and I advocate, the ideals of democracy and the market economy." Asked why there
was so much fuss about the disappearance of the Radio Liberty reporter Andrei
Babitsky in Chechnya, he said that Babitsky wanted to go to the side of the
Chechens, "the people whose interests he effectively served" -- the hard-line
position on Babitsky.

I watched him again, in London, as he was interviewed early this month by Sir
David Frost. He demonstrated many of the same qualities: an alert, controlled
poise; the ability to project easy familiarity; a well-briefed acuity in
defending the seemingly indefensible. (In Chechnya "there are terrorists who
kidnap innocent people by the hundreds and keep them in cellars, torture and
execute them. . . . Bandits of this kind -- are they any better than Nazi
criminals?") He also gave the reassuring impression that, in him, Russia has
found a humane version of Peter the Great, a ruler who will open the country to
the influence of a world at once gentler and more dynamic than Russia has ever
been. ("I cannot imagine my own country in isolation from Europe and what we
often call the civilized world," Putin said. Could Russia join NATO? "I don't
see why not. I would not rule out such a possibility.")

It is now a conventional trope that Vladimir Putin is a mystery. But why he was
promoted to a position where he now stands poised to win the presidency of
Russia in next Sunday's elections is not a mystery. He is very good, and
particularly so in the areas where a modern politician must be. He is a
consummate public performer. From its dark bowels the K.G.B. has produced a
star, one who speaks of his former institution with proud dignity. "I have never
wanted to be a James Bond," he told Frost. "But working in state security was
something I had always wanted -- since back in school."

He comes to the international arena trailing clouds of odium from a Chechen war
that has seen all-out assaults by the Russian Army on towns -- especially the
capital, Grozny -- with no discrimination between civilians and fighters.
Accounts of torture, beatings, rapes and killings in prison camps like the
notorious Chernokozovo are too well documented to be misinformation or hype. And
yet Putin is able to take the fight to the enemy, arguing that the Russian Army
is defending Europe and "what we call the civilized world" from terrorism and
extremism.

While in Moscow, I attended a private meeting between senior German
parliamentarians and Gen. Valery Manilov, the first deputy chief of the Russian
general staff. The Germans made their points that Manilov's army was abusing
human rights. Manilov, smiling patiently, said they had not quite got it. "Here
in the Southern Caucasus we have seen a general commitment to unite terrorist
forces to make a bid for state power. There were 25,000 men under arms, with one
system of command, of supply and of technical support. It was a regular
terrorist army. You might bear this in mind when you talk of the
'nonproportionality' of our response."

This is the Putin doctrine, against which both domestic and international
protests have so far been muted. No longer do we have a Yeltsin who sought to
square the interests of the West with the behavior of his generals -- and
usually, as far as the generals were concerned, chose the former. Now the state
and the military are as one once more. The Yeltsin years of neglect of the
Chechen problem, as well as the shameful (to the military) agreement of 1996
that effectively admitted defeat and handed over control to the Chechen
warlords, has been explicitly renounced. The Russian writ runs again in the
Caucasus -- but with freedom, not oppression, on its banners. The Chechens,
Putin told Frost, "are not a defeated people. They are a liberated people."

If foreign governments can find some encouragement in this, they can also find
much to worry about: Putin's past in the K.G.B.; the high proportion of his
current allies who share that past; his pride in it; the brutality of his war in
Chechnya; his callous treatment of the Babitsky case; the insistence on a
stronger state. All of these make human rights champions in Russia, and a wide
arc of opinion in the West, deeply skeptical, even hostile -- even before he
starts to govern. For the center-leftists in power in most of the rich world,
with a political need to appear moral in their dealings, Putin is as difficult
to cope with as China. Realpolitik and commercial interests demand an embrace;
the human rights lobbies scream. It is neuralgic.

But that is Putin through Western eyes; the eyes that see him as a mystery. He
is less of a mystery to Russian eyes, which are not moistened much by the plight
of the Chechens. Many Westerners see the K.G.B. as an undifferentiated horror;
most Russians do not. For a very brief period, democratically minded Russians
did turn against the security services. After the failure of the August 1991
coup against President Mikhail Gorbachev, the statue of Feliks Dzerzhinsky was
wrenched off its plinth outside the K.G.B.'s Lubyanka headquarters. Living in
Moscow at the time, I was near tears as I watched the crowd try to bring down
the massive sculpture of the austere terrorist who founded the service. The
crowd, however, was not large, and most observers were not as moved as I was.
This, one of the great images of the fall of Communism, had much less resonance
in Moscow than in the West.

The K.G.B. was weakened, but it was not reformed. Its crimes were never properly
examined, and there was no consistent public pressure to do so. Soon after
Dzerzhinsky's toppling, a bust of Yuri Andropov, long-serving K.G.B. chief and
briefly general secretary of the Soviet Communist Party, was prudently removed
from its niche in the Lubyanka wall. In December, Vladimir Putin, who served
under Andropov, ordered it restored.

K.G.B. men had been heroes of Soviet fiction and journalism since the 1920's.
From the mid-30's to World War II, the depiction of the agent as hero became
particularly clear-cut, a notable example of the Soviet genius for
dissimulation. It was an image that many millions of Soviet citizens accepted,
at least in part. Putin's father, also Vladimir, probably did. According to a
recent profile published in Moscow, he was a Communist Party member who "had
links" with the K.G.B.; the family was both patriotic and reserved, "pure
Leningrad working class." His mother died of cancer in 1998, his father of a
heart condition a year later, soon after Putin became prime minister.
Reportedly, the old man said on his death bed, "My son is like a czar!"

The Soviet secret police became, after Stalin's death, much more of a "thinking
corporation," and in doing so became increasingly attractive to the upwardly
mobile. By the time Putin joined in 1975, the officers of the foreign
intelligence branch, the First Chief Directorate, were well established as an
elite. In her 1988 book on the K.G.B., Amy Knight quotes a former Czechoslovak
intelligence officer, Ladislav Bittman, to the effect that the typical Soviet
foreign intelligence officers "radiate more self-confidence and personality than
a diplomat without the K.G.B. connection. A K.G.B. official dresses more
elegantly, entertains more freely and shows more individuality even in
discussing sensitive foreign policy issues and Soviet politics."

On a visit to one of Russia's newest and smartest banks, I asked its chairman if
this was true. Aleksandr Lebedev is head of the Russian National Reserve Bank,
and was in the late Gorbachev years an officer -- an intelligence officer, not a
K.G.B. man" -- in the London Embassy. He is still in his 30's, fluent and subtle
in English, beautifully dressed, working from a sumptuous office. "They came out
of the best places -- Moscow State, Leningrad State, the Moscow State Institute
for Foreign Relations," Lebedev said. "The state was looking for people with a
talent to make others feel well disposed toward them. Tennis was encouraged, so
you could move easily in high society in the West."

This theme -- of civilized men doing dispassionate analysis for a rather less
civilized leadership -- runs strong. In an interview in Komsomolskaya Pravda in
early February, Sergei Ivanov -- like Putin, a former middle-ranking foreign
intelligence officer and a close friend whom Putin made secretary of the
Security Council -- said modestly that "the cream went into the K.G.B. And a
word on the human rights defenders. Andrei Sakharov said not long before his
death in 1990 that the one organization which expressed respect for him was the
K.G.B. Do you believe the opinion of this man?" I could find no reference or
memory of Sakharov's saying such a thing. Late last month, though, Sakharov's
widow, Elena Bonner, signed a letter with other former dissidents calling
Putin's fledgling regime "the introduction of modernized Stalinism."

Putin's crafted image of civility and Europeanism -- it carries an echo of the
promotion of Andropov in the 1970's as a jazz-loving intellectual -- is accented
by his strong attachment to St. Petersburg, the place he was born and spent most
of his career. The city was meant to be a window on Europe and a door for it;
and Putin is said, now, to represent it. In a crumbling palace on St.
Petersburg's Nevsky Prospekt, I found Valery Golubev, who is chairman of the
city's Committee for Tourism and Development of Resorts, and a friend of
Putin's. (They worked in the same K.G.B. analytical department in the early
1980's.)

"In the 1970's, when we joined, the choice of officers was exclusively of a high
order," Golubev said. "The state had the possibility to find and attract into
that kind of work the most able, the most sincere, the most decent and the most
ambitious of young people. Petersburg isn't Moscow; it's a European city. Every
stone breathes these traditions, and it gets into the head of every
Petersburger. Moscow is more Asiatic in its mentality, and the other regions are
even more so. The people from Petersburg are more interesting, freer, freer in
their thoughts."

Putin's period in the K.G.B. in St. Petersburg and in East Germany has been
trawled over, but little has emerged beyond the enormous paradox that this
self-confident, articulate and subtle performer was regarded -- when he was
noticed at all -- as gray, silent, nondescript. He was posted to Dresden in
1985, where his cover was to run the Soviet-German House of Friendship in
Leipzig. His real task was to recruit agents to supply technical and economic
information; he may have been involved in setting up a K.G.B. network to prepare
for the collapse of East Germany.

When East Germany did indeed collapse, Putin headed back to a routine job in St.
Petersburg -- screening foreign students at his alma mater, Leningrad State.
There he was picked up by Anatoly Sobchak, the former St. Petersburg mayor who
gave him his start in politics. If the Soviet Union could produce, in its dying
days, an upper-class radical, Sobchak was it. Tall, handsome, cultured, with a
rhetorical style at once impassioned and beautifully phrased, Sobchak could have
-- and in the opinion of many, including himself, should have -- been Russia's
first president.

In February, in what turned out to be his last interview -- just 62, he died of
a heart attack about a week later -- Sobchak gave me an unclouded and rosy
picture of Putin. This was not surprising. Putin had shown his loyalty by
bringing Sobchak back from a velvet exile in Paris, where he had fled to avoid
charges of corruption. (Putin, almost in tears, referred at his funeral to a man
"hounded to his death" by enemies in the pre-Putin Kremlin.)

"I met him again after many years, by chance," Sobchak said. "He said he'd left
the K.G.B., and so he became my aide, then in a few months my deputy, then first
deputy. For six years we worked together very closely. He was utterly
professional. He worked very well with others, knew how to talk to them. He was
decisive. When you put something to him, he would think about and, if he could
do it, he would say yes, never no. Judge his success -- he was in charge of
foreign investment, and by 1993 we had 6,000 joint ventures, half the total in
Russia."

Searching for clues to the "real" Putin can be frustrating. Those who know him
well offer little more than variations on the Sobchak line -- admiration,
praise, an impression of sober industry and self-sacrificing loyalty. It is
confirmed even by the few foreigners who knew him. "I found him great to deal
with, compared with these other Russian bureaucrats who all wanted to fleece
you," says Graham Humes, an American who set up a charity in St. Petersburg. "He
was very intense; he controls everything in the room. You felt he wanted to be
feared but didn't want to give you cause to fear him."

The people who care most about democracy in Russia do fear him, however, and say
they have cause. They see him as the past returned, and say so. I talked one
evening in Moscow to Sergei Kovalev, a onetime protege of Andrei Sakharov. In
his frowzy office in a crumbling apartment building, he remains serene but as
uncompromising as ever. For him, as once for Sakharov, liberal democracy is
available, so why not have it? "Putin's priority will be to increase the powers
of the state, and in Russia that tradition is a grim one. He will be efficient,
but efficient in what cause? I heard that he talked of K.G.B. men being 'dropped
into power like paratroopers' under his rule. Yeltsin at least made efforts to
overcome the reflexes of the party boss he had been. In this case, we see a
glorying in the traditions of the K.G.B., and the power they now have."

Kovalev's hostility is echoed by Amy Knight of George Washington University, the
West's foremost scholar of the organization. "I don't agree with all this
modern-man stuff about Putin," she said. "Look what he's doing -- he's clamping
down. Look at what's happening in Chechnya."

Boris Pustintsev felt the sharp end of the K.G.B. stick when, in 1956, he and a
group of fellow students at Leningrad State wrote a letter of protest against
the Soviet intervention in Hungary. He served five years in a prison camp in
Mordovia. In 1992, Pustintsev was a central witness in a film on St. Petersburg
made for Britain's Channel 4. In the film he is seen referring to the
"K.G.B.-ization" of Sobchak's administration, with six of the city district's
leaders being former K.G.B. officers. Two days after the documentary was shown
in a Petersburg cinema, Pustintsev was assaulted by a gang of young men. He was
left nearly unconscious, with a wound that almost cost him the use of his right
eye.

One evening in his flat, Pustintsev showed me both the Channel 4 documentary and
an interview he did with Petersburg TV after the assault -- his face still
bruised and his eye heavily bandaged. In a voice shaking with anger, he says
that "if people like that, people of the type of Putin, ever get real power,
then we are all finished!" It was a little eerie, watching the eight-year old
interview in a country that was preparing to give a great deal of real power to
Vladimir Putin.

Pustintsev is convinced that the "K.G.B.-ization" he warned against is now
coming to pass. He points to the three men who stand behind Putin at the summit
of Russian state security, all of whom are drawn from the Leningrad/Petersburg
K.G.B.: Sergei Ivanov, head of the Security Council; Nikolai Patrushev, head of
the Federal Security Service (F.S.B.), the domestic intelligence arm; and --
most notably -- Viktor Cherkesov, the F.S.B.'s first deputy director. "This man
was known as a democrat hater when he was head of the Petersburg F.S.B.," says
Pustintsev. "He led an attack on the democratic organizations when they began to
emerge in the last part of the 1980's." The clear signs are that both Patrushev
and Cherkesov enjoy Putin's closest trust.

Putin was taken to Moscow in June 1996 by two Petersburgers -- Anatoly Chubais,
the former privatization minister and deputy prime minister, then at the height
of his powers, and Aleksei Kudrin, who had been head of St. Petersburg's
privatization committee and is now acting finance minister. Putin moved up the
ranks like a destroyer steaming unscathed through broadsides. In July 1998, he
left the Kremlin to become the head of the F.S.B. By the following March he was
in charge of the Security Council, and in August was made prime minister. In
these posts, he avoided scandal and took pains to stress his loyalty to Yeltsin.

When Putin was head of the F.S.B., Yevgeny Primakov was prime minister -- placed
there with great reluctance by Yeltsin, as the opposition surged after the
economic crash of August 1998. Primakov, himself a former spy master (in foreign
intelligence), began to move against businesspeople and politicians he thought
corrupt. Putin was ordered to investigate Boris Berezovsky, the billionaire
financier and patron of the Yeltsin "family" -- the extended circle of relatives
and trusted associates that helped make key decisions, agreed on key
appointments and drew a tight protective ring around the former president. Putin
refused.

It was a shrewd choice -- to defend an ailing and politically weakened Yeltsin
against Primakov, then the most popular politician in Russia, with the Communist
and nationalist opposition forces in ascendancy. But Yeltsin rallied, eventually
dismissing Primakov, and Putin had earned the trust of the "family," which took
him in as one of its own.

In a memorandum prepared in January for a leading Russian financial conglomerate
by an analyst with close knowledge of the Kremlin court, the argument is made
that Putin remains a partial prisoner of the family because of his inexperience.
"Putin," the analyst writes, "was in the last 10 years a man who fulfilled
another's orders; he lacks experience of carrying through political decisions
solely on his own. He is still under the spell of Yeltsin's greatness. He has a
subordinate type of mentality and feels dependent on Berezovsky's clan."

Upon assuming office after Yeltsin's resignation at the New Year, Putin signed a
decree exempting the president from any criminal or civil suit -- an act widely
believed to be part of the reason he was chosen as Yeltsin's heir. But the
decree may also have broken the spell. For while Putin -who certainly lacks
experience in the corridors of absolute power -- remains dependent on the dark
skills of the Kremlin fixers, he is also putting together his own circle.

Besides the three top people in security, other senior appointments include
Viktor Ivanov (no relation to Sergei) from the St. Petersburg K.G.B.; Igor
Sechin, Putin's main aide in St. Petersburg; Dmitry Kozak, a former head of the
St. Petersburg legal department; and Vladimir Kozhin, former head of the St.
Petersburg regional center of Currency and Export Control -- a body reputedly
run by the security services.

This is an embryonic team of stalwarts, few of whom owe their advancement to
anyone but Putin. It is being fleshed out by a few standouts, also
overwhelmingly of Putin's generation or younger, who were already in place --
above all, Mikhail Kasyanov, first deputy prime minister and former finance
minister, who went up sharply in his boss's estimation when he secured a
settlement last month to restructure Russia's private-sector debt.

Putin also has his own party, Unity, which won more than 25 percent of the votes
in last December's Parliament elections, almost as many votes as the Communists.
It did so on one policy: vote for Putin, the savior of the country. It acts as
the Kremlin's anchor, uniting with the Communists to manufacture a complaisant
parliamentary leadership.

Putin will not use this power base to make war on capitalism, but he wants to
send packing those responsible for bringing it to Russia. The most prominent
among them, Anatoly Chubais, who is said to have confidently expected to be
offered a top post, continues to support Putin. Indeed, he is now a business
oligarch in his own right, and as head of the giant monopoly Unified Electricity
System, he needs good relations with the administration. But Putin has been
catlike in his relations with him -- publicly criticizing Unified's financial
performance while making no pretense of consulting Chubais or his colleagues on
economic policy issues.

Sobchak made an interesting comment about Putin as president, saying that "he
will govern both as Teddy Roosevelt and as F.D.R." What he meant, Sobchak said,
is that Putin will be as concerned as Theodore Roosevelt to strengthen the
state, to take on the "malefactors of great wealth." And like Franklin
Roosevelt, he will try to use the state's power to rebuild a country that has
plummeted from relatively great economic heights to poverty and mass
unemployment.

In London, I met Pyotr Aven, a former trade minister and now head of Alfa-Group,
one of Russia's largest banks. "We must have a clean role model at the top," he
said. "Clearly, that has not been the case. Then we must choose. Do we want the
Asiatic model -- which is corrupt but works as long as you have a dictator who
is active? Or do we want the democratic market model -- which works, but only
with transparency and reliability? At the moment it is a mix. Putin has to
choose; I think he is bound to choose the latter option."

He has little choice. Russia has become a capitalist country -- distorted,
corrupt and inefficient -- but with small and large capitalists who can be
opposed only with a force he cannot use without destroying what progress there
has been. Putin, for all of his popularity, is constrained: he cannot, any more
than any other contemporary leader, command the economy.

He is also constrained by the weakness of his state in the world. This above all
will dictate a continuing collaboration with the West. But his experience has
made him suspicious of the West and alert to further incursions on what he sees
as Russia's interests. "There is now a firm consensus view at the highest level
that Russia must make its own economic and security decisions," says a
Swedish-born investor, Peter Castenfeld, who has worked closely with successive
Russian governments, including Putin's. "At the root of this view lies the
perception that the West, in particular America, misused its position of power
under labels like 'strategic partnership' and 'free market reform' when Russia
was weak. They think America was intrusive and manipulative inside the Kremlin.
They think professed Western values are a cover for self-serving positions, and
that the 'international community' is largely jury-rigged.

"This isn't seen by them as being anti-American. They just think America is so
powerful that it is unpredictable, because it is able to project domestic
political needs into the international arena at will. So they want to strengthen
the state -- to make the economy work better, be more rule-based and
market-oriented. They also want to strongly resist increased geostrategic
pressure on their neighbors. They fear very much that NATO will be pushed to
expand into the Baltics. Estonia is 20 minutes by car from Putin's and Ivanov's
hometown."

Putin has been clear in the central things: his desire for power and his
effectiveness in wielding it. He is also a master of the sine qua non of modern,
or perhaps postmodern, politicians: he can manipulate symbols. Among the most
potent of those in post-Soviet Russia is that of the Orthodox Church. Putin is
the first Russian leader since Czar Nicholas II who can plausibly proclaim
himself a believer, having been baptized soon after birth and remaining faithful
to the creed.

At a ceremony in the Kremlin to celebrate the New Year, Putin came into the vast
hall from one side to meet the patriarch of Moscow and all the Russias, Aleksei
II, who entered from another. Putin knelt to kiss the patriarch's hands. It was
an act rich in paradox: the former K.G.B. colonel kissing the hands of one who
-- according to a dossier published in the early 90's -- was more than usually
helpful to the K.G.B. while rising through a hierarchy that was routinely vetted
and controlled by the security services. "Vladimir Vladimirovich," said the
master of ceremonies as he rose, "what is your message for the new millennium?"
"Love," said the president-to-be.

While I was in St. Petersburg, I was able -- through a chance meeting with a
director for the New York Metropolitan Opera named Peter McClintock -- to visit
the rehearsals at the Marinsky Theater of Prokofiev's opera "War and Peace."
Directing the opera is the Russian-American filmmaker Andrei Konchalovsky, whose
two-volume memoir is currently a best seller in Russia. Speaking after a
rehearsal one evening, he was gently gloomy, even determinist, about his native
country. "All Russian politicians will favor the state -- it is part of our
culture. Orthodox and Communist culture privileged suffering, submission; there
was no tradition of free thought. Putin is a product of Russian culture, like
Yeltsin. We have had a chaotic period -- because we have no balance. Now there
will be a period of authoritarianism. It is inevitable, and won't be too bad."

The opera was commissioned during the last war under the personal supervision of
Stalin, and ordered to be superpatriotic. Now it finds itself pressed into state
service once more. Earlier this month, Vladimir Putin attended the opening in
St. Petersburg. With him was the British prime minister, Tony Blair -- bidding
to cement the kind of relationship with the new Russian power that Margaret
Thatcher had with Gorbachev in his early years. Even before his power is
confirmed by the people, Putin is a member of the club. The traditions he
inherits, the war he has pressed to its bloody end, all these are accepted,
swallowed, in the hope of stability in his tottering country. That, too, is no
mystery.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GERMANY (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%);

CITY: SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%);

COMPANY: K G B (56%);

ORGANIZATION: K G B (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GERMANY (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%);   SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (90%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   GENOCIDE (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); HOLOCAUST (77%); POLICE FORCES (77%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (76%); MOVIE
INDUSTRY (76%); MOVIE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (62%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (61%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (69%);

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (94%); BILL CLINTON (58%);

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: (Astakhov/Izvestia/Sipa Press); Putin (then 27), with his
K.G.B. boss Yuri Sergeyevich. As a spy in Dresden, Putin reported to
Sergeyevich. (Moscoop); Putin and his wife, Lyudmila, on New Year's Eve 1999 in
Gudermes, a Chechen city 25 miles from Grozny. (R.P.G./Corbis Sygma)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             193 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1243 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Clinton Planning to Meet With Assad of Syria
President Clinton said in Bangladesh that he would meet with President Hafez
al-Assad in Geneva on Sunday to try to bridge the differences between Syria and
Israel and allow for the resumption of peace talks that broke down two months
ago.   A1

Security concerns dampened Mr. Clinton's welcome in Bangladesh.   A1


The Pope in the Holy Land
Pope John Paul II began his pilgrimage by praying on Mount Nebo in Jordan, where
the Bible says Moses first viewed the Promised Land.   A10

Burying Doomsday Cult's Dead
The Ugandan police counted the bodies of 330 people, including 78 children, who
died on Friday when their church was set on fire. Officials said the toll could
be much higher.   A1

New Direction for German Party
The Christian Democrats, reeling from financial scandal, nominated Angela
Merkel, a physicist raised in the former Communist state of East Germany, to
become their new leader. Her appointment is expected to be approved at a party
conference next month.   A11

Wartime Sex Crimes in Court
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague opened the first United Nations trial
focusing exclusively on sex crimes against women in wartime. The accusations
involve Serbian soldiers in the Bosnian war.   A3

U.N. Starts Rights Meeting
The United Nations human rights organization opened its annual meeting in Geneva
with a crowded docket. The United States plans to introduce a resolution that
will criticize China for what Washington says are deteriorating human rights.
A6

Colombia Says Abuses Decline
The minister of defense said in Washington that human rights violations by his
armed forces had declined, despite contrary reports.   A11

Taiwan Reeling From Election
The stock market tumbled, protesters clashed with the police and President Lee
Teng-hui faced mounting pressure to resign as leader of the vanquished
Nationalist Party, in the wake of the opposition leader Chen Shui-bian's victory
on Saturday.   A8

World Briefing   A11

NATIONAL   A14-20

60's Rights Leader Is Arrested as Fugitive
Officials said the man formerly known as H. Rap Brown was arrested in Alabama in
connection with the shooting of two Georgia deputies.   A1

Prescription Web Sites Raided
United States customs agents joined Thai authorities in raiding online
pharmacies based in Thailand. Federal officials said it was the first time that
they had shut down foreign Web sites that sell prescription drugs online to
American consumers.   A18

Switching Gas Additives
The E.P.A. will ask Congress to phase out the gasoline additive M.T.B.E., which
was intended to make air cleaner but which pollutes water, and replace it with
corn-based ethanol and other substances.   A20

McCain to Help G.O.P. in Fall
Senator John McCain is planning to campaign for like-minded House and Senate
Republicans to help their party retain control of Congress.   A20

Seeing Siege Scene Differently
The two sides in the Branch Davidian wrongful-death civil lawsuit offered
starkly different conclusions after hurriedly reviewing infrared videos taken of
a unique court-ordered simulation conducted this weekend at Fort Hood, in Texas.

   A14

Back to Work at Boeing
Boeing's white-collar workers returned from a 40-day strike, and national labor
officials said they hoped the outcome would encourage other white-collar workers
to unionize.   A14

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

AIDS-Polio Vaccine Tests
Scientists in the United States and Europe are gearing up to test samples of an
experimental polio vaccine stored for more than 40 years to determine whether it
may have inadvertently been the spark that ignited the worldwide AIDS epidemic.
   F1

Children and Medications
Hillary Rodham Clinton announced an initiative to reverse a sharp rise in the
use of drugs like Ritalin and Prozac by children under 6. Experts and drug
companies reacted favorably to the suggestion that many preschoolers were being
given the powerful medications without being properly evaluated by doctors.
A18

Health & Fitness   F7

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Moving Off Welfare to Work Is Not Assured for Some
More than 40 percent of state welfare recipients have been on the rolls for five
years or more, new figures show, and many of these recipients have serious
problems that make them difficult to employ. A 1996 law limiting recipients to
five years of federal aid could drop thousands from the rolls next year.   A1

Mayor Assailed on Shooting
Hillary Rodham Clinton accused Mayor Giuliani of intentionally polarizing the
city by leading "a rush to judgment" over the disputed circumstances of the
fatal police shooting of an unarmed black man last week.   B1

Student Drug Death
Trinity College and the police in Hartford were investigating a drug-taking
episode on Friday that led the arrest of three roommates and the death of a
fourth.   B1

Madison Square Garden Plans
Cablevision, which owns the Knicks and the Rangers, plans to demolish Madison
Square Garden and build a new arena there or nearby.   B3

EDUCATION

Spotlight on School Board
The New York City Board of Education is under renewed scrutiny as its seven
members prepare to pick a permanent chancellor and Mayor Giuliani presses Albany
to abolish the board and give him control.   A1
Race and School Transfers
The Supreme Court let stand a lower-court ruling that race had been used
improperly in deciding which students could transfer between schools in a
Washington suburb.   A18

SPORTS   D1-8

ARTS   E1-8

Missing Oscars Found
Nearly all the missing Oscar statues were found in a trash bin in Los Angeles.
Two men are in custody.   A14

$80 Million Museum Gift
The Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art in Kansas City, Mo., has received 84 artworks as
a gift from the foundation created by the heirs of the founder of Hallmark
Cards.   E1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-30

Redesigning Sport Vehicles
Automakers said they were modifying new sport utility vehicles to make them less
hazardous to other motorists in crashes.   A1

Rate Rise Anticipated
The Fed is expected to raise interest rates by another quarter of a percentage
point today, to 6 percent.   C1

Stocks Finish Mixed
The Nasdaq lost 188.13 points, or 3.9 percent, to 4,610.00, and the S.& P. 500
slid 7.84 points, to 1,456.63, but the Dow rose 85.01, to 10,680.24.   C18

Dissension on Internet Taxes
A commission advising Congress on whether and how Internet commerce should be
taxed fell into disarray.   C1

Viacom Seeks Second Network
The owner of CBS made a deal to acquire control of UPN, raising the prospect of
one company owning two broadcast television networks.   C1

Upheaval at Magazine
Conde Nast ousted the top editor at Details and said the next issue would be the
last under its ownership.   C13

Business Digest   C1

FASHION   B8

OBITUARIES   C30-31

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: The Patrick Dorismond case; violence in Nigeria; Daumier's domain;
Tina Rosenberg on justice in Chile and Argentina.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E4

TV Listings   E8

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D7


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BANGLADESH (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA (94%); SWITZERLAND (93%);
ISRAEL (92%); GERMANY (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); JORDAN (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); UGANDA (79%); TAIWAN (79%); NETHERLANDS (70%); THAILAND
(66%);

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (79%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%);

COMPANY: HOLY LAND INSURANCE CO (58%);   UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS
(83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BANGLADESH (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA (94%); SWITZERLAND
(93%); ISRAEL (92%); GERMANY (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); JORDAN (79%);
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%); UGANDA (79%); TAIWAN (79%); NETHERLANDS (70%);
THAILAND (66%);   ALABAMA, USA (79%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (70%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (91%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (87%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (87%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(79%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (76%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (76%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (76%); RELIGION (76%);
RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST
PERSONS (74%); ARRESTS (74%); SEX OFFENSES (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES (73%);
POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (73%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%); PEACE PROCESS
(72%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); CULTS &
SECTS (70%); SHOOTINGS (69%); APPROVALS (69%); RIOTS (69%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL
CRIME (68%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (68%); SCANDALS (68%); ARMED FORCES (65%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (65%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (64%); RETAIL PHARMACEUTICALS
(63%); FUEL ADDITIVES (63%); ETHANOL (63%); ALCOHOLS (63%); BIOFUELS (62%);
PHARMACIES (60%); EXCISE & CUSTOMS (60%); WATER POLLUTION (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (65%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); JOHN MCCAIN (78%); ANGELA MERKEL (52%);

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             195 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 29, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Prosecuting War Crimes

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

"Pinochet's Revenge: Oliver North, You'd Better Watch Out" (Week in Review,
March 26) blurs the distinction between justified and unjustified prosecutions.
If United States officials commit war crimes or other atrocities and face no
prosecution at home, the rest of the world justifiably seeks their prosecution
elsewhere.

But there are procedural safeguards against politically motivated, unjustified
prosecutions, as illustrated by the British courts' scrupulous regard for due
process during the extradition case against Gen. Augusto Pinochet.

True, a hypothetical Libyan or Iraqi court might not care for such procedural
niceties, but that makes all the more baffling our government's opposition to
the emerging International Criminal Court, where rigorous fair trial standards
would prevail.

REED BRODY
Advocacy Director
Human Rights Watch
New York, March 27, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN
RIGHTS WATCH (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%); IRAQ (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  WAR CRIMES (92%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); DUE PROCESS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%);

PERSON: BRODY, REED  OLIVER LAURENCE NORTH JR  (74%);

LOAD-DATE: March 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             196 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

An African Tragedy

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 169 words



To the Editor:

An April 1 editorial describes the dynamics that have led to tragic reprisals
against environmental activists. It is even more tragic that the next such
crisis could be financed by the World Bank.

The State Department's 1999 human rights report had a litany of human rights
abuses by Chad and Cameroon, including extrajudicial killings, "disappearances"
and female genital mutilation. Yet the World Bank is poised to lend $300 million
to them and to the Exxon Mobil Corporation and the Chevron Corporation to
develop oil fields in Chad and build a pipeline to Cameroon.

Political corruption in the two countries makes it unlikely that any pipeline
revenue will pay for programs for the poor, which the World Bank touts as its
primary mission.  More likely are loss of land, environmental degradation and
worsening repression.

DELPHINE DJIRAIBE
Washington, April 3, 2000

The writer is president of the Chadian Association for the Promotion and Defense
of Human Rights.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: XOM (NYSE) (71%); CVX (NYSE) (71%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (71%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (71%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (71%);
SIC2911 PETROLEUM REFINERIES (71%); SIC1311 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS (71%);



COUNTRY: CAMEROON (94%); CHAD (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT  EXXON MOBIL CORP

 (71%); CHEVRON CORP (71%);   INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION &
DEVELOPMENT (59%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION & DEVELOPMENT (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHAD; CAMEROON;   CAMEROON (94%); CHAD (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; ETHICS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (92%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); DEVELOPMENT BANKS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
ENVIRONMENTALISM (90%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (88%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (88%); POLITICS (86%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (86%); OIL & GAS
PIPELINE CONSTRUCTION (86%); PIPELINE TRANSPORTATION (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); CORRUPTION (71%);
ETHICS (71%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (68%);

PERSON: DJIRAIBE, DELPHINE

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             197 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Israeli High Court Orders Release of 8 Lebanese Prisoners

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, April 12


Reversing itself, the Supreme Court ruled today that Israel is not justified in
holding Lebanese detainees as bargaining chips for missing Israeli soldiers.

The court ordered that 8 of 15 Lebanese detainees who have been imprisoned
without charges for more than a decade be released immediately. In the
closed-door hearing, the court said that the eight men did not "pose a danger to
state security" and that "absent any other reason for their arrest," their long
detention was illegal.

The seven others, including two former high-ranking guerrilla leaders, were not
included in the petition because of technical reasons; they were originally
represented by a different lawyer. But legal experts said the ruling was broad
and should apply to them, too -- unless the government could find another reason
to detain them.

After the court ruled, the Israeli prison authorities said they would release 13
of the detainees next week -- all the men in their custody. The two others, the
guerrilla leaders Mustafa al-Dirani and Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, are being held
in a secret location by the army, and Justice Minister Yossi Beilin indicated
today that the government would try to retain them as security risks.

International and local human rights groups, which have strongly criticized
Israel, saying the men were kept as hostages, received the court's decision with
relief.

"I'm sad that it took so long and that for 15 years the judicial system
collaborated with the state on holding persons as hostages," said Dan Yakir, an
Israeli human rights lawyer. "But I'm very happy that the court came to the
inevitable conclusion that such practices are not legitimate in a democratic
society that is premised on the protection of human rights."

In a cautiously worded statement, Prime Minister Ehud Barak, who is also the
defense minister, expressed his opposition to the prisoner release but said he
would abide by the court's ruling. As a general, Mr. Barak oversaw the mission
to capture Mr. Dirani from Lebanon in the early 1990's, and he still displays as
a memento the gun that was found under Mr. Dirani's pillow.

Mr. Barak said today that he would have preferred to have kept the men locked up
"for a certain period." He has pledged to withdraw Israeli troops from southern
Lebanon by July, and to do so in the context of a peace agreement or at least an
"arrangement" with Syria or Lebanon or both. If there is an agreement or
arrangement, Israel will negotiate for the release of its missing soldiers -- or
their bodies -- and that would be a moment to use the detainees as "chips."

The mother of Ron Arad, an Israeli navigator who was captured in 1986 after
parachuting out of his jet in Lebanon, deplored the court's decision. "I feel
the same way I felt the day that Ron was captured," Batya Arad said today. "I
see in this decision a betrayal of Ron by the justice system."

Highlighting the sensitivity of the case, the court delayed releasing the full
text of its decision today so that it could be reviewed for classified
information. Instead, it issued a terse one-paragraph summary of the 6-to-3
ruling by a nine-judge panel.

The summary said Israeli law on administrative detention, or detention without
trial, did not grant the Defense Ministry the right to detain individuals who
did not threaten state security.

In 1997 Chief Judge Aharon Barak wrote a decision upholding such detentions,
saying the government had sufficient authority. But he also wrote today's
decision, in which he changed his mind.

In the embargoed decision, Judge Barak, who is not related to the prime
minister, wrote that he had been plagued by the original decision in the
intervening years, according to an official who read the full ruling.

"It's really touching," the official said. "He writes that he is aware that he
ruled differently three years ago but that ever since he couldn't stop thinking
and rethinking about the mistake he made and that judges shouldn't be afraid to
admit mistakes and change their minds."

Legal experts say they believe that the ruling is part of the continuing
normalization process, in which Israel is dropping several discriminatory or
coercive policies that it justified as necessary to defend its security.

The lawyer for the detainees, Zvi Rish, described their reaction as "very
thrilled and surprised." But they did not "express it vocally," he said.

The eight detainees have been imprisoned in Israel for 11 to 13 years. All were
between the ages of 16 and 18 when they were abducted from southern Lebanon in
the late 1980's. They were convicted in Israel for membership in Hezbollah, the
Iranian-backed Shiite Muslim group, and received sentences of one to three years
in prison.

When their sentences expired, they were placed under administrative detention as
bargaining chips.

Some of the other detainees were never charged or convicted. Five others were
freed in December. And last week, Israel released Ghassan al-Dirani, a nephew of
Mustafa al-Dirani, after a Tel Aviv judge ordered him freed on compassionate
grounds. Ghassan al-Dirani is considered to be mentally ill as a result of the
interrogation he suffered in the captivity of pro-Israeli Lebanese militiamen
before he was secretly transferred to Israel.

Last weekend, after he returned to his homeland, the Lebanese authorities picked
him up on what they said was an outstanding warrant. He is once again being held
in prison.

The Israeli justice minister, Mr. Beilin, said the Supreme Court's decision
today was "correct and important, ending the very problematic detention of these
prisoners."

Next week the court is expected to rule on a related case. Human rights
advocates have challenged the detention of Lebanese citizens in the Khiam
prison, which is run by the Israeli-backed South Lebanese Army in the border
zone.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); LEBANON (94%); SYRIA (79%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; LEBANON;   ISRAEL (98%); LEBANON (94%); SYRIA (79%);
BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (58%);

SUBJECT: DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  DECISIONS &
RULINGS (93%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (91%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); JAIL
SENTENCING (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%);
VERDICTS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); PRISONS (73%); PETITIONS (73%); ARRESTS

 (72%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (60%);   CORRECTIONS
(90%); POWS & MIAS (78%);

PERSON: SONTAG, DEBORAH; DIRANI, MUSTAFA AL-; OBEID, ABDEL KARIM (SHEIK); BARAK,
EHUD (PRIME MIN); BEILIN, YOSSI (MIN)  EHUD BARAK (89%);

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lebanese women demonstrated yesterday in front of the Red Cross
headquarters in Beirut, demanding that Israel release Mustafa al-Dirani, a
guerrilla leader held in a secret location by the Israeli Army. (Agence
France-Presse)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             204 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 9, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

New San Francisco Ordinance Decrees That All Sizes Fit

BYLINE: By EVELYN NIEVES

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 749 words

DATELINE: SAN FRANCISCO, May 8


It was a big day for people tired of living in a small world.

The large and tall, the pudgy and the plump -- in short, anyone who has ever had
to endure the stigma of being overweight in a society where thin is in -- have
won a battle for the bulge, at least here in San Francisco.

In a move that says a lot about this city's legendary sensitivity, the Board of
Supervisors today passed an ordinance that makes it illegal to discriminate
against a person based on the nebulous category of "size."

Known throughout the city as the "fat ordinance," the measure actually applies
to skinny people, too. It adds height and weight to the same antidiscrimination
codes that provide protections for people based on race, religion, color,
ancestry, age, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, disability and place of
birth.

The ordinance, inspired by a fitness company advertisement on a billboard last
year ( "When the aliens come, they will eat the fat ones first") adds San
Francisco to a short list of places in the nation -- Santa Cruz, Calif.,
Washington, D.C. and the state of Michigan -- with similar statutes.

The ordinance has generated a number of jokes: one local columnist said it
inspired him to form the "California Association of the Not So Bad, Average and
Mediocre."

But advocates for fat acceptance say the ordinance is a necessary remedy for all
those who have ever been insulted, denied a seat at a restaurant or rejected for
a job because of their appearance.

"We're convinced that this is a serious problem that represents a loss of civil
rights," said Larry Brinkin of the San Francisco Human Rights Commission.

Marilyn Wann, a local leader of the National Association to Advance Fat
Acceptance, and the author of "Fat! So?" (Ten Speed Press, 1998), called the
legislation historic and necessary, especially when about half of all Americans
are overweight and 1 in 4 is medically obese, according to government
statistics.

"We don't need a diet," said Ms. Wann, who said her 270 pounds on a 5-foot-4
frame was her natural size. "We need an end to discrimination."

The growth of fat-acceptance groups is evident on the Internet; dozens of groups
have Web sites, notably the Fat Activist Task Force, formed in 1989 to pressure
Hallmark Cards to remove products poking fun at fat people from their
merchandise list (www.naafa.org/fatf).

"Fat people are people," said John Cahill, a San Francisco writer who carries
his 250 pounds on a 6-foot frame. "From the remarks I get on the Muni trains,
you'd think I was a deaf cow."

About 20 people of various sizes, most large, attended the board meeting today
to support the ordinance, which passed unanimously.

"I've counseled too many women and men in body-image support groups who have had
horrible experiences," said Melinda McBride, a graduate student. "People have
gone in for medical treatment for very specific things, and they've been told to
lose weight. It's important that this law passed because it can have
far-reaching implications outside of San Francisco."

Tom Ammiano, the president of the board and a former stand-up comedian who wrote
the ordinance, said he was prompted to act in part because overweight people
often become "targets and even scapegoats of many negative moral traits, such as
laziness, low intelligence, gluttony, bad health, etc."

In Santa Cruz, a 1992 ordinance banning discrimination based on height, weight,
physical characteristics and sexual orientation was invoked only once, by two
women who believed they were denied housing because they were a lesbian couple.
The matter was resolved through arbitration. That ordinance clears the way for
victims of discrimination to file a lawsuit seeking monetary redress, but none
have yet been filed.

In Michigan and Washington, D.C., where measures banning discrimination based on
height and weight or appearance have been in force since the 1970's, numerous
suits have been filed. Debbie Moss of the Human Rights Commission in Washington,
said the ordinance was used by "people being overweight, people having their
hair a certain way -- there are all kinds of reasons."

But Rob Morse, the San Francisco Examiner columnist who advocated acceptance of
mediocrity, said the new ordinance would probably not change life here all that
much. "In the past, the supes have voted to protect tropical hardwoods, the
Burmese people and San Francisco's two daily newspapers," he said, "and look at
all the good that's done."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS511191 GREETING CARD PUBLISHERS (51%); SIC2771 GREETING CARD
PUBLISHERS (51%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA
(79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: HALLMARK CARDS INC (51%);   SAN FRANCISCO HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION
(94%); FAT ACTIVIST TASK FORCE (72%);

ORGANIZATION: SAN FRANCISCO HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION (94%); FAT ACTIVIST TASK
FORCE (72%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SAN FRANCISCO (CALIF);   UNITED STATES (94%);   CALIFORNIA, USA
(94%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);   SAN FRANCISCO,
CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: WEIGHT; DISCRIMINATION; LAW AND LEGISLATION  ORDINANCES (90%);
LEGISLATION (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); OBESITY (77%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS (75%); GAYS & LESBIANS (75%);
EXERCISE & FITNESS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (71%); RESTAURANTS (67%); INTERNET &
WWW (66%); STATISTICS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(63%); RELIGION (54%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (75%); PHYSICAL FITNESS (73%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: NIEVES, EVELYN

LOAD-DATE: May 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Marilyn Wann, left, Jason Fisher and Nancy Gold are supporters
of San Francisco's anti-bias "fat ordinance," which was approved yesterday.
(Thor Swift for The New York Times)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             206 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Prisoner Restraints Amount To Torture, Geneva Panel Says

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH OLSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 311 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 17


Use of electric stun belts and restraint chairs, which human rights groups say
is widespread in the United States, almost inevitably violates the international
treaty against torture, according to a United Nations monitoring group.

The United Nations Committee Against Torture, which examines compliance of 118
countries that have ratified the 1984 pact, also cited as problem areas in the
United States police brutality, chain gangs, sexual assaults of female prisoners
by law enforcement officials and detention of minors.

The committee's panel of 10 human rights experts urged American officials to
"abolish electroshock stun belts and restraint chairs as methods of restraining
those in custody," on the ground that their use "almost invariably leads to
breaches" of the treaty, which the United States ratified in 1994.

There was no immediate response from the administration, whose representatives
received the recommendations on Monday without comment.

Stun belts, which are placed around prisoners' waists, are used in as many as
100 United States jurisdictions. The Clinton administration's top human rights
official, Harold H. Koh, argued that no lawsuits had been brought that
substantiate the accusations of death or serious injuries to prisoners from such
restraints.

He said that such devices are used only to transport dangerous inmates.

In its first review of the American record on torture and other cruel, inhuman
and degrading treatment or punishment, the committee also asked Washington to
"ensure that minors are not held in prison with the regular prison population."

The committee's conclusions were in response to last week's American government
report, which is required for all countries that have ratified the United
Nations Convention Against Torture. The United States was nearly five years late
filing its report.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (68%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS COMMITTEE AGAINST TORTURE  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (98%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (68%);

SUBJECT: PRISONS AND PRISONERS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; STUN GUNS; CHAIN
GANGS; GUARDS; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; SEX CRIMES; WOMEN; SUITS AND LITIGATION
HUMAN RIGHTS (92%); TORTURE (91%); LITIGATION (90%); PRISONS (90%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRUEL & UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT (78%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (77%); SEX OFFENSES (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); SEXUAL ASSAULT
(76%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (71%); SUITS & CLAIMS (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (66%);
   CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: OLSON, ELIZABETH; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); KOH, HAROLD H (ASST SEC)  BILL
CLINTON (69%);

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             209 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Allows Cambodians to Take Part in Trial of Khmer Rouge

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 534 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 24


After months of often rancorous exchanges over who should ultimately control war
crimes trials for the Khmer Rouge, the United Nations has conceded to Cambodia
the right to appoint one of two prosecutors. The compromise appears to have
surmounted a major hurdle in eventually bringing former leaders of the Khmer
Rouge to trial.

Human rights groups immediately criticized the deal under which either the
Cambodian prosecutor or a co-prosecutor appointed by the United Nations could
proceed with a case if a five-judge panel does not block it. The groups said the
United Nations had compromised its requirement that the trials be conducted by
allowing the prosecutors total independence.

In addition to allowing co-prosecutors, the deal also provides that the panel of
judges will include three members from Cambodia and two nominated by the United
Nations. Initially, the United Nations would have preferred to model this panel
on the war crimes tribunals used in the Balkans and Rwanda, which are outside
the control of national governments.

The agreement was arrived at in part last month through the intercession of
Senator John F. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, who discussed the urgency of
establishing a tribunal with Cambodian leaders, and through a long series of
negotiations between a United Nations team and Cambodia's prime minister, Hun
Sen.

The deal must be approved by the Cambodian legislature before the tribunal can
begin prosecuting cases against former members of the Khmer Rouge, an extreme
leftist movement that decimated Cambodian society in the 1970's. More than a
million people were executed or died from hard labor, dislocation, starvation
and disease.

Officials said the deal signaled that Mr. Hun Sen, himself a former
lower-ranking Khmer Rouge official, had given up having total control over the
tribunal.

"The secretary general considers the prime minister's response a positive
development," said Fred Eckhard, the spokesman for United Nations Secretary
General Kofi Annan. But the United Nations is refusing to discuss the agreement,
and plans to send its legal counsel, Hans Corell, back to Cambodia to discuss
details. In the past, Mr. Hun Sen has changed his position and undercut
agreements.

Officials here and in Cambodia said that the Clinton administration, with few
foreign policy breakthroughs to its credit as it enters its final months,
strongly backed the deal, apparently finalized in an exchange of letters between
Mr. Hun Sen and Mr. Annan this week.

At the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, Bruce Broomhall, the international
justice coordinator, said that this provision is a welcome development, but
overall he remains skeptical of the agreement.

"This rewards political intransigence by compromising on the integrity of the
tribunal," he said.

Kenneth Roth, executive director of Human Rights Watch, said in an interview
that he sees many pitfalls in the deal.

"We're afraid that this is a precedent that will come back to haunt the U.N.
elsewhere," Mr. Roth said. "The U.N. has been a very firm custodian of fair
trial standards, and prosecutions have been conducted with scrupulous regard for
due process."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (99%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
CAMBODIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); APPOINTMENTS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUDGES (78%); LIBERALISM (76%); LAWYERS
(75%); STARVATION (73%); INTERVIEWS (72%); EXECUTIVES (72%); APPROVALS (70%);
FOREIGN POLICY (60%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  JOHN KERRY (79%);

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             210 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 3, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1354 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-6

Putin Suggests New Way To Foil Missile Attacks
President Vladimir Putin of Russia, seeking to recast a security debate just
before his summit meeting with President Clinton, has suggested an alternative
to the proposed American system for defending against missile attacks by nations
like North Korea. Mr. Putin hinted that the United States and Russia could
collaborate on new ways to shoot down missiles soon after they were launched,
rather than in space.   A1


Integrating Russia Into Europe
President Clinton urged America's European allies to invite Russia into their
military and political unions or risk destroying the vision of an undivided
Continent.   A6

Moscow Challenged on Atrocity
Human Rights Watch called on the Russian government to seek out and try the
servicemen who went on a rampage near Grozny on Feb. 5, killing at least 60
civilians.   A6

No Investigation of NATO
The United Nations' chief war crimes prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, said there was
no basis for an investigation into whether NATO committed war crimes during the
bombing of Yugoslavia last year.   A4

Nazi Slave Labor Deal Snagged
An agreement in which German industry and the government agreed to pay Holocaust
survivors nearly $5 billion became entangled in disagreements with the United
States over protecting the companies from future lawsuits.   A6

Arrest in 1978 Italian Killing
The French police arrested Alvaro Loiacono, a former member of the Italian Red
Brigades, in the killing of former Prime Minister Aldo Moro of Italy in 1978.
Mr. Moro was kidnapped before he was killed in the group's most notorious
attack.   (AP)

Cuba Open to Claims Talks
Havana is prepared to hold talks with American companies that had property
seized when Fidel Castro came to power 40 years ago, a United States Chamber of
Commerce official said after a trip to Cuba.   A4

Baker to Monitor Mexico Vote
Former Secretary of State James Baker will lead a 35-member delegation to
observe the July 2 presidential election, the International Republican Institute
said.   (Reuters)

World Briefing   A5

NATIONAL   A7-10, 14

H.M.O.'s Seen to Curtail Participation in Medicare
More H.M.O.'s will soon pull out of Medicare or curtail their participation for
financial reasons, disrupting insurance coverage for hundreds of thousands of
elderly people, according to federal officials, independent experts and
managed-care executives. Cigna said it would end coverage for 104,000 Medicare
beneficiaries in 11 states: New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, California,
Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Maryland, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia. Aetna, with
676,000 Medicare beneficiaries enrolled in its H.M.O., said it would pull out of
some markets.   A1

F.A.A. Warns Airline
The F.A.A. threatened to shut down major maintenance overhauls at Alaska
Airlines, which would ground the airline within months. The agency, its
attention drawn to the airline by a fatal crash last January and a federal grand
jury investigation, said the carrier had trouble keeping track of required
maintenance and that managers had not noticed the problem.   A7

Tension Over Campaign Inquiry
Quarrels between the Justice Department and the F.B.I. over appointment of an
independent campaign finance investigator had a "devastating impact" on
relations among investigators, officials acknowledged in a report by the General
Accounting Office.   A10

Gore on Absent Fathers
Vice President Al Gore called for measures to encourage absent fathers, whom he
called "the No. 1 cause of child poverty in America," to pay child support. He
also urged government policies that would "lift up the institution of marriage."

   A8

Conviction in O'Hair Case
A federal jury in Austin, Tex., convicted Gary Paul Karr on several charges
relating to the disappearance of the atheist Madalyn Murray O'Hair, her son and
her granddaughter, but acquitted Mr. Karr, 52, of conspiracy to commit
kidnapping.   A9

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Satellite Heading for Ocean
NASA engineers prepared for the fiery plunge into the Pacific this weekend of
the 17-ton Compton Gamma Ray Observatory. Only two of its three stabilizing
gyroscopes have been functioning since December, and NASA feared the
consequences of its losing another gyroscope and plunging to earth on its own.
   A10

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

State Environment Agency Approves New Power Plant
The Pataki administration gave final environmental approval to build the
nation's largest power plant in the Hudson River town of Athens, 30 miles south
of Albany. The $500 million natural-gas-fired plant was proposed by Pacific Gas
& Electric.   A1

Life After the Senate Race
Two weeks after he dropped out of the Senate race for health reasons and saying
he wanted to be a better person and mayor, Mayor Giuliani has begun making
tentative overtures to some former enemies.   A1

Lazio Seeks Jewish Support
Representative Rick A. Lazio met in Manhattan with Jewish leaders, seeking
support in his Senate campaign from a key constituency that usually favors
Democrats but may be up for grabs this year.   B5

Doctors' Troubled Histories
Two radiologists whose licenses were suspended by the state after accusations
that they had administered faulty mammograms have a history of problems in their
practices, according to records and interviews with former associates.   B1

A Final Flurry of Spending
Jon S. Corzine, who is seeking the Democratic nomination for Senate in New
Jersey, is expected to spend up to $2 million next week to try to get supporters
to the polls, a sum approaching the get-out-the-vote budget for many
presidential contests.   B1

Beliefs   B6

ARTS & IDEAS   B7-16

OBITUARIES   A11

SPORTS   D1-8

Knicks' Season Ends
The Indiana Pacers defeated the Knicks, 93-80, in Game 6 of the Eastern
Conference finals.   D1

The Portland Trail Blazers beat the Los Angeles Lakers, 103-93, tying the
Western Conference finals at 3-3.   D4

Reunited in Pursuit of a Trophy
The New York Yacht Club will field a challenge to the next Kiwi defense of the
America's Cup, in 2002-3, under the command of the four-time cup winner, Dennis
Conner.   D2

BUSINESS DAY   C1-16

Sign of a Slowdown
The Labor Department said the nation's private employers, instead of hiring,
shed 116,000 jobs in May. It was the largest drop in more than eight years and
the first since the economy began to soar in the mid-1990's. The unemployment
rate edged up to 4.1 percent from 3.9 percent. Wage increases eased, reducing
concerns about inflation. Investors pushed stocks up across the board in the
belief that the evidence would discourage or limit further interest rate
increases by the Fed.   A1

The Nasdaq soared 6.44 percent, up 230.88 points, to 3,813.38, ending its best
week ever. The Dow rose 142.56 points, or 1.34 percent, to 10,794.76, and the
S.& P. 500 jumped 28.45 points, or 1.96 percent, to 1,477.26.   C1

Airline Merger Buzz
Speculation has intensified that the next acquisition target in the airline
industry is Northwest, and there have already been talks between Northwest and
AMR, the parent of American, executives confirmed.   C1

Leftists Control Pension Fund
A radical-left coalition now controls all three elected seats on the six-member
board of Brazil's largest and most influential pension fund, known as Previ,
with $17.5 billion.   C2

Oprah Editor Resigns
The editor of O: The Oprah Magazine, Ellen Kunes, is resigning for personal
reasons after just one issue went on sale.   C15

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A12-13

Editorials: Mr. Clinton's weekend in Moscow; measuring the progress of women;
public necessities; a mambo king bows out.
Columns: Frank Rich, Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B14
TV Listings   B16
Crossword   B14
Weather   D8
Public Lives   A7


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: CI (NYSE) (51%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS524114 DIRECT HEALTH & MEDICAL INSURANCE CARRIERS (51%);
NAICS524113 DIRECT LIFE INSURANCE CARRIERS (51%); SIC6321 ACCIDENT & HEALTH
INSURANCE (51%); SIC6311 LIFE INSURANCE (51%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); EUROPE (92%); CUBA (90%); FRANCE (79%); SOUTHERN
EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (79%); ITALY (79%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA (79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); ALASKA, USA
(79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); GEORGIA, USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%); NEW
YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); DELAWARE, USA (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);   HAVANA, CUBA (73%);

COMPANY: CIGNA CORP (51%);   NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (90%); UNITED
NATIONS  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS
WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (90%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%);
HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (92%); EUROPE (92%); CUBA (90%); FRANCE (79%); SOUTHERN
EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (79%); ITALY (79%);   TEXAS, USA (79%); MARYLAND, USA
(79%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); ALASKA, USA (79%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%); GEORGIA,
USA (79%); CONNECTICUT, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);
DELAWARE, USA (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);   HAVANA, CUBA (73%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); BOMBINGS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MEDICARE (89%); FOREIGN
POLICY (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); BUSINESS
& PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (75%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); HOMICIDE (73%); LITIGATION (73%); MANAGED
CARE ORGANIZATIONS (71%); COMMERCE DEPARTMENTS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (68%); HOLOCAUST (68%); ACCIDENTAL
FATALITIES (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (66%);
HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS (65%); AIRLINES (61%); SENIOR CITIZENS (60%);
POLICE FORCES (53%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); CHAMBERS OF COMMERCE

 (64%);

PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (90%); BILL CLINTON (90%); FIDEL CASTRO (50%);

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             211 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 4, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Terrorism Panel Faults U.S. Effort on Iran and 1996 Bombing

BYLINE: By JAMES RISEN

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, June 3


The Clinton administration has not done enough to press Iran for cooperation in
the investigation of a 1996 bombing that killed 19 American servicemen, despite
evidence of Iranian involvement, a bipartisan commission on terrorism has
concluded.

In a report to be released on Monday, the National Commission on Terrorism
concludes that the administration has done little to mount an international
campaign to put diplomatic pressure on Iran to cooperate in the investigation
into the bombing of the Khobar Towers complex in Saudi Arabia.

The commission, created by Congress, recommends that the United States make no
any further concessions to Iran as part of its rapprochement with political
reformers until Tehran cooperates fully in the investigation and ends its
support for terrorism.

"U.S. efforts to signal support for political reform in Iran could be
misinterpreted in Iran or by U.S. allies as signaling a weakening resolve on
counterterrorism," the commission's report says.

It calls for the United States to create the kind of international campaign
against Iran that worked to a limited degree with Libya, which was forced to
hand over two intelligence officers for trial in connection with the bombing of
Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland.

Last year, President Clinton sent a letter to the Iranian president, Mohammad
Khatami, asking for help in the Khobar Towers probe, and senior American
officials publicly acknowledged that they had evidence of Iranian involvement in
the bombing.

But the commission concluded that the administration had not acted aggressively
enough on the case at a time when it was also seeking a diplomatic opening with
Tehran. "The U.S. government has not sought similar multilateral action to bring
pressure on Iran to cooperate in the Khobar Towers bombing investigation," the
report says.

It argues that Iran remains the "clearest case" of a state sponsor of
anti-American terrorism as an element of its government's policy.

In response, an administration official denied that the United States had failed
to seek international support for its efforts to gain Iranian cooperation on
Khobar Towers. "We have pursued approaches to Iran through a variety of means,
including trying to elicit support from other countries," the official said.

The White House spokesman, P. J. Crowley, said: "Khobar Towers remains under
investigation, and we continue to pursue all aspects of the case, including
possible Iranian involvement. Nothing is being overlooked, and this remains a
high priority."

The 10-member terrorism commission was created last year with six members
appointed by the Republican Congressional leadership and four by the Democratic
minority. Its report is based on interviews with officials throughout the
government, including at the State Department, Pentagon, National Security
Council, F.B.I. and C.I.A.

One of its recommendations calls on the Central Intelligence Agency to drop its
human rights guidelines on the recruitment of terrorist informants.

In 1995, the C.I.A. established new procedures for the agency's case officers to
seek approval before recruiting informants who may have been involved in human
rights abuses. The guidelines were put in place following charges that the
C.I.A. knowingly hired paid informers among Guatemalan military officers
suspected of involvement in political killings, including those of an American
citizen and a rebel leader married to another American.

The commission argued that the guidelines had made it more difficult for the
C.I.A. to penetrate terrorist organizations.

"These procedures have deterred and delayed vigorous efforts to recruit
potentially useful informants," the report concluded. "The C.I.A. has created a
climate that is overly risk averse."

The commission recommends that the 1995 guidelines no longer be used in
terrorist cases. "The director of central intelligence should issue a directive
that the 1995 guidelines will no longer apply to recruiting terrorist
informants," the report says.

A C.I.A. spokesman denied today that the 1995 guidelines impeded the agency's
ability to gather intelligence on terrorist organizations.

"The notion that our human rights guidelines are an impediment to fighting
terrorism is simply wrong," said the agency's spokesman, Bill Harlow.

"No one knows better than we do that when combating terrorism, it is often
necessary to deal with unsavory individuals," he said. "But we do so with our
eyes wide open, and with appropriate notification to senior officials. The
bottom line is this: C.I.A. headquarters has never turned down a request to use
someone, even someone with a record of human rights abuse, if we thought that
person was valuable to our overall counterterrorist program."

But L. Paul Bremer, the chairman of the commission and an ambassador at large
for counterterrorism in the Reagan administration, said the panel had heard
testimony from both current and former C.I.A. officers who said the guidelines
served as disincentives to the recruitment of agents inside terrorist groups.
The commission's members were unanimous in recommending that the guidelines be
dropped in terrorist cases, he said.

A C.I.A. official argued that the guidelines serve to protect agency case
officers from second-guessing if they recruit an agent who later emerges as a
human rights violator. With the guidelines in place, case officers can show that
they received approval from senior officials to go ahead with the recruitment.

"The guidelines haven't been a problem," the official said. "We want people to
be aggressive in the field, and we think they have been pretty successful at
that."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: PANASONIC (NSE) (68%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); SAUDI ARABIA
(92%); IRAN (88%);

CITY: TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (88%);

COMPANY: PANASONIC HOME APPLIANCES INDIA CO LTD (68%);   CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY (93%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SAUDI ARABIA; IRAN;   UNITED STATES (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF

 (96%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); IRAN (88%);   TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(88%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; MILITARY BASES AND
INSTALLATIONS; BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; IRAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  TERRORISM
(93%); INVESTIGATIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (87%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%);
COUNTERTERRORISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (72%);

PERSON: RISEN, JAMES  BILL CLINTON (79%);

LOAD-DATE: June 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             213 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 8, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rights Group Says NATO Bombing in Yugoslavia Violated Law

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 562 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE, June 7


In an extensive report that infuriated NATO leaders, Amnesty International said
today that NATO violated international law in its bombing war over Yugoslavia by
hitting targets where civilians were sure to be killed.

In particular, the human rights group said that NATO's bombing of the Belgrade
headquarters of Radio Television Serbia, on April 23, 1999, "was a deliberate
attack on a civilian object and as such constitutes a war crime." Sixteen people
died in the predawn attack, nearly all of them technicians, security workers and
makeup artists.

NATO has defended the bombing as an attack on the "propaganda machine" of
President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia.

International law forbids direct attacks on civilians and civilian targets and
requires all feasible precautions to prevent civilian deaths. In some cases,
Amnesty said, NATO failed to take sufficient precautions to minimize civilian
casualties. The number of civilian deaths from NATO air strikes "could have been
significantly reduced if NATO forces had fully adhered to the laws of war," the
report said.

Amnesty also condemned a NATO attack on a bridge at Varvarin on May 30, 1999, in
which at least 11 civilians died. "NATO forces failed to suspend their attack
after it was evident that they had struck civilians," the report said, and it
criticized NATO for ordering its pilots to fly so high that they could not take
proper precautions against bombing civilians. In particular, the report
criticized the bombing of convoys of Albanian refugees near Djakovica on April
14 and Korisa on May 13.

The report was released less than a week after Carla Del Ponte, the chief
prosecutor for the war crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia in The Hague,
told the United Nations Security Council that her investigation had found no
basis for charging NATO with war crimes. Mrs. Del Ponte said that although "some
mistakes were made by NATO," she was "very satisfied that there was no
deliberate targeting of civilians or unlawful military targets."

Still, some tribunal officials said privately that they hoped their report would
cause NATO countries to review their rules of engagement in order to lessen the
chances of civilian casualties.

NATO's secretary general, Lord Robertson, called Amnesty's accusations baseless.
He said that NATO "made every effort to minimize civilian casualties." NATO's
mistakes, he said, were few and should be weighed "against the atrocities that
NATO's action stopped."

The report by Amnesty does not try to weigh the violations committed by Serbian
officials and forces; rather it tries to hold the members of NATO up to the
highest standards of international law and behavior.

The Amnesty report is similar in its findings to a detailed report by Human
Rights Watch in February. Of the 500 or so Yugoslav civilians killed in Serbia
and Kosovo by NATO bombs, half died because of NATO violations of laws and
practices on protecting civilians, said Kenneth Roth, executive director of
Human Rights Watch, in a telephone interview from New York.

Amnesty was scathing about the bombing of the television station, which went off
the air only briefly.  "NATO deliberately attacked a civilian object, killing 16
civilians, for the purpose of disrupting Serb television broadcasts in the
middle of the night for approximately three hours."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES
(92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (91%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL; NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (91%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (91%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (98%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);
KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);   BELGRADE,
SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  BOMBINGS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); REFUGEES (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%);
DEATHS & DEATH RATES (71%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%);   LAW OF WAR
(78%);

PERSON: ERLANGER, STEVEN; ROBERTSON (LORD) (SEC)  SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (57%);

LOAD-DATE: June 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             217 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 21, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Denied in Senegal

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 363 words


Six months ago the Pinochet precedent spread to Africa when Senegal decided to
try the former dictator of Chad, Hissene Habre, on charges of torture. It was
the first time an African country had brought human rights charges against
another nation's head of state, and it energized democracy activists -- and
terrified other former tyrants -- across the continent. But Senegalese courts
have now dropped the charges after what looks suspiciously like interference
from the country's new president. Chad's torture victims have appealed. Their
plea should be heard by a court independent of executive branch pressure.

Mr. Habre ruled Chad for eight years with the backing of France and the United
States, which supported him as a counter to the Libyan leader, Muammar
el-Qaddafi. Mr. Habre's regime killed thousands of people, and hundreds of
thousands may have been tortured. He was overthrown in 1990.  Since then he has
lived in Senegal.

His comfortable exile was disturbed when he was arrested in February, after a
group of torture victims came to Senegal to testify. Judge Demba Kandji's
indictment was based on Senegal's ratification of the Torture Convention, which
obliges states to prosecute or extradite alleged torturers no matter where the
crimes took place.

In March, however, Abdoulaye Wade was elected president of Senegal. Mr. Wade
apointed Mr. Habre's attorney, Madicke Niang, as a special adviser. President
Wade also headed a panel that removed Judge Kandji from the case. The president
of the Indicting Chamber, the body that released Mr. Habre, was promoted while
his chamber was deliberating the matter.

The chamber's decision that Senegal had no jurisdiction to prosecute torture
abroad is particularly disappointing because Senegal enjoys one of Africa's most
independent judiciaries. It was the first nation to ratify the International
Criminal Court, and its lawyers hold prominent positions in judicial and human
rights organizations worldwide.  If it tried Mr. Habre, Senegal could make a
signal contribution to human rights on a continent that has suffered more than
any other from murderous leaders and the absence of the rule of law.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SENEGAL (99%); AFRICA (93%); CHAD (93%); UNITED STATES (79%); LIBYAN
ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (79%); FRANCE (56%);   LIBYA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHAD; SENEGAL;   SENEGAL (99%); AFRICA (93%); CHAD (93%); UNITED
STATES (79%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (79%); FRANCE (56%);   LIBYA (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; EDITORIALS  TORTURE (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%);

 LAWYERS (76%); ARRESTS (73%); JURISDICTION (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%);
   RULE OF LAW (77%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (67%);

PERSON: HABRE, HISSENE  HISSENE HABRE (94%);

LOAD-DATE: July 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             224 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 20, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Officials Are Arguing Over Papers On Chile Coup

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 19


Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and George Tenet, director of central
intelligence, are at odds over the extent to which the United States should
release documentation of its involvement with repressive Latin American regimes
in decades past.

During a visit to South America this week, Dr. Albright pledged to push for the
"fullest possible declassification" of files related to the coup that toppled
Chile's elected Socialist government and the 17-year military dictatorship that
followed.

She also promised to start reviewing for release documents about Argentina's
"disappeared" and their children, victims of state-sanctioned kidnappings during
successive regimes between 1976 and 1983.

"This has been something that the president and I have not only supported but
have been instrumental in making sure it happens," Dr. Albright said in Chile on
Thursday. She added: "The whole enormity of the project reflects our commitment
to clarify the historic record of a highly controversial period in our bilateral
relations."

But Mr. Tenet recently notified members of Congress that he had decided to
withhold an unspecified number of documents about Chile on the grounds they
would disclose too much about how his agency conducts its business.

"These materials present a pattern of activity that had the effect of revealing
intelligence methods that have been employed worldwide," Mr. Tenet said in an
August 11 letter to lawmakers.

The documents had already been cleared by the C.I.A.'s own declassification
experts as part of the last and largest release of interagency files related to
Chile, which is scheduled for September 14.

President Clinton last year ordered the national security agencies to "retrieve
and review for declassification documents that shed light on human rights
abuses, terrorism and other acts of political violence in Chile" between 1968
and 1990.

"I think you're entitled to know what happened back then, and how it happened,"
Mr. Clinton said at the time, referring to covert American actions that aided
the rise of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who led the junta that overthrew Chile's
Socialist president, Salvador Allende Gossens.

The president's initiative, which began after the arrest of General Pinochet in
London at the request of a Spanish judge, has yielded about 7,500 documents so
far, most of them from the State Department. Archivists who have reviewed the
redacted documents say none of them reveals the C.I.A. role in destabilizing the
Allende government.

Mr. Tenet said he would submit the withheld documents for a final interagency
review, and insisted, "We are in no way trying to withhold information
embarrassing to the United States government."

But advocates of a broader declassification of documents voice concerns that Mr.
Tenet is doing just that: withholding details of American complicity in the
overthrow of a democratic government and, by extension, in the repressive regime
that followed. They accuse the C.I.A. director of flouting the spirit of Mr.
Clinton's order.

"I think we're witnessing an internal division within the administration," said
Daniel Weiss, a spokesman for Representative George Miller, a California
Democrat. "We believe the president genuinely wants to see the full story on
Chile and the United States told publicly."

Mr. Weiss said the C.I.A. chief apparently wants to withhold information "that
would speak unfavorably of the United States. But that's the historical process.
That's the integrity we're trying to establish, to understand fully what took
place in Chile."

The outlines of C.I.A. operations in Chile have been in the public domain for a
quarter century.

American records related to recent repression in Argentina are not expected to
provide as rich a historical trove. That country's first military coup, in 1976,
coincided with the election of President Carter, whose human rights campaign
strained ties with the architects of a "dirty war" that eventually killed more
than 15,000 people. But the United States was well apprised of Operation Condor,
a plan by South American regimes to arrest dissidents in one another's
countries.

The White House declined to say whether President Clinton would back up the
openness of his top diplomat or ratify the caution of his spymaster. David
Stockwell, a spokesman, said the matter is still under review.

"We want to ensure that the American public has access to as much information as
possible about human rights abuses, terrorism and other acts of political
violence during and prior to the Pinochet era in Chile," Mr. Stockwell said. "Of
course," he added, "the president has confidence in George Tenet."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (57%);

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); LATIN AMERICA
(88%); ARGENTINA (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  APCO ARGENTINA INC (57%);   CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (71%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (71%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (71%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (71%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (98%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%);
LATIN AMERICA (88%); ARGENTINA (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS; COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); COUPS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);

 SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION

 (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (77%); HISTORY (77%); POLITICS (74%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); JUDGES (71%); TERRORISM (70%); ARCHIVE
COLLECTIONS (70%);   MILITARY RULE (76%);

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; ALBRIGHT, MADELEINE K (SEC); TENET, GEORGE;
CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (79%);

LOAD-DATE: August 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             225 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 25, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Truth on Guatemala

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 126 words



To the Editor:

Re "Guatemala's Missing Children" (editorial, Aug. 20):

Your editorial prompts me to ask why Congress has not passed the Human Rights
Information Act, which would mandate an immediate review of all United States
documents pertaining to human rights violations in Honduras and Guatemala and
set deadlines for declassification.

The declassification procedure would help countless families overseas discover
what happened to their loved ones while fully protecting national security
interests of the United States.

It is time for the United States to help these families learn the truth.

JULIE SCHIFELING
Metamora, Ill., Aug. 23, 2000

The writer is Illinois legislative coordinator, Amnesty International U.S.A.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%); HONDURAS (92%); UNITED STATES (91%);

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (56%);   AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA;   GUATEMALA (96%); HONDURAS (92%); UNITED STATES (91%);
   ILLINOIS, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: KIDNAPPING; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE
CHILDREN (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); CIVIL
WAR (87%); WRITERS (86%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (86%); NATIONAL SECURITY (83%);

 EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (59%);

PERSON: SCHIFELING, JULIE

LOAD-DATE: August 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             226 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Risky American Course in Colombia

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 328 words


Colombia's President, Andres Pastrana, deserves American support for his efforts
to reduce drug production and trafficking and begin peace negotiations with
Marxist guerrillas. Mr. Pastrana's political position is shaky at the moment,
and President Clinton's visit to the port of Cartagena today may help reinforce
it. But the Clinton trip will also inaugurate a misguided expansion of American
support to Colombia's security forces.

Colombia's army and police are fighting a simultaneous war against drug
producers and Marxist guerrillas who now control as much as half of the
country's territory. It is unrealistic to imagine that the $1.3 billion aid
package, most of it to supply 60 military helicopters and train a new army
anti-narcotics brigade, will only be used against the drug traffickers and not
also against the guerrillas who provide them with armed protection.

There is nothing wrong with Washington helping an elected democratic government
combat a brutal armed insurgency. But this particular guerrilla conflict, which
has been raging for decades, has reached a military stalemate and needs to be
resolved at the negotiating table. Delivering close to $1 billion in American
military aid does not seem the best way to encourage both sides to talk peace.

Colombia's army has a terrible record of violating human rights. Regrettably,
the House stripped the aid legislation of safeguards to improve military
professionalism, and Mr. Clinton unwisely waived one of the remaining human
rights provisions to let aid begin flowing immediately.

The aid package contains some good features, including nearly $240 million for
human rights training, judicial reform and programs promoting alternative
economic activities for peasants now making their living from drug cultivation.
It will be up to Mr. Clinton's successor to see that American aid is used to
promote peace and development, not to draw Washington into an endless guerrilla
war.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (95%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; DRUG ABUSE AND
TRAFFIC; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; CIVIL
WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); DRUG TRAFFICKING
(90%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (90%); PEACE PROCESS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(89%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (78%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); DRUG POLICY (78%);
CIVIL WAR (76%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (73%); LEGISLATION (71%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); HELICOPTERS (54%);

PERSON: PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES); CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (92%);

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             227 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

China Protests U.S. Rights Suit Against a Leader

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 415 words


China is demanding that American officials dismiss a federal civil lawsuit
charging a high-ranking official with human rights abuses stemming from the 1989
military crackdown that killed hundreds of student protesters in Tiananmen
Square.

The lawsuit was filed Monday in Federal District Court in Manhattan by five
participants in the Tiananmen Square democracy movement. The suit was brought
against Li Peng, the country's prime minister at the time and now the chairman
of the National People's Congress.

Chinese officials blamed the United States government for not properly
protecting Mr. Li from having a court summons served to him while he was in New
York for a United Nations conference of members of parliaments. A process server
handed the summons to a State Department employee guarding Mr. Li. Although the
department later said it could not accept such papers, a federal judge in
Manhattan ruled that Mr. Li could be served through his guards.

"What happened in New York concerning the serving of the court papers is a
political farce, put together by a small number of anti-China elements," Zhang
Yuanyuan, a spokesman for the Chinese Embassy in Washington, said in a telephone
interview on Friday night.

The civil suit was filed by lawyers from the Center for Constitutional Rights, a
nonprofit legal group that specializes in human rights cases. It is the first
time that such a legal action has been taken against a Chinese official.

The Chinese government is "expressing strong opposition, strong displeasure and
dissatisfaction with the incident, and launching a strong protest," Mr. Zhang
said. He added that the charges were "absolutely absurd and unacceptable."

State Department officials could not be reached yesterday for comment.

The lawsuit accuses Mr. Li of being responsible for "crimes against humanity,"
including summary execution, arbitrary detention and torture.

The plaintiffs, who live in the United States, are four former student
dissidents and one man, Zhang Liming, whose sister was shot dead by army troops
that overran Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989. Among the former students is Wang
Dan, who was released from a Chinese prison in 1998 and exiled to the United
States.

The legal basis for the lawsuit comes from two American statutes that allow
human rights victims anywhere in the world to file for claims in this country's
courts. Mr. Li has more than two weeks to answer the court order. He flew back
to China on Friday.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS  (55%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%); CENTER FOR
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (55%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%);   NEW YORK, USA (93%);   NEW YORK,
NY, USA (93%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); LITIGATION
(92%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); STUDENT ACTIVISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); INTERVIEWS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TORTURE (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); PRIME MINISTERS (76%); LAWYERS (75%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

 ARMIES (73%); JUDGES (73%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (70%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (69%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (63%);

PERSON: LI PENG (57%);

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             228 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

To End the Conflict in Africa

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 162 words



To the Editor:

Makau Mutua (Op-Ed, Aug. 30) proposes ending war in Rwanda and Burundi by
creating two states, one Hutu and one Tutsi. He says "most ordinary Africans"
agree. But in two years of negotiations to end the Burundian war, none of the 19
participants backed partition.

Why not? Because Burundi, like Rwanda, is a centuries-old state encompassing
Hutu and Tutsi who share a common language, culture and religion. The struggle
is indeed about power, but it also pits Tutsi against Tutsi and Hutu against
Hutu. Sometimes Hutu and Tutsi from one region unite against others.

Monoethnic states might just redefine the conflict. Burundian Hutu killed
hundreds of Rwandan Hutu last February and Burundian Tutsi for years
discriminated against Rwandan Tutsi in their country.

Peace in central Africa demands new attitudes, not new maps.

ALISON DES FORGES
Buffalo, Aug. 31, 2000

The writer is a consultant for Human Rights Watch, Africa.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BURUNDI (96%); RWANDA (96%); AFRICA (95%); CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH  (56%); HUMAN RIGHTS WATCH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA; BURUNDI;   BURUNDI (96%); RWANDA (96%); AFRICA (95%);
CENTRAL AFRICA (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; HUTU TRIBE;
TUTSI TRIBE  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CIVIL WAR (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%);
DISCRIMINATION (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); RELIGION
(54%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%);

PERSON: DES FORGES, ALISON; MUTUA, MAKAU (PROF)

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             229 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Wide Net in Argentine Torture Case

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER and GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1577 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Sept. 10


When the local daily newspaper Reforma ran a front-page picture of Ricardo
Miguel Cavallo, director of Mexico's national motor vehicle bureau, a shock of
recognition ran halfway round the world.

The face -- thin, almost fragile, silver hair, icy eyes, a half-smile -- was
familiar in Buenos Aires, in Barcelona, in Mexico City. Scores of survivors of
Argentina's military junta, which killed tens of thousands a generation ago,
said they knew Mr. Cavallo as "Serpico." They remembered him from the torture
chamber inside the mechanics' school of the Argentine Navy. Under the junta,
from 1976 to 1983, more than 5,000 people disappeared into that chamber. Most
were never seen again.

Susana Burgos, who had lived through two years of captivity, knew that face:
"Older, but with the same look, the same eyes," she said. She had faint hope of
seeing her tormentor punished. But when the newspaper stories ran, so did Mr.
Cavallo -- for a plane back to his native Argentina, where officers who served
the junta have official amnesty. The flight stopped in Cancun, Mexico, where Mr.
Cavallo was arrested, just before midnight on Aug. 24, on charges of terrorism
and torture.

The warrant came from across the Atlantic, in the name of Spanish citizens who
suffered and died in Argentina. It was signed by the same judge, Baltasar
Garzon, who tried last year to extradite Augusto Pinochet, the former dictator
of Chile, on charges of genocide.

Now Mr. Cavallo's case appears likely to create a precedent that General
Pinochet's did not: the principle that the law knows no borders, that a person
can reach across frontiers and back through time to seek justice for crimes
against humanity.

Mexico must now decide whether Mr. Cavallo should be sent to Spain to stand
trial for crimes committed 20 years ago in Argentina. And if Mexico extradites
him, it would be unprecedented in the annals of international law, human rights
experts say.

"There will be no refuge for torturers, even in a country that used to be a
paradise of corruption and impunity," said Jose Miguel Vivanco, executive
director of the Americas division of Human Rights Watch.

"When you arrest Pinochet, it sends a chill through the tyrants," said Reed
Brody, the group's advocacy director. "When you arrest Cavallo, it sends tremors
through the ranks, and tells them they have fewer places to hide. It says to the
ranks of police officers and soldiers that if they commit torture today, they
could be prosecuted tomorrow, and not only in Spain."

Mexico, like many other nations, has long placed the principle of its
sovereignty above the ideals of human rights. It became a kind of haven for
Latin American military officers suspected of cold-war crimes, just as Argentina
once was a refuge for Nazis.

Mexican officials have given no indication how they will decide the case of Mr.
Cavallo. But Mr. Brody said he expected Mexico to comply with the Spanish
judge's extradition request, a decision that appeared more likely after Mexico
agreed on Thursday to the United Nations' plan for an international criminal
court. The United States, saying it wants to protect its own sovereignty, has so
far refused to go along with the idea of the international criminal court.

Mexico's Commerce Department set up a new national motor vehicle registry bureau
last year, ostensibly to fight auto theft, and Mr. Cavallo won a 10-year
concession to run it. He had helped his brother set up a similar service, a
national data base of automobile serial numbers and titles, in El Salvador. Mr.
Cavallo is listed as a director and part owner of that company.

Popular opposition and allegations of incompetence hounded the Mexican bureau.
On Thursday, an under secretary of commerce, Raul Ramos Tercero, was found dead
on a highway outside Mexico City, his throat and wrists slashed. Mexican
officials linked his death, which has officially been called a suicide, to the
Cavallo case.

Although Mr. Cavallo's resume showed he had served under the Argentine junta, he
was hired last year. During and after the last years of the junta, which fell in
1983, many of its soldiers turned up elsewhere in Latin America, selling their
skills to armies and governments.

His brother, Oscar, now in El Salvador, said in an interview that whatever Mr.
Cavallo had done in Argentina had happened long ago and far away, and should be
forgiven and forgotten.

"How far should we go back to undertake revisionism in the world?" he said. "We
could judge Spain for colonizing America and killing indigenous people. When are
we going to stop?"

Mr. Cavallo's lawyer says that he may be a victim of mistaken identity, and that
if he is not, the laws of Argentina will pardon him. Many Latin American
governments have granted their cold warriors sweeping amnesties, seeking to
induce a kind of national amnesia. Though they killed their own people, the
accused can go free, and their victims have little hope for justice.

Mr. Cavallo was hired in August 1999, and came to Mexico permanently last fall.
In November, Judge Garzon cited him in a formal charge of terrorism and torture.
But it was not until two weeks ago that the connection was made between the Mr.
Cavallo who victims said they remembered as the young servant of the Argentine
junta and the middle-aged government contractor in Mexico. France also wants to
question Mr. Cavallo, who served as a military attache in Paris in 1982 and
1983, about the deaths of 15 French citizens, including two nuns, under the
junta.

In 1996, Judge Garzon, whose job is to investigate rather than to try cases, had
opened a criminal case after Spanish lawyers asked him to look into the torture,
disappearance and killing of Spanish citizens under the Argentine junta.

"These are very grave violations," he said in 1998. "We have a moral debt with
the relatives of hundreds of victims."

Ms. Burgos and four other survivors told Judge Garzon that Mr. Cavallo had
helped run the mechanics' school. "Cavallo was one of the naval officers there
who would lead the kidnappers who would go out and snatch people, then bring
them back to the school," Ms. Burgos said in an interview from Barcelona. "I
understand he became one of the school's bosses.

"We were tortured there," she said. "On arrival, we were beaten, and then for
days during those first weeks they would soak us with water and attach
electrical charges to our bodies and zap us with 220 volts. Later they'd use
psychological torture, telling us they were going to go out and kill our
children, our families."

As many as 30,000 people were killed by the junta; thousands were dumped in
rivers and the sea, buried in mass graves, made to disappear.

Among them were six members of Natalia Bruschtein's family -- her father,
grandfather, aunts and uncles. She is now 25 and her hair is turning gray. She
has lived in exile in Mexico City nearly all her life. She does not remember her
father, who was seized by the junta when she was an infant. Her mother tells her
he was a leftist guerrilla, but more idealist than ideologue.

In the last week, she has been organizing Argentine exiles in Mexico City to
call on the Mexican government to send Mr. Cavallo to stand trial in Spain.
"This is our way to recover the people we lost," she said. "Anytime I can do
something for my father, it is a way to recover some part of him."

"The military will win only if they are able to make us forget," she added. "Our
memories are our greatest defense."

Dr. Ignacio Maldonado Martinez has heard many memories of a man named Serpico.
An Argentine exile who has lived here for 25 years, he is a psychiatrist who has
treated many victims of the junta. "They told stories, even years after torture,
with absolute clarity," he said.

Roughly 30 of them "remembered the person named Serpico," named after the New
York City policeman, immortalized by Hollywood, whose testimony sent corrupt
officers to prison 30 years ago.

The Argentine Serpico also played the role of good cop. "He'd play the good guy
amid evil to drive his subjects crazy," Dr. Maldonado said.  His victims
remembered "the good torturer," a calm young man "with a very smooth voice," who
was "very personable, friendly" as he threatened torture and death, he said.

"When I saw his picture in Reforma," Dr. Maldonado said, "the first thing I
thought was, this is what I had imagined, exactly -- a man with a friendly face,
but with a halfway terrible look."

Argentina's president, Fernando de la Rua, said on Tuesday that he opposed Mr.
Cavallo's extradition. "The government of Argentina insists on the principle of
territoriality in the application of criminal law," he said, arguing that no one
should be tried abroad for crimes committed in his native land.

Chile used that same argument in urging Britain not to send General Pinochet to
be tried in Spain. In March, after 16 months of house arrest in England, he was
allowed to fly home to Chile.

But photos, fingerprints and the first-hand testimony of torture victims rule
out the idea that Mr. Cavallo is not the man known as Serpico, according to the
Mexican branch of Interpol, the international police organization.

And the laws of his native land may not apply to him anymore.

"Pinochet's long detention in London has shown that globalization has now
expanded from economic affairs to the institutions of politics and justice,"
Chile's new president, Ricardo Lagos, said recently.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (57%);

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%); ARGENTINA (96%); SPAIN (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); CHILE
(79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);

STATE: CATALONIA, SPAIN (88%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (55%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (94%); BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (92%); BARCELONA, SPAIN

 (90%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ARGENTINA; MEXICO; SPAIN;   MEXICO (99%); ARGENTINA (96%); SPAIN
(94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); CHILE (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (50%);
CATALONIA, SPAIN (88%); ATLANTIC OCEAN (55%);   MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (94%);
BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (92%); BARCELONA, SPAIN (90%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; ARGENTINA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-SPAIN; ARGENTINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-MEXICO; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; MEXICO-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-SPAIN; TORTURE  EXTRADITION (91%);
TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);

 WAR CRIMES (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); EXECUTIVES (78%); COLD WAR

 (76%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (72%); ARMED FORCES
(71%); CORRUPTION (71%); TERRORISM (71%); ARREST WARRANTS (71%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (71%); WAR & CONFLICT (70%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (69%); GENOCIDE (64%);
MILITARY RULE (76%);

PERSON: WEINER, TIM; THOMPSON, GINGER; CAVALLO, RICARDO MIGUEL; PINOCHET UGARTE,
AUGUSTO (GEN); GARZON, BALTASAR (JUDGE)  RICARDO MIGUEL CAVALLO (97%); AUGUSTO
PINOCHET (60%);

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Protesters with a banner bearing a caricature of Ricardo Miguel
Cavallo in Mexico City after a ceremony for Argentina's visiting president. Mr.
Cavallo, below, is accused of being a torturer during the Argentine junta.
(Associated Press); (Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             232 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 20, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A Treaty to Sign

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 137 words



To the Editor:

The United States should sign the treaty setting up an international criminal
court (World Briefing item, Sept. 14). An international criminal court is the
only way to enforce uniform international human rights standards.

Signing it would be part of a logical progression: the United States has already
signed the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights, as well as the Geneva Conventions, which are the
basis for those treaties.

Government officials of countries that violate human rights must be held
accountable. The United States has concerns about national sovereignty, but by
not signing the treaty we make our country look as if it is trying to evade
human rights laws.

BARATH NAGARAJAN
Austin, Tex., Sept. 16, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%);

CITY: AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(93%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   TEXAS, USA (79%);   AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%);

PERSON: NAGARAJAN, BARATH

LOAD-DATE: September 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             233 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Peru Closing Bribery Case Of Top Aide Now an Exile

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 792 words

DATELINE: PANAMA, Sept. 26


As Panamanians denounced the arrival of Peru's disgraced intelligence chief to
seek asylum, a prosecutor announced in Peru today that she was closing the
bribery case against him.

The intelligence chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, was seen on videotape apparently
handing $15,000 to an opposition member of Congress, presumably to win his
support. News reports from Lima said the prosecutor's decision, subject to
review by superiors, was made on the grounds that there was no official
misconduct because the congressman had not yet been sworn into office.

Mr. Montesinos, who had been a close adviser to President Alberto K. Fujimori,
arrived here early Sunday and has been given a 90-day tourist visa as officials
review his asylum request. He is said to be staying in the home of the Peruvian
consul.

It is unclear how the prosecutor's decision will affect his asylum claim. It was
not unexpected among political experts in Lima, who had said Mr. Montesinos is
the master of too many secrets that touch Peru's highest levels of political and
military power. Many opposition politicians, who had accused him of murder,
torture and human rights violations, had made his arrest and trial a
nonnegotiable step toward any dialogue on Mr. Fujimori's call for elections next
year, a contest in which he will apparently not run.

"This will only create more of a crisis," said Fernando Llovera, a spokesman for
Alejandro Toledo, who made a strong showing against Mr. Fujimori in the first
round of the recent presidential election, before contending that the vote was
fixed and dropping out of the race. "There are now several groups who will no
longer take part in any dialogue."

Several opposition legislators arrived here on Monday to ask President Mireya E.
Moscoso to deny asylum on the grounds that Mr. Montesinos was fleeing criminal
judgment, not political persecution.

Panamanian human rights groups held a modest protest today on the same street
where in 1979 they denounced the shah of Iran's asylum request. The
demonstrators said they wanted to show their opposition to Mr. Montesinos's
presence and their country's reputation as a haven for political pariahs.

The government today expelled seven Peruvians who arrived here soon after Mr.
Montesinos, including high-ranking military officers who are his allies.

Over the years, Panama has been the home in exile to, among others, the shah,
Gen. Raoul Cedras of Haiti and a former Guatemalan president, Jorge Serrano
Elias.

"The feeling I have is the same as 21 years ago, that of indignation and
impotence," said Miguel Antonio Bernal, a political expert who said the police
nearly beat him to death in the protests against the shah. "Once again, Panama
has been used as a garbage dump and latrine for this type of rat. The truth is
that Panama is business, not a country. These people come here with money to do
business."

Foreign Minister Jose Miguel Aleman said his office was reviewing the asylum
request, which he said was political because of Mr. Montesinos's role as an
adviser and intelligence chief. Mr. Aleman acknowledged that the decision to
admit Mr. Montesinos was made only after United States officials and numerous
Latin American presidents had called Ms. Moscoso to warn her that it was the
only way to avoid a bloody coup in Peru.

"This was a sacrifice by the Panamanian people to help the Peruvian people
attain an open democracy," Mr. Aleman said. "So it fell to us to receive Mr.
Montesinos. We are a political party that was itself persecuted by the army. It
was hard for us to make this decision. But we did it for a brother country."

Ricardo Arias Calderon, a vice president in the 90's, said other countries had
more resources and room for Mr. Montesinos. "Why haven't the Latin American
presidents explained why they were so eager for Panama to accept him?" he asked.
"We no longer wish to be the little country where they send dictators."

Some political experts said that Panama might have been hoping to get off an
American blacklist for not having done enough to fight money laundering.

"This was a matter of hemispheric cooperation to promote democracy in keeping
with international accords," Mr. Aleman said. "I hope that is valued in some
way. But there was no quid pro quo."

Panama's sometimes troubling role as a haven may bring unwanted costs, said
Robert A. Pastor, a political scientist at Emory University and a former member
of the National Security Council.

"Panama has made its own democratic transition, and it is moving to consolidate
the rule of law," Mr. Pastor said. "So to excuse somebody who may have committed
crimes in another country does not do much to consolidate the rule of law in a
hemispheric context."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); HAITI (79%); GUATEMALA
(79%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (88%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; PANAMA;   PERU (98%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); HAITI
(79%); GUATEMALA (79%);   LIMA, PERU (88%);

SUBJECT: DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS; BRIBERY; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; ASYLUM
(POLITICAL)  POLITICAL ASYLUM (91%); BRIBERY (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); ELECTIONS (89%); PROTESTS
& DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); MISCONDUCT (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (78%); MURDER (78%);

 TORTURE (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); POLITICS (77%); PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); RIOTS (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); PASSPORTS & VISAS (54%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (75%);

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO  VLADIMIRO MONTESINOS (94%); JOSE
MIGUEL ALEMAN (66%); ALBERTO K FUJIMORI (59%);

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             235 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 30, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mideast Human Rights

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 75 words



To the Editor:

Arab nations have called for a neutral United Nations committee to investigate
human rights abuses committed by Israel (news article, Oct. 23). Perhaps the
committee should also investigate human rights abuses that have taken place over
the last few decades under dictatorial regimes in Iran, Iraq and Syria. These
abuses would make the violence in Israel pale in comparison.

DAVE BREAU
Highland Park, N.J., Oct. 23, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MIDDLE EAST (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); IRAQ (92%); ISRAEL
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); SYRIA (71%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; MIDDLE EAST;   MIDDLE EAST (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(92%); IRAQ (92%); ISRAEL (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); SYRIA
(71%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; PALESTINIANS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (86%);

PERSON: BREAU, DAVE  TZIPORA LIVNI (59%);

LOAD-DATE: October 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             239 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 17, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Key House Leader Withdraws Support for Colombia Aid Plan

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS with JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 752 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 16


Representative Benjamin A. Gilman, chairman of the House International Relations
Committee, has abruptly withdrawn his support from the decision to funnel $1.3
billion in mostly military aid to Colombia, arguing that the United States is on
the brink of a "major mistake."

Mr. Gilman, Republican of New York, sent a letter this week to the White House
drug policy coordinator, Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, contending that the American
plan to increase the role of the Colombian military in the drug fight will end
disastrously, because the military has undermined its political support after a
history of corruption and human rights abuses. That position echoes other
critics of the plan.

Mr. Gilman called on the Clinton administration to redirect its assistance,
including at least 40 Black Hawk helicopters, from the military to the national
police in Colombia. Mr. Gilman has long admired the police, which he views as
more effective and less tainted by human rights violations.

"If we fail early on with Plan Colombia, as I fear, we could lose the support of
the American people for our efforts to fight illicit narcotics abroad," Mr.
Gilman said. "If we lose public support, we will regret we did not make the
mid-course corrections for Colombia that I have outlined here."

Last summer, Mr. Gilman voted to support Plan Colombia, a $7.5 billion strategy
drafted jointly by American and Colombian officials and passed by Congress. In
addition to the military spending, the program allocates money to promote
alternative crops, economic renewal and human rights. The plan seeks to halve
drug production over five years in Colombia, reportedly the source of most of
the cocaine and heroin that enters the United States.

Congressional sources said Mr. Gilman was troubled by recent military failures
in rural areas where rebel forces operate.

It is unclear what effects, if any, Mr. Gilman's shift will have. A Senate
Republican aide who follows Colombia closely said it was "far too early" to
criticize the plan. Mr. Gilman is expected to relinquish his chairmanship next
year because of term limits.

Critics of the plan have argued that the military aid would merely intensify the
conflict in which two rebel groups have joined forces with narcotics traffickers
against the government, a conflict that could eventually draw the United States
directly into fighting the rebels.

Leaders of Colombia's neighbors also have expressed fears that the fighting will
spill into their countries.

Washington counters that Colombia's increasingly jumbled battle lines make it
necessary to equip and deploy the military in the fight against drugs. The
American plan calls for training three counternarcotics battalions, with a total
of up to 3,000 troops.

The administration also has promised to watch over the military's record on
human rights. A spokesman for General McCaffrey, Robert Weiner, said today that
denying aid to the military on the basis of its past performance would ensure
defeat.

"Granted they're not a superpower," Mr. Weiner said. "One of the major purposes
of the Plan Colombia is to provide the military with the resources they need.
This actually scares the cartels to death."

In southern Putumayo Province, where half of the coca in Colombia is grown,
rebels have sealed off roads, arguing that the military has to rein in
right-wing gunmen who are associated with the armed forces.

A botched operation in a northern town, Dabeiba, resulted last month in the
downing of one of the army's seven American-made Black Hawks and the deaths of
22 troops.

The helicopter had been carrying reinforcements to assist soldiers locked in a
firefight with rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. But sloppy
communications led the pilot to land in a rebel-controlled area, an American
official said.

The rebels "were waiting for them," the official said. "What kind of
intelligence is that? They were dug in like the Ho Chi Minh Trail."

A high-ranking official in President Andres Pastrana's government defended the
military involvement on the grounds that the drug war has fundamentally changed
in the last five years.

"It used to be an urban drug war, which the police were very capable of
handling," the official said. "It has now become a drug war fought in the
jungles, and you can't do that without military support."

Another official said, "The fact that there are voices that are against these
tactics doesn't mean that the strategy is going to change."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (99%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(93%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%);
ILLEGAL DRUGS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); DRUG POLICY (89%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); TERM LIMITS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); DEFENSE
SPENDING (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); POLICE FORCES (73%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (73%); HEROIN (71%); COCAINE (71%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (71%);
CORRUPTION (70%); WAR & CONFLICT (69%); HELICOPTERS (54%);

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (56%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (56%);

LOAD-DATE: November 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Benjamin A. Gilman (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             243 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 9, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Do More for Rights In Saudi Arabia

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 179 words



To the Editor:

Re "Saudi Heir Urges Reform, and Turn from U.S." (front page, Dec. 4):

The Saudi government's recent ratification of several international human rights
conventions is a good beginning, but the provisions of these treaties must now
be fully carried out.

For example, although Crown Prince Abdullah signed the United Nations Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women in September,
Saudi Arabia still needs to provide basic protection for women.

Abuse of female domestic workers from developing countries remains widespread,
and women in general are extremely vulnerable to intimidation or abuse in police
stations when male officers press them for confessions.

Concrete and visible steps to carry out the conventions they have signed would
demonstrate to the world and, more important, to the people of Saudi Arabia,
that Crown Prince Abdullah and his government take their commitment to human
rights seriously.

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Executive Director
Amnesty International U.S.A.
Washington, Dec. 6, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (56%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED
NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST
WOMEN (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (83%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS CONVENTION ON THE
ELIMINATION OF ALL FORMS OF DISCRIMINATION AGAINST WOMEN (57%); UNITED NATIONS
(57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SAUDI ARABIA;   SAUDI ARABIA (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WOMEN  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS

 (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WOMEN (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(88%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (70%); POLICE FORCES (68%); EXECUTIVES (67%);

PERSON: SCHULZ, WILLIAM F; ABDULLAH (CROWN PRINCE)  ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ
(73%); ABDULLAH BIN ABDUL AZIZ (73%);

LOAD-DATE: December 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             245 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Iraq Is Forcing Kurds From Their Homes, the U.N. Reports

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 976 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 8


More than a decade after President Saddam Hussein began a murderous campaign
against rebellious Kurds, unknown thousands of them and other non-Arab Iraqis
are again being driven from their homes, United Nations officials in the region
say.

Much of the forced migration is taking place within northern Iraq, from
government-controlled locations like the oil-producing area around Kirkuk, which
the displaced people say President Saddam Hussein is trying to "Arabize."

They are being resettled in Kurdish areas in the north. The relocation, which
the United Nations is beginning to quantify, adds to an already large refugee
population in the north. The earlier refugees are Iraqis displaced by sporadic
outbreaks of Kurdish infighting, families who fled or were forced north from
government-controlled areas of central and southern Iraq during the Persian Gulf
war of 1991, and others from Iran.

Officials say the 805,000 displaced people there -- about 23 percent of the
population -- are putting strains on international relief efforts and local
populations. They have asked Baghdad to stop the flow.

In a briefing to the Security Council last Monday, Benon Sevan, who directs all
of the United Nations programs in Iraq that are not related to weapons, said he
was "greatly concerned with the increasing numbers of internally displaced
persons." He said conditions at refugee centers were "abominable."

Officials working in the Kurdish region say about 59,000 people have been
surveyed, mostly Kurds and some Turkomen, and report that they have been
displaced from homes near Kirkuk -- an oil-producing city about 200 miles north
of Baghdad near the border of Kurdish areas -- where there is also a huge
military base and airfield.

They have told officials that the Iraqi government apparently does not want them
in that strategic area.

This round of expulsions has been going on to varying degrees for two years,
human rights groups say, but has attracted little attention until now, when the
concentrations of people arriving at refugee camps has made the trend obvious.

In its 2001 world report, the private group Human Rights Watch said this week
that Kurds and Turkomen were being expelled from at least half a dozen districts
as part of a government program that has forced ethnic minorities to sign forms
renouncing their ethnic identities and declaring themselves to be Arabs.

Some refugees arriving in the north say that even that was not enough to avoid
expulsion and the seizure of their properties.

Human Rights Watch documented more than 800 expulsions from January to June of
this year. At the State Department, the office of the ambassador at large for
war crimes, David Scheffer, has been watching the forced relocations as
officials prepare evidence for a possible war crimes indictment of President
Hussein.

The Kurds, a rebellious and fractious people, have particular reasons to fear
the central government. In 1987 and 1988, 50,000 to 100,000 Kurds were gassed to
death with chemical agents by Mr. Hussein's government, American officials say.

At a refugee camp at Kani Shaitan, east of Kirkuk in Kurdish territory, 1,375
people, 994 of them children, have been crowded into a settlement built for 550
people. People continue to arrive at the camp, officials say, sometimes in
groups that appear to have been driven out of government-controlled regions en
masse.

"Unfortunately, the number of families at the Kani Shaitan camp appears to be
increasing," Mr. Sevan said. Arrivals are getting ahead of efforts to build
homes for newcomers. At another nearby camp, Chamchamal, plans to build nearly
500 houses in time for the harsh winter of mountainous northern Iraq have been
held up by a dearth of materials. In other settlements the United Nations has
been putting up tents and supplying them with heaters.

The latest report of the United Nations program under which Iraq exports
unlimited quantities of oil to buy civilian goods says the presence of so many
refugees is taxing the ability of the United Nations housing agency, Habitat.
Housing experts are looking for ways to encourage local builders to provide
labor and material for crash programs.

In the Kurdish north -- comprising the three Iraqi provinces of Dahuk, Erbil and
Sulaimaniya -- the United Nations, not the government, administers the oil for
food program. Because the Hussein government has a record of abuse against
Kurds, money is specially earmarked for them.

Direct United Nations administration appears to have meant a better targeted,
more carefully monitored relief effort in the Kurdish areas, and Iraqi officials
contend that per capita, the Kurds are spoiled in comparison with other Iraqis.

In the last six months, United Nations officials say, economic improvements have
continued in Kurdish areas, especially in livestock breeding and poultry
farming, as money from the oil-sales program provides food and new stock. More
than 43,000 chicks were distributed in recent months, and 10 million fish larvae
were introduced into local waters. A million fruit tree seedlings were
introduced, and 2,000 farmers and 640 agricultural workers were trained.

But electricity remains in short supply in the north, while it is becoming more
available in government-controlled areas.

In June, Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, found a mixed pattern in
studying malnutrition. In Kurdish areas chronic malnutrition dropped to 14.5
percent of children under 5, from 18.3 percent a year earlier. But the incidence
of underweight children rose and acute malnutrition doubled. Officials attribute
that to diarrheal diseases that could be corrected with more education about
hygiene.

Cholera has been all but eliminated in Kurdish areas through a campaign to teach
sanitation and good health practices, the United Nations says.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); GULF STATES (79%);

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAQ;   IRAQ (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); GULF STATES
(79%);   BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%);

SUBJECT: KURDS  DISPLACED PERSONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); REFUGEES

 (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (85%); DESERT STORM (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(77%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (72%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (71%); TRENDS
(70%); INDICTMENTS (62%); ETHNICITY (60%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; HUSSEIN, SADDAM (PRES)  SADDAM HUSSEIN (92%);

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Iraq shows the location of Kirkuk: Kurds and other non-Arabs are
being driven out of Kirkuk.


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             246 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Burmese Junta May Be Ready To Release Top Opponent

BYLINE: By BLAINE HARDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 788 words


The military dictatorship in Myanmar signaled yesterday that it might soon
release Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the leader of the country's democratic opposition
and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize who has been under house arrest since
September.

The junta that rules Myanmar, formerly Burma, has been bombarded in recent weeks
by criticism from the United Nations, human rights groups and Thailand. It has
been accused of torturing political opponents, using forced labor and condoning
an illegal drug industry that is spreading addiction across Southeast Asia.

Amnesty International will release a report today that charges the Burmese
government with using torture as an "institution" of state repression. The
report says torture is used routinely "as a means of instilling fear in anyone
critical of the military government."

In what may be an attempt to defang these critics, Burmese officials attending a
meeting in Vientiane, Laos, told European Union officials that they would allow
a four-member European delegation to visit Myanmar next month.

Its members would be free to talk to opposition leaders, including Mrs. Aung San
Suu Kyi, who is likely to be released from house arrest before the visit, said
Charles Josselin, a French official who attended the meeting.

Early this month, the government released six other prominent opposition
leaders. They were detained, along with Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi, when she tried to
travel outside Yangon, the capital, on Sept. 21 to meet with other members of
her party. The government has all but banned the party, the National League for
Democracy, in recent months, locking up nearly all of its leaders in the capital
and around the country.

President Clinton last week awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the
highest American civilian honor, to Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi.

Since her party won the national election held in 1990, which the generals in
power ignored, she has spent most of the last decade confined to her house in
Yangon, formerly Rangoon.

At the meeting in Laos, Foreign Minister Win Aung of Myanmar reportedly did not
mention Mrs. Aung San Suu Kyi by name. But he led European Union officials
attending a meeting with foreign ministers from the Association of Southeast
Asian Nations to believe that she and two other opposition leaders would be
released soon, Mr. Josselin told reporters.

"It's hard to imagine that a lifting of the restrictions would not happen before
the visit," Mr. Josselin said.

The government of Myanmar has been singled out in the last month for an
exceptionally scathing round of condemnation from the United Nations General
Assembly, international trade unions, human rights groups and military leaders
in Thailand.

The General Assembly last week accused the government of condoning the use of
rape, torture, mass arrests, forced labor and summary executions to suppress
dissent.

The International Labor Organization, an agency associated with the United
Nations, recommended that member nations consider sanctions against Myanmar for
its continued use of forced labor. In support, the International Confederation
of Free Trade Unions, with members in 148 countries, announced that it would
demand the withdrawal of foreign investors who aided or abetted forced labor in
the country.

The chief of Thailand's armed forces said he planned to use a visit to Myanmar
this week to warn the government that the widespread production of heroin and
amphetamines there was a threat to regional stability, as well as a cause of
drug addiction in Southeast Asia.

Of all the criticism in recent weeks, the most detailed is Amnesty
International's report, "Myanmar: The Institution of Torture." It says political
prisoners, believed to number about 1,700, are routinely tortured.

Drawing on interviews with former political prisoners who escaped from Myanmar
this year, Ms. Guest said Amnesty had established that the junta consistently
used the same torture techniques during interrogations. They include
near-suffocation, electric shocks to various parts of the body and the "iron
road," a technique that involves rolling an iron bar up and down the shins of a
prisoner until the skin peels off.

"At least 43 political prisoners have died in custody since the military's
violent suppression of the democracy movement in 1988, although the true number
is believed to be much higher," the report said.

The International Committee of the Red Cross last year was granted access to
Myanmar's prison system. Conditions have reportedly improved since then. But the
Amnesty report said Red Cross officials still did not have access to detention
centers, where torture during interrogation most commonly took place.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (99%); LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (93%); THAILAND (93%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); EUROPE (92%); ASIA

 (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: YANGON, MYANMAR (90%); VIENTIANE LAOS (52%);   VIENTIANE, LAO PEOPLE'S
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (79%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION

 (56%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION

 (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MYANMAR;   MYANMAR (99%); LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (93%);
THAILAND (93%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%);
EUROPE (92%); ASIA (92%); UNITED STATES (79%);   YANGON, MYANMAR (90%);
VIENTIANE LAOS (52%);   VIENTIANE, LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICAL PRISONERS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(90%); AWARDS & PRIZES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); NOBEL PRIZES (90%); TORTURE
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(89%); ARRESTS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (89%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); EUROPEAN UNION (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS

 (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (77%);
HOUSE ARREST (77%); LABOR DEPARTMENTS (76%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (76%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ELECTIONS (71%); LABOR UNIONS (71%);

   FORCED LABOR (89%);   MILITARY RULE (90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(89%);

PERSON: AUNG SAN SUU KYI, DAW; HARDEN, BLAINE  AUNG SAN SUU KYI (90%); BILL
CLINTON (73%);

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             251 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

PINOCHET IS RULED UNFIT FOR A TRIAL AND MAY BE FREED

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1108 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Jan. 11


Britain declared tonight that Gen. Augusto Pinochet was medically unfit to stand
trial in Spain and that it was now inclined to abandon the extradition case
against him.

The statement opens the way for the former Chilean dictator to avoid charges of
crimes against humanity and to return to his homeland.

Home Secretary Jack Straw released the results of a Jan. 5 examination of the
84-year-old general by four British specialists and said he was "minded" to
"take the view that no purpose would be served by continuing" the extradition
proceedings.

The medical report and Mr. Straw's reaction to it appeared to mark the closing
stages of a case that has shaken international law, galvanized human rights and
exile groups, and stirred passionate old antagonisms in Chile.

General Pinochet has been under house arrest in England for nearly 15 months
awaiting the outcome of complicated legal and judicial moves surrounding a
Spanish judge's request to send him to Madrid, where he would face 35 charges of
torture and conspiracy to torture dating from the days of his strongman rule in
Chile.

Mr. Straw did not make clear how soon he might exercise his power to end the
extradition proceedings, on compassionate grounds of age and health. But he said
he was writing to various rights groups that have been party to the case and to
Spain, Chile and countries like France, Belgium and Switzerland that have made
extradition requests of their own. He is asking for answers back within a week.

Patrick Robertson, a spokesman for General Pinochet, said he was delighted at
the announcement. The general's principal lawyer, Michael Caplan, said only that
it was "a very important development in the case at this stage."

England's highest court, the Law Lords of the House of Lords, fundamentally
altered the law of sovereign immunity when it threw out the general's claim that
he could not be tried for acts during the time that he was a head of state. The
court also established new international powers for people seeking redress of
rights abuses, even in courts outside the country where crimes were alleged to
have been committed.

The point was reflected in the response of Kenneth Roth, executive director of
Human Rights Watch, who said today, "Heads of state no longer enjoy impunity for
crimes against humanity."

The medical tests held last week were scheduled after the Chilean Embassy
submitted evidence in October from General Pinochet's doctors that his health
had declined markedly. He was said to have suffered a series of small strokes in
September.

Mr. Straw then asked General Pinochet to consent to an independent examination,
and his office selected the four doctors, specialists respectively in
gerontology, geriatric medicine, neurology and neuropsychology. The seven-hour
examination was conducted in Spanish -- General Pinochet does not speak English
-- and two of the physicians, Mr. Straw said, were fluent in the language.

He said that it was the "unequivocal and unanimous" conclusion "that following
recent deterioration in the state of Senator Pinochet's health, which seems to
have occurred principally during September and October 1999, he is at present
unfit to stand trial, and that no change to that position can be expected."

The general was originally arrested on Oct. 16, 1998, as he lay in a London
clinic recuperating from back surgery. The British police made their surprise
move in response to an application from a Spanish judge, Baltasar Garzon. He
asked for General Pinochet's extradition to Madrid to stand trial on charges of
genocide, torture, kidnapping and murder in connection with the disappearance of
more than 3,000 people in the 17 years after he seized power in a 1973 coup.

Judge Garzon, considered something of a maverick in the Spanish judiciary, had
gathered his evidence during an investigation into the so-called dirty wars in
Latin America in the 1970's. The Spanish Government, forced by circumstance to
pursue the case, has shown little enthusiasm for it and tonight Spain's Foreign
Ministry said it would "respect the decisions of the British Government."

General Pinochet won his first legal battle to overcome the charges when the
High Court upheld his claim to sovereign immunity. But in a ruling that was to
create the case's legacy, the Law Lords overturned that decision, saying that
being a head of state did not excuse crimes against humanity.

The case returned to the House of Lords after one of the original judges was
found to have had an association with Amnesty International, a party to the
case. But the second Lords' decision was even more emphatic on the principle
than the first one, though it reduced the number of charges and narrowed the
scope to torture and conspiracy to torture.

The case then moved on to the validity of the extradition order itself. It was
upheld by a London magistrate last October and then appealed, leading to a plan
for another hearing on March 20.

In the one appearance in court that General Pinochet has been obliged to make,
he maintained the defiant attitude he adopted from the beginning, saying he did
not recognize the jurisdiction of any court outside of one in Chile to try him
and saying he was innocent of "all the lies of Spain."

Every hearing and court date has seen crowds of supporters and opponents hurling
taunts and jeers and holding aloft flags and placards with accusatory slogans
and pictures of missing friends and relatives.

For the last 13 months, the general has been living under house arrest with his
wife, Lucia, in a rented mansion in one of London's exclusive southern suburbs.
He had periodic visits from Chilean supporters and backers of his in this
country, the most visible of whom has been former Prime Minister Margaret
Thatcher. Her office said tonight that she was delighted with the doctors'
report and that she expected Mr. Straw to be a "very fair man" and order the
general's freedom.

Carlos Reyes, a former journalist imprisoned by the Pinochet government who
speaks for a group representing Chileans abroad, said, "It's unbelievable that a
criminal should escape justice because perhaps he is ill."

But other opponents of General Pinochet were more resigned to the apparent
inconclusive end of the case. "I am not surprised to hear this, and much as I
regard Pinochet as a blood-soaked tyrant, if the doctors say he is unfit to
stand trial then he is unfit to stand trial," said George Galloway, a Labor
member of Parliament. "It would be reducing ourselves to Pinochet's level if we
pursued the matter vindictively in the teeth of medical evidence."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (96%); SPAIN (94%); ENGLAND (89%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); FRANCE (54%); BELGIUM (54%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; SPAIN;   CHILE (96%); SPAIN (94%); ENGLAND
(89%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); FRANCE (54%); BELGIUM (54%);
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); MADRID, SPAIN (79%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
EXTRADITION (94%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%);
SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (88%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (79%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY
(79%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); JUDGES (78%); HOUSE ARREST (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW

 (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); NEUROSCIENCE (75%); GERIATRICS (75%);
MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (73%); IMMUNITY (73%); PSYCHOLOGY (73%);

 ARRESTS (72%); GERONTOLOGY (70%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (64%);   MEDICAL
DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (73%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING

 (73%);

PERSON: PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); STRAW, JACK (SEC); HOGE, WARREN  JACK STRAW
(79%);

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             252 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Feminist Coalition Protests U.S. Stance on Sex Trafficking Treaty

BYLINE: By PHILIP SHENON

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 559 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 12


An unusual coalition of women's groups, family-planning advocates and
conservative Republicans is protesting what it describes as the Clinton
administration's effort to weaken international laws against the trafficking of
women and children for prostitution.

In a letter last week, the presidents of the National Organization for Women and
the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, along with Gloria Steinem and
other feminists, accused the administration of taking a position that was
"extremely detrimental to women" in negotiations over a new United Nations
treaty on sex trafficking.

They were referring to the administration's support for wording in the treaty
that would define "forced prostitution" -- but not other types of prostitution
-- as a form of "sexual exploitation."

The letter to the State Department said that the wording would make it more
difficult to prosecute prostitution rings because the definition "would not
cover some of the most common methods of sex trafficking, which prey on and
profit from the economic desperation of women, girls and their families by
securing their 'consent.' "

Leaders of the Heritage Foundation and other politically conservative groups
sent a similar letter of protest last week to the first lady, Hillary Rodham
Clinton. Mrs. Clinton has focused on the issue in her foreign travels and has
repeatedly called for a crackdown on all types of trafficking of women and
children across international borders.

State Department officials insist that American negotiators in Vienna, where the
United Nations treaty is being drafted, are seeking a document that is as tough
as possible in demanding punishment for criminals who transport women or
children across borders for prostitution.

But they said the United States risked alienating other governments, and
undermining international support for the treaty, if it pressed too hard for a
definition of sexual exploitation that included all forms of prostitution.

They said a number of European governments that have legalized prostitution
might refuse to sign the treaty unless it made a distinction between forced
prostitution and situations in which women choose freely to become prostitutes.

"The suggestion that we are trying to weaken laws on international trafficking
of prostitutes is nonsense," said James P. Rubin, the State Department's chief
spokesman.

Human rights groups estimate that each year hundreds of thousands, and perhaps
millions, of women and children are forced into lives of sexual exploitation.
Many are transported across international borders by criminal organizations.

The debate over the wording of the United Nations treaty pits the administration
against some of its natural constituencies in the women's movement and among
family-planning organizations.

The administration's position does have support from some human rights
organizations and women's leaders.

Regan Ralph, executive director of the women's rights division of Human Rights
Watch in Washington, said that the treaty was too important to be undermined by
a squabble over the exact wording of one section.

"My understanding is that the treaty is moving forward, and that it offers
significantly improved protections of the victims of trafficking," she said. "We
shouldn't allow this debate to derail those efforts."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (54%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (55%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); PLANNED
PARENTHOOD FEDERATION OF AMERICA (58%); NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN  (58%);
NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (58%); THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION  (55%); THE
HERITAGE FOUNDATION (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);
PLANNED PARENTHOOD FEDERATION OF AMERICA (58%); NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN

 (58%); NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (58%); THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION  (55%);
THE HERITAGE FOUNDATION (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (54%);   VIENNA,
AUSTRIA (55%);

SUBJECT: PROSTITUTION; THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING COUNTRIES; CHILDREN AND YOUTH

 SEX TRAFFICKING (92%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (92%); PROSTITUTION (92%); CHILD
TRAFFICKING (91%); CONSERVATISM (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS
(90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WOMEN (90%); CHILD
ABUSE (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
DECRIMINALIZATION (89%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FAMILY (78%); ILLEGAL PROSTITUTION (77%); EXECUTIVES (77%);

 INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (72%); DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (70%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: SHENON, PHILIP; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%);

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             256 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Anti-Sweatshop Movement Is Achieving Gains Overseas

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1025 words


Apparel and footwear factories overseas have slowly improved working conditions
in response to a highly vocal anti-sweatshop movement, labor rights advocates
say.

Pressure from college students and other opponents of sweatshops has led some
factories that make goods for industry giants like Nike and the Gap to cut back
on child labor, to use less dangerous chemicals and to require fewer employees
to work 80-hour weeks, according to groups that monitor such factories.

These changes, labor advocates say, could signal the beginning of a broad
improvement in conditions for low-paid apparel workers in Asian and Latin
American factories after four decades in which the trend has been for American
companies to transfer production overseas in search of ever-cheaper labor.

The advocates stress that the improvements have been spotty, and that serious
problems remain at factories from Honduras to Hong Kong. Wages are often too low
to feed a family, factory air is often filled with chemicals and many managers
refuse to let sick employees leave work to get medical attention.

"There has been some improvement on the ground, but nowhere near significant
enough," said Charles Kernaghan, executive director of the National Labor
Committee, a leading anti-sweatshop group.

At many factories, labor rights advocates say, managers have stopped hitting
workers, have improved ventilation and have stopped requiring workers to obtain
permission before going to the toilet.

Sweatshop opponents praise some companies, like Liz Claiborne, for improving
conditions, while accusing others, like Wal-Mart, of being slow to ensure
changes at the overseas factories that produce their apparel.

"Some steps have been taken, but I don't think one can say that conditions have
improved in any wholesale way," said Pharis Harvey, executive director of the
International Labor Rights Fund, a watchdog group in Washington."A number of
companies that produce globally are watching much more carefully to deal with
problems before they become embarrassing public problems."

The anti-sweatshop movement has put many apparel makers, like the Gap and Kathie
Lee Gifford, on the defensive by picketing in front of stores, holding sit-ins
at colleges and bombarding companies with letters.

The movement, one of the nation's largest to push for changes since the 1960's,
includes church and consumer groups, labor unions, human rights organizations
and college, high school and even middle-school students. The movement's leaders
often note that sweatshops are not just found overseas; many remain in New York,
Los Angeles and other American cities.

At last month's protests in Seattle, conditions in such factories were a major
focus, with many demonstrators demanding that trade treaties punish countries
that permit violations of minimum labor standards.

Apparel industry executives say that with shoppers hunting for bargains, they
face intense pressure to produce goods as cheaply as possible, encouraging many
to turn to substandard factories.

Many corporate executives acknowledge that the anti-sweatshop movement's efforts
are paying off.

Phil Knight, chairman of Nike, the world's largest footwear maker, said the
movement had gotten his company to accelerate efforts to improve conditions. "It
probably speeded up some things that we might have done anyway," said Mr.
Knight, whose company uses 565 footwear and apparel factories employing 500,000
workers in 46 countries. "Basically, the workers in footwear factories, not just
our factories, are better off today than two years ago."

In one significant move, Nike and its rival Reebok are requiring the many Asian
factories that produce for them to stop using petroleum-based adhesives that
cause damage to the liver, kidney and central nervous system in favor of safer
water-based adhesives.

Labor rights experts point to many improvements. Five years ago, monitoring
groups say, apparel factories in Honduras often employed children under 14, but
now it is rare to find workers under 16. In Indonesia, managers no longer
systematically squash unionization efforts.

Liz Claiborne, the Gap and Reebok have all hired respected human rights groups
to monitor a handful of their factories.

"The anti-sweatshop movement has improved working conditions," said Apo Leong,
executive director of the Asia Monitor Research Center, a labor rights group
based in Hong Kong. "We're seeing the multinationals putting pressure on their
contractors, and subsequently conditions have improved."

Mr. Leong noted that factories in China were using less child labor and prison
labor. But he said grave problems remained throughout Asia. He said that China
often imprisoned union organizers, that many Nike and Reebok plants still lacked
adequate ventilation and that many factories in Cambodia had deplorable health
and safety conditions.

Sweatshop opponents point to other problems. Jeffrey Ballinger, executive
director of Press for Change, a labor rights group, said wages paid by Nike's
Indonesian factories had fallen in recent years, after accounting for inflation,
an assertion the company denies. " Wages are behind where they were," Mr.
Ballinger said. "They're below what is considered necessary to meet the minimum
needs of a single adult."

Mr. Kernaghan of the National Labor Committee said, "There are two places where
progress seems to grind to a halt: the effort to form unions and the effort to
have wage increases."

One recent development is the formation of the Fair Labor Association, a White
House-backed group of human rights organizations and companies, including L. L.
Bean, Nike and Reebok. This group is setting up a monitoring system to inspect
overseas factories to get them to meet minimum labor standards, like not
requiring employees to work more than 60 hours a week.

Many campus groups call the association pro-corporate, and criticize it for not
requiring factories to pay a living wage. But the association's members defend
it as the first serious corporate-backed effort to inspect apparel factories and
to put teeth behind basic labor standards.




http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (58%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS316219 OTHER FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS316211 RUBBER AND
PLASTICS FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS315239 WOMEN'S AND GIRLS' CUT AND
SEW OTHER OUTERWEAR MANUFACTURING (58%); NAICS315228 MEN'S AND BOYS' CUT AND SEW
OTHER OUTERWEAR MANUFACTURING (58%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (58%);

 SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR  (58%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (58%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC  (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%);
HONG KONG (79%); ASIA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SEATTLE, WA, USA
(79%);

COMPANY: NIKE INC; GAP INC  LIZ CLAIBORNE ACCESSORIES (54%);

ORGANIZATION: NIKE INC; GAP INC

GEOGRAPHIC: FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS; LATIN AMERICA;

   UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (92%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); HONG KONG

 (79%); ASIA (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%); WASHINGTON, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA,
USA (79%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (79%); SEATTLE, WA,
USA (79%);

SUBJECT: APPAREL; LABOR; SWEATSHOPS; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; WORKING HOURS; SHOES
AND BOOTS; SNEAKERS; INDUSTRIAL AND OCCUPATIONAL HAZARDS  SWEATSHOPS (92%);
GARMENT WORKERS (91%); FOOTWEAR (90%); FOOTWEAR MFG (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); EXECUTIVES (89%); APPAREL MFG
(89%); WAGES & SALARIES (78%); ATHLETIC FOOTWEAR MFG (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CHILD LABOR (78%); STRIKES (78%); CHILD WELFARE (78%);
CONSUMER PROTECTION (78%); WORK WEEK (77%); CHILDREN (77%); TRENDS (76%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); LABOR UNIONS (73%); MIDDLE & JUNIOR HIGH SCHOOLS (72%); TRADE
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%);   CONSUMER WATCHDOGS
(78%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (91%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: ;GREENHOUSE, STEVEN  ELISABETH 'LIZ' CLAIBORNE  (54%);

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             258 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Foes Are Granted An Appeal

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 510 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 8


Gen. Augusto Pinochet's hopes of being freed from house arrest and allowed to
return home to Chile soon suffered a setback today when a British court said it
would hear an appeal of Britain's decision that he was not medically fit to
stand trial on torture charges.

Six human rights groups and the government of Belgium are challenging the
refusal of Jack Straw, Britain's home secretary, to make public an examination
of General Pinochet in January by four British doctors.

The doctors' report was the basis of Mr. Straw's finding that the 84-year-old
former dictator was not able to withstand the rigors of extradition to Spain and
trial in Madrid.

The same challenge was thrown out last week by High Court Judge Maurice Kay, who
ruled that Mr. Straw, in insisting on keeping the medical records confidential,
had acted "lawfully, fairly and rationally." But today, the court granted the
request for judicial review, saying the complainants had "an arguable case."

The decision significantly changed the status of the case for General Pinochet's
opponents. Now, whatever the outcome, there can be an appeal to Britain's
highest court, the Law Lords of the House of Lords.

Aside from requiring the general to remain in Britain possibly for months more,
such an appeal would return the Pinochet case to the Lords, which on two earlier
occasions has ruled against him.

If today's action had remained only an application for permission to seek
judicial review and the court had rejected it, the way would have been cleared
for Mr. Straw to make a final and unappealable decision to let Mr. Pinochet
depart. A Chilean Air Force plane has been waiting at an air force base in
Oxfordshire for the past week in the expectation that his confinement in England
was coming to an end this week.

Lord Justice Simon Brown, one of the three judges, appeared to take note of the
protracted legal passage of the case during the last year and a half, saying one
reason the court was taking the case was to spare another "unfortunate" tribunal
from having to deal with the complex case all over again.

General Pinochet has been in England since his arrest in October 1998 on a
petition from a Spanish judge that he be extradited to Madrid for trial on
charges of crimes against humanity dating from his 1973-1990 strongman rule of
Chile. After losing a series of judicial efforts to overturn his arrest and
contest the Spanish claim, General Pinochet saw his chances for an imminent end
to the case improve sharply when Mr. Straw said last month that he was inclined
to drop the proceedings on grounds of age and health.

"We very much welcome the fact that the hearing will now go on to consider the
merits of the case," said a spokesman for Amnesty International, one of the
rights groups. "It's particularly important for us, because clearly we want to
put our argument before the court, which is that it flouts natural justice not
to provide the information in the medical reports, particularly to the
governments seeking natural justice."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (97%); CHILE (95%); SPAIN (93%); ENGLAND (90%); BELGIUM
(88%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (78%);

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; BELGIUM; SPAIN;   UNITED KINGDOM (97%); CHILE
(95%); SPAIN (93%); ENGLAND (90%); BELGIUM (88%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(78%);   MADRID, SPAIN (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-GREAT BRITAIN;
TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; EXTRADITION  EXTRADITION (91%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); APPEALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HOUSE
ARREST (90%); ARRESTS (89%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (89%); JUDGES (89%); TORTURE (89%);

 BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); SUPREME COURTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); MEDICAL
RECORDS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); PETITIONS (72%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (71%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); AIR FORCES (68%); POLITICS (66%);
ARMED FORCES (63%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (63%);

PERSON: HOGE, WARREN; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN); STRAW, JACK (SEC)  JACK STRAW
(79%);

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             259 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Israel Reports Abuses in Past Interrogations of Palestinians

BYLINE: By JOEL GREENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 276 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, Feb. 9


An official report made public today said Israel's Shin Bet security service had
committed systematic abuses while interrogating prisoners during the Palestinian
uprising and that its agents had lied about their actions in court.

The findings, covering 1988 to 1992, appear to lend support to longstanding
assertions by prisoners and human rights groups that the Shin Bet routinely
mistreated Palestinian detainees, using methods defined by the groups as
torture.

The scathing report, submitted in 1995 by the Israeli comptroller at the time,
Miriam Ben-Porat, was kept secret since its presentation to a parliamentary
subcommittee on intelligence. But following a recommendation by the Israeli
Supreme Court, the subcommittee released a summary of the report today,
asserting that there were no longer grounds for secrecy.

Last year the court banned interrogation methods that human rights groups have
called torture, including violent shaking, shackling in painful positions and
covering the head with a foul-smelling sack. Those methods had been sanctioned
by a government commission in 1987 as permissible forms of "moderate physical
pressure."

The comptroller's report said that during the uprising, interrogators regularly
went further, violating the commission's guidelines and the Shin Bet's own
interrogation rules.

"In the Shin Bet interrogation facility in Gaza, deviations went on on a wide
scale," the report said. "There were also deviations in other facilities to a
certain extent."

The report added that "veteran and even senior interrogators in the Gaza
facility committed serious and systematic deviations."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (94%);

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL;   PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (94%);
JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

SUBJECT: INTELLIGENCE SERVICES; PALESTINIANS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (90%); TORTURE

 (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%);

PERSON: GREENBERG, JOEL; BEN-PORAT, MIRIAM  TZIPORA LIVNI (95%);

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             260 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Truth About Chile

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 491 words


Thanks to a powerful nudge from President Clinton, the secrecy that has too long
shrouded Washington's role in the 1973 political convulsions in Chile is
lifting. The picture painted by newly disclosed passages from State Department
papers is profoundly disturbing. It is now clear that the American government
knew far more about the disappearance and murder of two American citizens in
Chile than it acknowledged at the time. Indeed, American intelligence and
military officials may have encouraged Gen. Augusto Pinochet's security forces
to round them up even though it was clear that the two men, like thousands of
Chileans arrested during the same period, were likely to be mistreated, if not
killed.

The truth about clandestine American activities in the cold war has been
difficult to unearth and painful to confront. In the name of opposing Communism,
Washington sometimes ignored its own democratic principles and condoned the kind
of brutal conduct it publicly deplored. The case of the two Americans murdered
in Chile seems to belong in this category.

For 26 years, American officials have steadfastly denied any role in the
unsolved murders of the two young men in September 1973. Charles Horman, 31, a
filmmaker and writer, and his colleague, Frank Teruggi, 24, were arrested and
killed as supporters of General Pinochet overthrew the Socialist government of
Salvador Allende. Mr. Horman and Mr. Teruggi applauded Mr. Allende's Socialist
experiments. They worked for a newsletter that reprinted articles from American
newspapers critical of American policy toward Chile. Their deaths were
dramatized -- and American complicity strongly implied -- in the 1982 movie
"Missing," made by Constantin Costa-Gavras.

The recently declassified State Department documents show that its own
investigators concluded almost immediately after the murders that General
Pinochet's new government had killed the two men. The investigators inferred,
moreover, that the Chileans would not have done so without some sign of assent
from American intelligence officials.

This damning information was not made public when portions of the same documents
were selectively declassified in 1980. The State Department cited national
security and executive privilege considerations in exempting the passages from
disclosure under the Freedom of Information Act. The reasoning was deceptive,
and an abuse of the law.

President Clinton, who has pressed for full disclosure of cold-war secrets,
directed federal agencies to search their files for information on human rights
abuses and terrorism in Chile, beginning with the period from 1968 to 1978. Mr.
Clinton acted after the arrest of General Pinochet in London in 1998 on human
rights charges filed by a Spanish judge. It is now time for the Central
Intelligence Agency and the Pentagon to follow Mr. Clinton's order, and the
example of openness set by Secretary of State Madeleine Albright.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: STATE DEPARTMENT (74%);

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT (74%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (97%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA,
USA (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; MISSING PERSONS  MURDER (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); COLD WAR (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (89%); ARRESTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); FREEDOM
OF INFORMATION (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (76%);
MISSING PERSONS (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(74%); PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (72%); VISUAL ARTISTS (72%); TERRORISM (69%);
WRITERS (66%);

PERSON: TERUGGI, FRANK; HORMAN, CHARLES  BILL CLINTON (90%);

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             261 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 26, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

South Africa's Embattled Press

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


Redressing a tradition of racist journalism was bound to be one of the most
important and complex challenges for South Africa's fledgling multiracial
democracy. But a campaign by a government-appointed commission to coerce
journalists into answering charges of racism discredits that legitimate cause
and undermines an otherwise impressive record of respect for constitutional
freedoms.

In the last two weeks more than 30 editors and writers have been subpoenaed to
appear before the South African Human Rights Commission to answer charges of
racism. They were ordered to produce documents related to their editorial
decisions, and the commission has the power to search their offices. The
journalists could face fines or up to six months in jail if they fail to comply.

The subpoenas are not as bad as the crude attempts of the old white regime to
silence those few publications that exposed the injustices of apartheid, but
they carry an uncomfortable echo. One of the newspapers subpoenaed is the Weekly
Mail & Guardian, whose reporters were imprisoned by the previous regime. This
was the paper that at the height of repression in the mid-1980's famously
published a front page almost entirely blacked out by state censors. It was also
at the forefront in documenting Pretoria's sponsorship of death squads.

The Human Rights Commission began to investigate the media after two groups, the
Black Lawyers' Association and the Association of Black Accountants, complained
last year that the Mail & Guardian devoted more effort to exposing corruption
among black politicians than white politicians, and that another paper
"depersonalized" the deaths of blacks by running an article under the headline
"60 people killed in Nigerian clashes over the weekend." In a report last
November, the commission found little evidence of overt bigotry, but it accused
nearly all of the country's main newspapers of "unconscious" racism, including
two that were owned, edited and read mainly by blacks.

The country's privately owned media, like every other sector of the economy, are
still dominated by white ownership, and the most experienced editors and
reporters are mostly white -- reflecting decades of discrimination in education
and employment. But mainstream papers are more sensitive now than they were even
a few years ago. Unconscious bigotry undoubtedly exists, but the best judges of
that are readers, listeners and viewers -- and competitors -- rather than state
agencies armed with subpoena powers.

The governing African National Congress, now led by President Thabo Mbeki, has
been disappointingly supportive of an investigation that undermines the very
rights that Nelson Mandela appointed the commission to uphold -- including free
expression, which is entrenched in South Africa's enlightened new Constitution.
South Africa's embattled editors are expected to challenge the subpoenas in
court. Such a case would present an important early test of press freedom in the
new South Africa.  Mr. Mbeki and the commission, for their part, should heed the
words of their distinguished countrywoman, Mamphela Ramphele, who warned
recently that South Africa's young democracy was threatened by a "culture of
silence." Blacks, she noted, too often avoid criticizing their government for
fear of being accused of disloyalty, while whites fear the unanswerable charge
of racism.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SOUTH AFRICA (95%); NIGERIA (79%);

CITY: PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICA (73%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH AFRICA (95%); NIGERIA (79%);   PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICA (73%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   SUBPOENAS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(90%); WRITERS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%);
DISCRIMINATION (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); POWER FAILURES (75%); JAIL SENTENCING
(74%); CENSORSHIP (72%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (72%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
(71%); FINES & PENALTIES (69%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%);   CORRECTIONS
(74%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: THABO MBEKI (58%);   NELSON MANDELA (79%);

LOAD-DATE: February 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             263 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 1, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

At Russian Camp, 2 Views of Chechen Prisoners

BYLINE: By PATRICK E. TYLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1164 words

DATELINE: CHERNOKOZOVO, Russia, Feb. 29


The heavy steel doors, freshly painted for visitors, swung open one by one along
a 100-foot-long corridor to reveal cold cells, gauzy from cigarette smoke and
poor ventilation, where the sallow faces of Chechen men and women peered out
from the shadows -- their eyes frozen by the flash of intruding cameras.

Their guards barked orders at them to "stand back from the door!" or to "turn
around!" or "speak up!" and to report to a group of visitors on the conditions
in this notorious "filtration" camp. Some who have passed through here have
alleged that brutal beatings and torture have taken place.

Almost in unison, the inmates, their heads covered with shawls or woolen hats
against the chill, reported that everything was "normal." They said the Russian
administrators of the camp did not beat them, or use electric shocks during
interrogations, as had been alleged. Nor, they said, did the Russians poke tear
gas through the portals that served as peepholes in steel outer doors that
sealed them in the communal cells, where they had spent weeks or months waiting
to be released or charged with aiding Chechen fighters.

The Russian military, which has been trying to retake the southern Chechnya
region from separatists, guided journalists and European officials through the
camp on Monday and today in an effort to refute allegations of brutality and
torture that former inmates have made to human rights organizations.

In the military's carefully guided tour, a new field hospital was displayed in
the prison courtyard, but there was no one in residence, and it appeared to have
been set up in the last few days.

Of 817 detainees who have been processed here, according to Russian military
officials, only 99 were still here today. And while the inmates told the
visitors, in the presence of guards, that they do not know of incidents of
beating and abuse, two important facts emerged today.

First, according to family members gathered outside the gates, hundreds of
detainees have been bused out of the camp in recent days. And the inmates said
there has been a significant improvement in their treatment since a new
detachment of guards and administrators took over early this month, after the
reports of brutality emerged.

"I would like to stress that this new administration is much better and that
radical changes have taken place after they arrived, and we are very grateful
for that," said Makhmail Abu Akhar, a resident of Grozny, the Chechen capital.
He has been locked up here for two months after being arrested at a checkpoint
when he could not produce his passport.

Standing next to him was a pitiable young man in his 30's named Ruslan who was
crying and tugging at his hat. He appeared to be mildly retarded and described
himself as an invalid unable to work.

"I want to go home," he sobbed, "but I don't have any documents."

Gen. Mikhail Nazarkin, a senior officer from the Russian Ministry of Justice,
told reporters that 80 percent of the inmates who have passed through this
prison since last fall were suspected of "participation in illegal armed
formations" in Chechnya.

Russian security services have cleared 452 of them thus far, he said, and they
have been released. Others, still under suspicion, have been transferred to
prisons elsewhere pending action by state prosecutors, he said.

But what was clear from interviews snatched with inmates in a 90-minute tour was
that the Russian authorities have cast their net broadly to arrest undocumented
Chechen men and others who may have been helping Chechen fighters indirectly by
caring for the wounded.

That was apparently the case with Ismail Abu Bakar, a pediatrician by training
who said he had been treating wounded civilians, but perhaps also some fighters,
over the months of bombardment of Grozny and its environs. He was arrested in
the village of Yermolovskaya while helping evacuate a large group of wounded. "I
was providing medical assistance to these people, and it doesn't matter if they
are militants or nonmilitants," he said, "I am a physician in the first place.
If people are sick, is there any difference between them? But these were mainly
peaceful citizens suffering from the bombardment."

Five women stood behind the cell door marked No. 11.

"We would like to know why we are here, and we don't understand the reason," one
said.

Another said, "We have no idea how long they are going to keep us here." She
said she was arrested as she was catching a ride on a bus loaded with wounded
civilians and some fighters.

"They charged that we helped the militants, that we treated their wounds," she
said. "But actually, because the Russians lack precision weapons, they were
dropping bombs all over the town, and the wounded were mainly civilians."

Some young men here said they were farmers or laborers who had been wrongly
detained simply because they fit the profile of Chechens who are supporting the
rebels. Several said they were arrested when they returned to Chechnya from
their homes in other parts of Russia to rescue aged relatives.

"I work on a commune," said one man. "They claim I was a militant, but they
don't have to keep me in here. It would be enough for them to go back to the
farm where I was and ask people what I've been doing for the last 10 years. I
have been working on the land. I am an agricultural worker."

One former Chernokozovo inmate named Jalil met with investigators from the
Boston-based Physicians for Human Rights after his release this month. He told
them that he and many men from his village in the Terek River basin were
detained in a sweep on Feb. 4 after eight Russian soldiers were killed nearby.
When they reached the prison camp here, he was quoted as saying, they were
greeted by guards who said: "Welcome to hell. You will have a slow and cruel
death."

Jalil had to prop himself up on pillows when he was interviewed in Ingushetia by
Doug Ford, a senior investigator for the physicians' group. Jalil spoke with
difficulty at times and said his mind was not clear after being beaten
unconscious four times while detained. He said he was released only after his
sister raised the 4,000 rubles necessary to buy his freedom.

On both Monday and today, after the official tour of Chernokozovo was completed,
the bus carrying journalists from the prison was mobbed by distraught women.
Some only suspected that a beloved son or husband was inside and were trying to
find out. They pounded their fists on the bus and blocked its way while Russian
military escorts barricaded the door from the inside so the journalists could
not speak to the women.

Some scrawled messages in the dust on the bus windows. Others reached up and
pressed notes into the hands of one journalist hanging out the window. Then
guards carrying assault rifles rushed out of the camp and forced the women away
from the bus, knocking some of them down.

One of the notes handed in through the window simply said, "Help us."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); EUROPE (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA); CHERNOKOZOVO (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (96%); EUROPE (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION; NEWS AND
NEWS MEDIA; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TORTURE  HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (90%); TORTURE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); JOURNALISM
(75%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (70%); ARRESTS (69%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (66%); POLITICS

 (60%); MENTAL RETARDATION (60%);   CORRECTIONS (89%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: TYLER, PATRICK E

LOAD-DATE: March 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Prisoners in the yard of the Chernokozovo prison. The Russian
authorities have made a broad sweep of Chechens, arresting some who may have
helped the rebels only indirectly, by caring for the wounded. (Reuters)

Map of Russia shows the location of Chernokozovo: Hundreds of detainees have
left Chernokozovo in recent days.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             269 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Graves Hold Victims Of Argentina's Past

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 204 words

DATELINE: BUENOS AIRES, April 14


More than 90 bodies buried for more than two decades in mass graves in a
forgotten Argentine cemetery were identified today as victims of the country's
last military dictatorship.

Seemingly destined to spend eternity without a name in the graveyard in the
small town of Lomas de Zamora, just south of Buenos Aires, they did not come to
light until a new cemetery director, Juan Hrchan, took over in December.

"In a notebook that we have here it says, 'Grave 60, Jane Doe No. 2, John Doe
No. 3, do not disturb,' " Mr. Hrchan said, pointing out that the document had
been signed by a previous cemetery director during the so-called Dirty War in
1976-83, a time when the police acted with total impunity.

In one mass grave, ledgers filled out by the police listed the same official
death date -- Dec. 24, 1976 -- for nine victims who lived only a few blocks from
the feared "Pozo de Banfield" clandestine torture center run by the military,
Mr. Hrchan said.

While waiting for a federal judge to order an exhumation and the identification
of the bodies, Mr. Hrchan has not allowed anyone to disturb the sites.

As many as 30,000 Argentines disappeared during the Dirty War, according to
human rights groups.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (58%);

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (93%);

CITY: BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (92%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ARGENTINA;   ARGENTINA (93%);   BUENOS AIRES, ARGENTINA (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  CEMETERIES (91%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TORTURE (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);   MILITARY RULE (77%);

PERSON: JUAN HRCHAN (92%);

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             270 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Reproductive Justice

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 146 words



To the Editor:

The story of a 14-year-old Mexican girl who was denied a legal abortion after
being raped (news article, April 10) is not a horrifying exception in Mexico and
other Latin countries, where machismo and the influence of the Roman Catholic
Church distort the implementation of laws about women.

International women's groups -- including the Center for Reproductive Law and
Policy, where I am a staff lawyer -- are bringing attention to reproductive
rights with creative legal strategies. Recently, three groups intervened on
behalf of a 19-year-old Peruvian woman who was raped by a clinic doctor. After
the doctor was exonerated, they took the case to an international tribunal, the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Peru acknowledged abuses and began
revamping its health and judiciary systems.

LUISA CABAL
New York, April 11, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA (76%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S APPAREL (57%);   CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
(57%); CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS (57%); INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN
RIGHTS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS  (57%); CENTER FOR REPRODUCTIVE
RIGHTS (57%); INTER-AMERICAN COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: LATIN AMERICA;   MEXICO (90%); UNITED STATES (79%); LATIN AMERICA
(76%);

SUBJECT: ABORTION  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); ABORTION (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%);

 WOMEN (87%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
RELIGION (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (56%); PHYSICIANS &
SURGEONS (52%);   ABORTION LAWS (90%);

PERSON: CABAL, LUISA  LUISA CABAL NEW YORK (55%);

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             272 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1334 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

U.N. Rights Group Rejects U.S. Criticism of China
The major United Nations human rights body decided not to act on a United States
resolution criticizing China's human rights record. The vote in Geneva was an
embarrassing defeat for the Clinton administration, coming after the State
Department issued a withering annual report on human rights in China.   A1


Leading Republican lawmakers accused the administration of caving in to pressure
from China by refusing to sell high-tech destroyers and other advanced weapons
to Taiwan. The Senate Republican leader, Trent Lott, said the administration's
decision was based on "threats emanating from Beijing" rather than on Taiwan's
legitimate defense needs.   A14

Jet Crashes in Philippines
An Air Philippines Boeing 737-200 crashed on Samal Island, 625 miles southeast
of Manila, apparently killing all 130 people aboard.   A3

U.N. Warns Sanction Violators
The Security Council put on notice any country or leader breaking international
sanctions by trading with a rebel movement in Angola that has sustained itself
by selling diamonds and smuggling weapons and oil.   A14

Violence in Zimbabwe
Attacks against white farmers mounted on the 20th anniversary of the country's
independence. President Robert Mugabe said he hoped to see an end soon to the
standoff over land distribution, though his speech sent seemingly mixed signals
about his attitude toward the white farmers and the direction he intends to take
in dealing with them.   A4

The opposition leader, Morgan Tsvangirai, urged conciliation, during a visit to
Washington.   A4

Execution Sought in Pakistan
Prosecutors demanded the death penalty for Nawaz Sharif, the ousted prime
minister, who was convicted of hijacking and terrorism on April 6 and was
sentenced to life. Prosecutors are appealing that sentence.   A10

Tories' Stand on Asylum Policy
Britain's Conservative Party leader, pressing the Labor government in a bitter
debate over refugees, said new asylum seekers should be put in secure detention
centers and deported within six weeks if their claims were rejected.   A9

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A16-21

Role of Federal Judiciary Is Affirmed in Death Cases
The Supreme Court set aside the death sentences of two convicted murderers in
Virginia, indicating in separate decisions that despite limits imposed by a 1996
law, federal judges still had a strong role in reviewing the quality of justice
administered by states. But the rulings do nothing to reverse a trend in which
the court has moved to streamline the appeals process for death row inmates. Nor
was there a suggestion that the court was reassessing its view of capital
punishment.   A1

Doctor's Warning on Elian
A pediatrician advising the government said Elian Gonzalez was being
psychologically abused by his Miami relatives and should be taken from them. The
comments were attacked by doctors for the Miami relatives. A federal appeals
court was weighing whether the government should be barred from letting the boy
return to Cuba with his father.   A19

Proposal for Better Housing
Gov. George W. Bush unveiled a five-year plan to offer $1.7 billion in federal
tax credits to encourage developers to build and rehabilitate houses in run-down
areas.   A20

McCain Taking Stand on Flag
Senator John McCain of Arizona is expected to tell South Carolinians today that
the state should remove the Confederate flag from its Capitol, and that he
should have said so during the primary campaign there.   A20

Gay Rights Bill Advances
The Vermont Senate, voting 19 to 11, gave preliminary approval to a bill
creating marriage-like "civil unions" for gay couples.   A16

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Drug to Fight Resistant Germs
The F.D.A. approved Zyvox, the first in a new family of antibiotics and the
first medicine in more than 40 years to treat a potentially lethal strain of
staphylococcus now on the rise.   A19

Managed Care and Heart Risks
New Yorkers who belong to managed health care plans, including those enrolled in
Medicare, were more likely to receive cardiac surgery at hospitals with higher
death rates for that surgery than patients in fee-for-service plans.   B4

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

Senate Acts to Revise G.O.P. Primary Ballot
The State Senate approved a plan to remove barriers to candidates getting on the
state ballot for the Republican presidential primary and to make it a
winner-take-all contest.   A1

Sewer Plants' Repairs Lagging
Federal and state monitors said the modernization of 102 sewage plants
discharging waste water into city reservoirs was far behind schedule,
jeopardizing efforts to avoid building a $6 billion filtration plant.   B1

A Rush Around the Clock
More people are using the bridges and tunnels to Manhattan every morning, and at
ever earlier hours, the Port Authority said, suggesting, though not confirming,
that the 9-to-5 workday has become outdated.   B1

Puzzling Data on Livery Crime
Seven livery cab drivers have been killed this year, compared with 11 for all
last year. Yet while the pace of driver homicides has risen, the larger crime
pattern, which shows the number of reported robberies in the cabs, has not,
police data show.   B3

Diallo Family Files Lawsuit
The family of Amadou Diallo filed a civil lawsuit against the city and the four
police officers who were acquitted of state criminal charges.   B4

New Tactic Against Virus
The City Board of Health passed a resolution declaring large puddles of water an
official public nuisance, and it empowered the Departments of Health and
Sanitation to remove any receptacle containing standing water, without warning
its owners.   B4

Mayor Scales Back Tax Plan
Mayor Giuliani offered a $36.7 billion budget that scaled back an earlier
proposal for tax breaks and restored cuts he had sought for libraries and other
cultural institutions.   B5

EDUCATION   B11

Chancellor's House May Go
The president of the Board of Education said the Brooklyn Heights town house
bought in 1990 for the chancellor's residence should be sold.   B5

SPORTS   D1-8

Devils Lead Series, 3-0
The Devils beat the Florida Panthers, 2-1, in Game 3 of the four-of-seven-game
playoff series.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-26

MyTrack Chief's Margin Call
Baruch Israel Hertz, whose constant advertisements on CNBC promise to make
investing a cinch by providing stock quotes, market information and easy access
to electronic trading, owes $45 million to four unidentified brokerage firms to
cover his stock-trading losses, his company, Track Data, disclosed. To meet the
brokers' demand, he pledged 25 million shares of his company's stock, out of
about 45 million he owns.   A1

Technology Stocks Storm Back
The Nasdaq rose 254.41 points, or 7.2 percent, to 3,793.57. The Dow gained
184.91 points, or 1.8 percent, to 10,767.42, and the S.& P. 500 rose 40.17
points, or 2.9 percent, to 1,441.61.   C1

Teaming Up Internationally
Merrill Lynch and HSBC Holdings will offer online banking and investment service
in Europe and Asia.   C1

A Slip in Housing Construction
Housing starts fell 11.2 percent in March, the largest monthly drop in six
years. The decline was attributed entirely to a slowdown in construction of
apartments and other multifamily housing, while single-family housing starts
were unchanged.   C5

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   B9

ARTS   E1-10

DINING   F1-14

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: A clear choice on China trade; Mr. Giuliani's new budget; saving the
Miranda rule; family planning politics.
Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E9

TV Listings   E10

Public Lives   B2

Weather   A20 D7


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: BOE (LSE) (56%); BAB (BRU) (56%); BA (NYSE) (56%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS336414 GUIDED MISSILE & SPACE VEHICLE MANUFACTURING (56%);
NAICS336412 AIRCRAFT ENGINE & ENGINE PARTS MANUFACTURING (56%); NAICS336411
AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (56%); SIC3761 GUIDED MISSILES & SPACE VEHICLES (56%);

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PHILIPPINES (92%); TAIWAN (92%);
ZIMBABWE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SWITZERLAND (73%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (73%);

CITY: MIAMI, FL, USA (92%); MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%);

COMPANY: BOEING CO (56%);   UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (56%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL  (56%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); PHILIPPINES (92%); TAIWAN (92%);
ZIMBABWE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SWITZERLAND (73%);
FLORIDA, USA (92%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (73%);   MIAMI, FL, USA (92%); MANILA,
PHILIPPINES (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); APPEALS (89%); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); SENTENCING (86%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (86%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (85%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%); US PRESIDENTS
(78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); SMUGGLING
(78%); REFUGEES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(78%); POLITICS (76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (75%); LITIGATION

 (75%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (75%); AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS (74%); HIJACKING (74%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (73%); PRISONS (72%); TRENDS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (70%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (70%); JAIL SENTENCING (69%); TERRORISM (68%); APPEALS
COURTS (67%); DEPORTATION (67%); IMMIGRANT DETENTION CENTERS (67%);
ANNIVERSARIES (66%); JUDGES (63%); MURDER (56%);

PERSON: TRENT LOTT (58%); NAWAZ SHARIF (50%); MORGAN RICHARD TSVANGIRAI (50%);

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             275 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

COCAINE WAR: A special report.;
A Web of Drugs and Strife in Colombia

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 4370 words

DATELINE: MONTCLART, Colombia


Nearly half the world's supply of cocaine originates within 150 miles of this
isolated Colombian military outpost on the Putumayo River. So when Lt. German
Arenas and his anti-drug troops recently set out by boat, they knew that finding
a target would be the easy part.

Four hours later, his squadron of young marines stopped and marched into the
equatorial wilderness, guns at the ready. By nightfall, they had found three
crude cocaine-processing laboratories in the jungle, more than 6,000 seedlings
of a new, more potent variety of coca plant, a half-dozen large fields brimming
with ripening coca bushes and four hapless peasants.

But after they destroyed as much as they could, arrested the peasants and headed
back downriver, the soldiers left behind at least 200 more labs hidden in the
dense, trackless jungle and thousands more acres of coca plants, visible from
the air everywhere across southern Colombia.

Over all, to the growing alarm of the Clinton administration, which has been
bankrolling much of the anti-drug fight here, coca production in Colombia has
more than doubled in the past five years. Using recent satellite images,
American officials estimate that the country now grows or processes more than
500 tons of cocaine a year, or some 90 percent of the world's supply, and that
Putumayo and Caqueta provinces are responsible for two-thirds of that.

But here as in many parts of southern Colombia, the army and the police dare not
send spray planes and helicopters to eradicate the fields because the instant
they appear, the aircraft invariably draw ground fire from the Marxist guerrilla
forces that thrive on the drug trade.

The principal rebel group, the 15,000-strong Revolutionary Armed Forces of
Colombia, or F.A.R.C., has been fighting the government since the mid-1960's,
financing their war for most of that time with kidnappings and extortions.

But that has changed sharply in recent years. With the smashing of the notorious
Medellin and Cali cartels, the guerrillas gained greater access to a far more
lucrative source of income: coca and heroin. Now the rebels provide protection
and support to the dozens of smaller trafficking groups that have sprung up to
replace the cartels, and they are earning, by the Colombian government's
estimate, more than $1 million a day.

That, in turn, has blurred the lines of what was once painted in relatively
simple terms as an ideological battle between a pair of left-wing insurgencies
that enjoy almost no popular support and a flawed but functioning democracy.
Along the way, the focus of the conflict has shifted so that while the
government still controls most of the country's territory, the war itself is
increasingly being fought over cocaine and heroin.

On one side is the popularly elected government of President Andres Pastrana and
its thin and poorly trained security forces. On the other are the increasingly
well armed and richly financed leftist guerrillas. Equally menacing are the
right-wing death squads, which have a long history of collusion with elements of
the Colombian military and are also dealing in drugs.

"It is the only self-sustaining insurgency I have ever seen," said Gen. Charles
E. Wilhelm, who is responsible for Latin America as commander in chief of the
United States Southern Command. "There is no Cuba in back of it; there is no
Soviet Union in back of it. It is this delicate merger of criminals,
narco-traffickers with insurgents."

After nearly a decade of trying with little success to give government forces
the edge in this confrontation, the White House and Congress are on the verge of
the biggest gamble yet: a $1.6 billion package over two years that would beef up
anti-drug training for the Colombian police and military and provide them with
better equipment, including more than five dozen helicopters.

Critics in the United States and in the region worry that Washington is
embracing an unrealistic plan. They say that Colombia lacks a concrete strategy
for quickly getting the job done, that attacking cocaine at the source will be
more difficult in Colombia than it was in neighboring countries, and that
ultimately American military advisers will be drawn into the broader war between
the guerrillas and the government.


The Combatants

Coca Brings Shooting From Many Directions

In the jungle and the farming villages, the distinction that the Pentagon and
the State Department try to draw between arming an anti-drug war and avoiding
Colombia's long-running civil conflict is blurred. The drug trade finances both
the leftist insurgents and their rivals, the paramilitary death squads, who
often operate with the tacit support of Colombian Army units.

"When people are shooting at you, it is hard to determine their immediate
affiliation," said William Ledwith, director of international operations for the
United States Drug Enforcement Administration. "Does it really make a difference
if you are attacked by the F.A.R.C., the E.L.N., by paramilitaries or by a gang
of narcotics traffickers wanting to defend their laboratories?" he asked, using
the acronyms for the guerrilla groups. "To me, all the bullets are the same."

The rapid expansion of coca production in Colombia is in large part a
consequence of two developments. One is what is known as the "balloon effect" --
the reappearance of a problem in a new place after it has been squeezed in
another -- which followed successful American-led campaigns against coca growers
in Peru and Bolivia.

The other, more recent development was a crucial miscalculation by President
Pastrana. Elected on the promise of ending the debilitating war against the
guerrillas, he tried to lure them to the negotiating table in 1998 by granting
the leading guerrilla group control over a chunk of territory larger than
Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island combined. The guerrillas quickly
turned it into an armed protectorate and a coca-growing factory, and the peace
talks have floundered.

The breakup of the powerful Medellin and Cali cartels -- the D.E.A. once called
the latter "the most dangerous criminal group in history" -- was originally
expected to cripple the Colombian drug business. But their demise actually
served to spur coca cultivation in more remote regions of the country and to
foster unholy alliances between new drug gangs on one side and the leftist
guerrillas and paramilitary forces on the other.

Just five years ago, Putumayo and neighboring Caqueta province were perhaps the
poorest and most neglected areas of the country. Today, they have become a
paradise for coca growers, with more than 100,000 acres cultivated under the
protection of the largest rebel group, F.A.R.C.

Colombian trafficking groups have not only pushed aside Peru and Bolivia, the
traditional sources of raw coca leaf, but also have moved aggressively into the
heroin business, replacing Southeast Asia and Afghanistan as the source of most
of the heroin seized in the United States.

For the Colombian military, that is a formidable challenge.

Though the national armed forces look strong on paper, with more than 100,000
soldiers, barely a third of them are ready for fighting. Under a widely
criticized law that reflects the class prejudice and favoritism that run through
Colombian society, high school graduates are forbidden to participate in combat.

The Colombian 90th Marine Battalion, to which Lieutenant Arenas, 28, and his
teenage soldiers belong, patrols more than 1,500 miles of waterways in a network
of four major rivers with barely 1,000 men and a handful of boats.

"For an area like this, a thousand men is nothing," Lieutenant Arenas said as
his gunboat, the A.R.C. Leticia, equipped with two cannons, two machine guns and
a pair of grenade launchers, chugged up the Putumayo River, with only the sound
of its motors breaking the quiet. "Even though my guys are motivated, skilled
and happy to be here, they face a lot of limitations."


The American Role

Shoestring Operation Welcomes Assistance

The situation on the ground in Colombia had been eroding throughout the 1990's.
But in 1994, just as the F.A.R.C. was beginning its big advance, the Clinton
administration's relations with the Colombian government went into a deep freeze
after Washington received information that President-elect Ernesto Samper had
accepted $6 million in campaign contributions from drug cartels.

Normal ties resumed with the election of Mr. Pastrana in 1998. But it was not
until the F.A.R.C. launched a nationwide offensive that brought it within
striking distance of Bogota last July that the real dimensions of the crisis
began registering in Washington.

Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the director of the White House's Office of National
Drug Control Policy and before that the commander of American military forces in
Latin America, was the first to visit, and immediately began pushing President
Clinton for emergency aid. That pressure, along with the major rebel action in
July, convinced the White House of the seriousness of the situation in Colombia.

"It is essential the Colombian government restore state authority in this
crucial region," General McCaffrey said during a more recent visit to a military
base where three new anti-narcotics battalions, trained and financed with
American assistance, are being formed. "The rapid expansion of drug production
in Colombia, almost entirely in zones dominated by armed illegal groups,
constitutes a drug emergency."

The biggest single item in the administration's proposed assistance package,
which has been approved by the House and is pending in the Senate, is 63
helicopters, divided between 33 Bell UH-1N models and 30 more modern Sikorsky
UH-60L Blackhawks, which are equipped with night-vision equipment and special
armor. As the guerrillas and traffickers are aware, once training programs for
crews and the construction of hangars are taken into account, the earliest date
for complete delivery of the American-supplied equipment would be late next
year.

Nevertheless, the prospect that American aid may soon begin flowing clearly
excites the weary soldiers here. "Tell them we need air support, like the police
get for their operations," said Lt. Gustavo Lievano, the marine unit's second in
command.

A sergeant wanted to know, "How much more money are they going to give us to buy
intelligence from informants?"

Illustrating the shoestring nature of operations here, on this mission
Lieutenant Arenas was relying on walkie-talkies he paid for out of his own
pocket while in the United States last year. Sometimes, even having enough
gasoline for boats can be a problem.

But to some in Washington, the prospect of increased American involvement in
Colombia is viewed much more warily.

"Before we quadruple our military aid and embark on an open-ended, costly
commitment, the Colombian government needs to come up with a workable strategy,"
said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont. "And our own administration
needs to explain in detail what its goals are, what it expects to achieve at
what cost over what period of time, and what the risks are, both to the
thousands of Colombian civilians who will be caught in the middle when the war
intensifies and to our own military advisers there.

"The Colombian government wants a blank check. That is not going to happen."

On the Colombian side, a recent poll shows that a majority of Colombians favor
American intervention.

"Pastrana has shown that he doesn't know how to deal with this situation," said
Diego Bedoya Hurtado, a Bogota accountant. "Only the Americans are going to be
able to get us out this mess."

From the perspective of the Pastrana administration, however, the American aid
package is only part of a broader effort. It hopes to combine American military
aid with nearly $1 billion from European nations for social and economic
programs, and loans from international organizations, making for a whopping $7.5
billion effort that mixes carrot and stick.

One additional concern, both in Andean capitals and in Washington, is that any
success against coca cultivation in Colombia will inevitably lead to a
resurgence of coca growing in Peru or Bolivia.

"The balloon effect in drugs is something that we are always looking at," said
Mr. Ledwith, director of international operations for the D.E.A.

Coca growing in Peru and Bolivia has been cut by more than half following
increased cooperation between their governments and the United States.
Successful crop substitution programs are one reason, but Peruvian President
Alberto Fujimori's policy of shooting down any drug plane flying over Peru has
been a huge deterrent, as have stepped-up eradication efforts.

Thus the bulk of coca production has shifted to Colombia, where most of the
processing and marketing operations were already located. Feeling relatively
safe on their native soil, the coca-growing syndicates have invested heavily in
developing more potent strains, some of which can be harvested in as little as
60 days.

Smaller, more vulnerable trafficking groups have gravitated toward
insurgent-dominated areas like this one, paying a tax on their drug income to
the guerrillas in return for protection from the Colombian government's
anti-drug campaign.

In 1996, a United States intelligence summary concluded that while guerrilla
units were selling protection "in virtually all departments where traffickers
operate," only a few "probably are involved more directly in localized,
small-scale drug cultivation and processing."

But that has changed dramatically over the past 18 months, since the Colombian
government gave a chunk of territory to the F.A.R.C. That step in late 1998 was
intended as a gesture of good faith to lure the rebels into peace negotiations.

Hopes that the long war with the leftist guerrillas could end were raised almost
two years ago when Mr. Pastrana was elected as a peace candidate implicitly
endorsed by the F.A.R.C.'s main leader, Manuel Marulanda.

Informal peace talks with the group began last year. But after Mr. Pastrana flew
to San Vicente del Caguan, the largest town in the rebel-held zone, for the
opening ceremonies, Mr. Marulanda delivered a calculated snub by failing to
appear, sending subalterns instead and leaving Mr. Pastrana looking at an empty
chair in front of television cameras and photographers.

Since then, the negotiations have repeatedly stalled, with the F.A.R.C. breaking
off discussions every time the government refuses to bend to one of its demands,
and the government eventually giving in. Though the agreement called only for
military forces to withdraw, the F.A.R.C. has also driven mayors, judges and
Roman Catholic priests from its zone.


The People

Ever-Present Violence Creates Nation of Fear

To the average Colombian, it appears that while the government and rebel
negotiating teams quibble over procedural issues, the F.A.R.C. is building up
its military might and its drug-trafficking capabilities.

As a result, cartoonists now routinely portray Mr. Pastrana as a shrunken figure
too small for the presidential sash and his shirt and pants.

F.A.R.C. leaders quickly converted their area, bitterly referred to by locals as
"Farc landia," into a major cocaine production center complete with airstrips
for exporting the product. Now, the second largest left-wing guerrilla group,
the Army of National Liberation, known by the Spanish acronym E.L.N., wants its
own demilitarized zone.

In recent interviews in Caqueta, the province adjoining the F.A.R.C. haven,
peasants -- none of whom were willing to be identified -- also complained of
being ordered by local F.A.R.C. commanders to grow coca. Other peasant farmers
in the region who were already cultivating coca say they are now forced to sell
to a guerrilla-controlled monopoly at a price that is about half what their crop
would have fetched on the open market a year ago.

The paramilitary death squads controlled by Carlos Castano and closely allied
with elements of the Colombian Armed Forces have acted no differently. These
paramilitary troops were originally protected by law, defending businesses and
landholders from leftists guerrillas, and aiming their assaults at civilians
they suspected of aiding the rebels.

The paramilitary units lost their legal status more than a decade ago, and moved
heavily into the drug trade. Three years ago, the D.E.A. described Mr. Castano
"as a major narcotics trafficker in his own right," and in a startling interview
on Colombian television on March 1, the paramilitary chieftain acknowledged that
the bulk of his group's money now comes from drugs.

As the conflict deepens, the situation for ordinary Colombians has grown worse.
At least 35,000 people have been killed over the past decade, and more than 1.5
million people, most of them peasants, have been forced to leave their homes.

"First the paramilitaries came and told us to leave or they would kill us, and
then when we were resettled, the guerrillas came and at gunpoint forced two of
my sons to join them," said Javier Gonzalez, a refugee from Cordoba province in
the northwest. "For the past three years, we have been sent from one place to
the next, but everywhere we go, we are mistreated and abused."

In addition, at least 2 percent of Colombia's 40 million people -- some 800,000
mostly middle-class people -- have left the country since 1996, most of them for
the United States. Investors are also fleeing in the face of extortion demands
by guerrilla and paramilitary groups, and unemployment is at a record rate of
one worker in five after a recession that shrank the economy by more than 5
percent last year.

A recent poll shows Colombians worry most about the pervasive violence that
accompanies the drug crisis.

Colombia's murder rate is 10 times that of the United States, and its kidnapping
rate is the highest in the world, thanks in large part to spectacular mass
abductions like the E.L.N.'s raid on a Roman Catholic church service in Cali
last year that resulted in more than 150 hostages.

"It feels like we are besieged, with an enemy just outside the castle walls
waiting to pluck anyone who comes into their grasp," a doctor who lives in Cali
said recently. "There is no longer anywhere you can go where you are safe."

More than five million people marched last fall in support of the "No Mas" civic
foundation, which is demanding an immediate cessation of hostilities. But the
leader of that movement, Francisco Santos, was forced to leave the country in
mid-March after the F.A.R.C. threatened to kill him.

"There is a tendency to see the Colombian conflict as a table with two legs, the
government versus the guerrillas," thereby ignoring the aspirations of civil
society, Mr. Santos said recently in Miami.


The Hard Questions

A Brief Intervention Or a Prolonged Effort?

For the Clinton administration, the unraveling of the situation in Colombia has
created an uncomfortable dilemma. While the United States is determined to
diminish the flow of cocaine and heroin into American cities, especially with an
election looming, it does not want to be pulled into what can only be a long,
bloody and expensive campaign in Latin America's longest running guerrilla war.

"The situation on the ground in Colombia is increasingly complicated, but our
policy is very straightforward," Brian E. Sheridan, the Defense Department
coordinator for drug enforcement policy and support, said recently in testimony
to a Congressional panel. "We are working with the Colombian government on
counternarcotics programs. We are not in the counterinsurgency business."

But to Colombian military officers in the field, there is no such distinction.
"To me, they are one and the same thing," Lieutenant Arenas said, clearly
puzzled that anyone would suggest there is any difference between drug
traffickers and guerrillas.

And while the Clinton administration is talking only of a two-year program,
focused on the delivery of the helicopters and a training program for pilots,
top Colombian military officials lay out a six-year campaign. They envision
being able to break the F.A.R.C.'s control of coca-growing areas in the south in
two years, after which the Colombian Armed Forces would focus on the Guaviare
region in the country's heartland for two years and then northern areas
dominated by paramilitary groups.

American officials contend that the only way the government can regain control
of Putumayo and Caqueta provinces is through a coordinated effort in which the
Armed Forces clean out guerrilla concentrations and are followed by police units
that fumigate coca fields by air.

But very little in the battlefield record of the Colombian Army and Air Force
inspires confidence in that kind of plan. Throughout the 1990's, the United
States funneled most of its aid and training to the Colombian National Police
because American officials regarded the Armed Forces as a bloated, corrupt and
largely defensive force.

The American approach is also likely to exacerbate a longstanding debate about
the most effective way to reduce drug cultivation. While aerial spraying is
traditionally favored by the United States, many in Colombia argue that crop
substitution programs similar to those that proved successful in Bolivia and
Peru are more effective ways to wean peasant farmers from drug crops.

The aid package now before the United States Congress includes a hefty increase
in financing for such "alternative development" programs, to $127 million over
the next two years from $5 million in the last budget. But the experience of the
National Plan for Alternative Development, the Colombian government's crop
substitution agency, makes clear that coordinating aerial spraying and crop
substitution programs requires a precision that has eluded American and
Colombian experts.

Human rights groups see another, equally troubling problem in the White House
aid package. They point to a long history of cooperation between some Colombian
military units and Mr. Castano's right-wing death squads, or paramilitaries.

According to the Colombian prosecutor's office, the death squads killed nearly
1,000 people in more than 125 massacres in 1999. Recent reports by Human Rights
Watch and the United Nations and investigations by Colombian prosecutors have
singled out specific Colombian military units and commanders as having provided
support to the death squads or having failed to heed calls for help from
villages under attack.

To curb such abuses, Congress passed the Leahy Amendment in 1997, prohibiting
the United States from providing assistance to any Colombian military unit that
violates human rights. As a result, some Colombian battalions have been
disqualified from receiving American aid, new units have been formed, and
instruction in human rights has become a required part of Colombian military
training. But critics of the Clinton administration's aid package insist not
only that those restrictions be strengthened, but that new oversight mechanisms
be included.

"The government paints a rosy picture, but the reality is that army officers who
commit atrocities are almost never prosecuted," Senator Leahy, the author of the
amendment, said recently.

"Links between the army and paramilitaries are widespread, and human rights
investigators have had to flee the country."

R. Rand Beers, assistant secretary of state for international narcotics and law
enforcement affairs, denied that paramilitary groups would get better treatment
than their enemies on the left. "We are pressing the Colombian government to
live up to the promise that they will go after the paras, and we will continue
to do that," he said, referring to the paramilitary troops.

American policy, however, is to "go after the drugs wherever they are," Mr.
Beers added. "We will start by going after the largest concentrations of those
drugs, and right now that is in the south. So it's not that they are getting a
free ride because they are paras. It's because the paras have fewer forces in
the south than the F.A.R.C. at this time. That said, the paras are increasing
their presence in the south, and are becoming a more significant problem there."

Even without the aid package, the United States' commitment in Colombia is
already growing. The Colombian battalions patrol the rivers of southern Colombia
in American-made Pirana vessels, and last year, a Riverine War School opened in
Puerto Leguizamo with some classes by visiting American instructors.

"We've had your Coast Guard come in to show how to board vessels, your Army and
Marines to teach combat on land and water, the Miami police to demonstrate
detention methods," Lieutenant Arenas said enthusiastically. Many of the
Americans leave equipment and supplies behind as gifts, a gesture that is deeply
appreciated by troops who are short of everything from boots and maps to two-way
radios.

At any given moment, 80 to 220 American military officials are working in
Colombia, according to the United States Embassy in Bogota. The largest
concentrations are at Tolemaida in the center of the country, and Tres Esquinas
in the southwest, where the first of three counternarcotics battalions was
trained last year and two more battalions are scheduled to be formed this year.

All told, American aid to Colombia has grown by 3,500 percent since 1993,
General McCaffrey said. That makes Colombia the largest recipient of American
aid outside the Middle East even without the new flows of equipment and training
under discussion.

Washington clearly hopes that this large one-time injection of new aid will
prove sufficient for the Colombian government to regain the upper hand.

But Fernando Cepeda Ulloa, a former minister of the interior and ambassador to
the United States, was speaking for many Colombians, and some Americans, when he
recently suggested that a pair of fundamental questions remain.

"Is the elimination of narcotics trafficking the key to achieving peace, or is
the achievement of peace necessary to the elimination of narcotics?" he asked.
"That is a dilemma that has to be analyzed and contemplated."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); BOLIVIA (79%); SOUTH AMERICA
(79%); PERU (79%);

CITY: MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%);

COMPANY: ;CALI CARTEL; MEDELLIN CARTEL  F A R (53%);   OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG
CONTROL POLICY (59%);

ORGANIZATION: ;CALI CARTEL; MEDELLIN CARTEL  OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL
POLICY (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); BOLIVIA (79%);
SOUTH AMERICA (79%); PERU (79%);   MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%);

SUBJECT: DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; COCAINE AND CRACK COCAINE; HEROIN; CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY
FORCES; FOREIGN AID; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES
ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; SURVEYS AND SERIES  COCAINE (95%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); DRUG POLICY (90%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (89%); HEROIN
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (89%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME

 (89%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); CARTELS (87%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); NARCOTERRORISM (78%); ARMIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); US
PRESIDENTS (72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); HELICOPTERS (64%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (63%); POLITICS (60%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (56%);
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (56%);

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A Colombian marine battalion, trained with American assistance,
destroying a cocaine laboratory. (Alex Quesada/Matrix)(pg. A1); Despite efforts
by government troops to destroy the crop, thousands of acres of coca plants
remain visible by air across southern Colombia, with production more than
doubling in the past five years. A group of Colombian marines raided a field
recently. (Larry Rohter/The New York Times)(pg. A13)

Chart "Growing an Illicit Crop and Cultivating a War"
Colombia is now the source of 90 percent of the cocaine and two-thirds of the
heroin seized in the United States. Cultivation of coca and poppies has more
than doubled in the past five years, and the profits of drug trafficking are
increasingly going to guerrilla and paramilitary groups.

Chart shows coca cultivation (in acres) for Colombia, Peru and Bolivia

(Source Office of National Drug Control Policy)(pg. A12)

Maps of South America highlighting Colombia and a blow-up of Colombia
highlighting cocoa cultivation areas. (pg. A12)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             276 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 956 words



THE AMERICAS

COLOMBIA: PEACE AIDE QUITS
The government's top peace official resigned after rebels of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia threatened to step up a longstanding campaign of
extortion and kidnapping against the rich. Peace Commissioner Victor Ricardo,
left, denied his decision was linked to death threats from rightist paramilitary
gangs. But he voiced outrage at a communique announcing that the rebels would
begin abducting millionaires and executives of companies worth more than $1
million who refused to pay tribute to the 17,000-strong rebel force.   (Reuters)


MEXICO: U.S. OBSERVER DEPORTED
Ted Lewis, the director for Mexico of the San Francisco human rights group
Global Exchange, was detained by immigration agents in Guadalajara and deported.
Mr. Lewis was organizing 40 foreign professors to study election conditions
before the July 2 presidential balloting. The autonomous Federal Electoral
Institute had approved his credentials as an election observer.   Sam Dillon
(NYT)


CHILE: PINOCHET HEARING
An appeals court opened a hearing into arguments about whether it should strip
Gen. Augusto Pinochet of his legislative immunity as a senator before he can
stand trial for human rights violations that occurred during his rule between
1973 and 1990. The three-day hearing is only the beginning of what promises to
be a long legal battle. If General Pinochet loses his immunity, defense lawyers
are expected to appeal to the Supreme Court.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

EUROPE

TURKEY: OPPOSITION TO CANDIDATE
The presidential candidate supported by major political party leaders, Ahmet
Necdet Sezer, faced quiet but growing opposition before today's first ballot.
Some members of Parliament, which must choose the next president, said they had
been told Mr. Sezer was either too liberal, too sympathetic to Islam, or too
critical of the military. The speaker of Parliament, Yildirim Akbulut, is his
most prominent opponent.   Stephen Kinzer (NYT)

BRITAIN: SELF-DEFENSE DISPUTE
The Conservative leader William Hague called for a radical overhaul of the law
of self-defense after a public outcry over the murder conviction of a Norfolk
man who shot an intruder at his farm. Chief Constable Crispian Strachan of the
rural Northumbria police said the law permitting use of "reasonable force"
worked well enough and that Mr. Hague's idea would generate American levels of
violent assault and killing in Britain.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

SPAIN: PREMIER WINS APPROVAL
Parliament voted 202 to 148 to approve a second term for the center-right prime
minister, Jose Maria Aznar, whom voters re-elected on March 12 with an
unexpected outright majority. In the two-day investiture debate, Mr. Aznar, 47,
promised more reforms to maintain economic growth and a firm stance against
armed Basque separatists.   (NYT)

SPAIN: 5 CONVICTED IN BASQUE DEATHS
Gen. Enrique Rodriguez Galindo of the Civil Guard and four other officials who
also served under Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez were sentenced to up to 71
years each in prison for their roles in the 1983 murders of two suspected
members of the Basque separatist group E.T.A. Two people were acquitted,
including a former senior interior ministry official. It was the second major
trial looking into a shadowy campaign blamed for the deaths of 27 suspected
Basque rebels in the 1980's.   (NYT)

KOSOVO: ALBANIAN PROTEST
Some 10,000 ethnic Albanians jammed Pristina to demand the release of thousands
of Kosovo Albanians held in Serbian jails. More than 2,000 ethnic Albanians
arrested in the 18-month Serbian crackdown on the Kosovo Liberation Army were
taken to Serbia before NATO's bombing campaign forced Yugoslav troops and the
police to withdraw and hand the province over to United Nations administrators
and international peacekeepers.   (AP)

ASIA

INDIA: DROUGHT RELIEF
The government has begun a large-scale relief effort for the drought-stricken
states of Rajasthan and Gujarat. It will send wheat and rice, fodder for cattle
and water to the hardest-hit areas. Officials say the country has ample grain
stores to prevent a famine. No deaths have been attributed to the drought.
Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

AFGHANISTAN: PRISONERS FREED
The ruling Taliban released about 300 opposition prisoners from jail under a
decree by the movement's supreme leader, Mullah Mohammad Omar, officials said.
The head of the jail said the freed men included those who had committed minor
offenses and those who had promised to serve the Taliban, which controls most of
the country.   (Agence France-Presse)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: ENVOY REBUFFED
A former Russian ambassador to the United Nations and the United States, Yuli M.
Vorontsov, has been rebuffed by the Iraqis as he tried to reopen an
investigation into Kuwaiti prisoners still missing after Iraq's invasion and
occupation of Kuwait in 1990. Mr. Vorontsov, whom Secretary General Kofi Annan
of the United Nations appointed in February, reported to the Security Council
that he is still seeking a meeting with the Iraqis.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: OPPOSITION WARNING
The leader of Zimbabwe's opposition, Morgan Tsvangirai, left, said his Movement
for Democratic Change, which saw two more of its supporters killed Tuesday in
political violence, would not stand by and watch as government loyalists
continued to attack its members. At least five backers of the new opposition
party have died in the last 10 days in attacks by people claiming to be
supporters of President Robert Mugabe's ruling party. The opposition has urged
its members to observe the law.   Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (94%); SPAIN (93%); MEXICO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%); EUROPE (79%); CHILE (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (54%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (84%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA (94%); SPAIN (93%); MEXICO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%); EUROPE (79%); CHILE (79%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (54%);



SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); APPROVALS (88%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (88%); LIBERALISM (78%);
EXTORTION (78%); RESIGNATIONS (78%); IMMUNITY (78%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%); POLITICAL
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WEALTHY PEOPLE (77%); MURDER (77%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(77%); EMERGING MARKETS (75%); IMMIGRATION (75%); ELECTION MONITORING (75%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (74%); BALLOTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%); POLITICS
(73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (73%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(72%); APPEALS COURTS (72%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES
(70%); LAWYERS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); APPEALS

 (67%); ECONOMIC GROWTH (64%); SELF DEFENSE (58%); RELIGION (50%);   HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (73%);

PERSON: AHMET NECDET SEZER (53%);

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             280 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 5, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

China Cites Progress On Its Rights Record

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 111 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, May 4


China told a United Nations human rights panel today that it had made progress
in preventing torture and in prosecuting officials suspected of such abuse but
conceded that it could do more.
 Rebutting criticism from a human rights group, Qiao Zonghuai, China's
ambassador to the United Nations in Geneva, said that stronger laws, more
training for the judiciary and improved investigating methods had resulted in
fewer torture cases in recent years.

But he said: "China's legal system still needs to be improved, and there are
still weak links in our system of judicial supervision. These problems pose
obstacles to the eradication of torture in China."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); SWITZERLAND (90%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (55%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (94%); SWITZERLAND (90%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND
(55%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TORTURE  HUMAN RIGHTS (91%); TORTURE (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (86%);

LOAD-DATE: May 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             285 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 18, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Discusses How to Try Rebel Leader In Freetown

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 729 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, May 17


Discussions began here today on whether legal options exist to bring Foday
Sankoh, the Sierra Leone rebel leader, to justice, because no international
tribunal has automatic jurisdiction over him.

Mr. Sankoh, whose Revolutionary United Front established itself as one of the
most brutal guerrilla movements -- chopping off citizens' limbs and destroying
villages -- won a place in the Freetown government last year in return for an
end to his violent campaign against President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah. Thus,
diplomats said, the responsibility is on Sierra Leone, which holds the rebel
leader prisoner, to make the first decisions on his future.

Will it try another reconciliation with the warlord, whose troops control
diamond-mining areas, or will Mr. Sankoh be declared an outlaw and turned over
to a criminal court?

A key to Mr. Sankoh's future may be President Charles Taylor of Liberia, a
beneficiary of diamonds supplied by the Sierra Leone rebels. Some officials in
Sierra Leone say Mr. Taylor may have found an alternative rebel leader -- Mr.
Sankoh's former field commander, Sam Bockarie -- and could jettison Mr. Sankoh.

While awaiting a decision by Mr. Kabbah and fearful that threats of a war crimes
trial could endanger some 270 United Nations hostages still held by rebels, many
United Nations officials and human rights groups say Mr. Sankoh should not be
absolved in any way.

The United Nations, which was not involved in the peace agreement signed last
year in Lome, Togo, took the unusual step of distancing itself publicly from the
amnesty for Mr. Sankoh that was part of that accord. Secretary General Kofi
Annan has said repeatedly throughout the current hostage crisis -- in which Mr.
Sankoh's forces have held as many as 500 United Nations forces -- that the rebel
leader would have to be held accountable.

Reed Brody, advocacy director of Human Rights Watch, said governments were
obliged to see Mr. Sankoh prosecuted. "Once he is in international custody," Mr.
Brody said, "there is a duty under the Geneva Conventions to bring him to
trial."

Mr. Brody, who has been active in efforts to try other leaders outside their
countries, including Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile and Hissen Habre of Chad,
said there were four possibilities in Mr. Sankoh's case.

"One, probably the best, would be to create an international tribunal on the
order of the tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda," he said. The other
possibilities are creating a regional tribunal to handle the case, sending Mr.
Sankoh to another country for trial or trying him in Sierra Leone, Mr. Brody
said.

"Normally it is better to try people in the country where their crimes were
committed, where the victims are located, where justice would ultimately be more
meaningful," Mr. Brody said. "But given the unsettled conditions in Sierra Leone
and the passions that are manifesting themselves in the calls by some for mob
justice or lynch justice, it might be better to have him tried by a tribunal
that is perceived to be neutral."

At the International Peace Academy, a research organization with close ties to
the United Nations, the president, David Malone, said this was the kind of case
for which an International Criminal Court had been created. But the court, which
an international treaty established two years ago, is bogged down in
negotiations over how it will function, with the United States demanding
immunity for its citizens.

Leading nations, Mr. Malone said, have not made the case against Mr. Sankoh
clear enough to be heard in Freetown and among those United Nations officials,
some working in Africa, who are inclined to patch up relations with the rebel
leader.

"The Security Council has consistently failed to telegraph clearly what its
approach to Sankoh on criminal responsibility is going to be," Mr. Malone, a
Canadian diplomat, said. "The real dilemma is that there seems to be a split of
opinion in United Nations circles on the Sankoh case. On the one hand, you have
people who believe that somehow the Lome agreement needs to be put back together
again and that in order to do so Foday Sankoh remains a necessary and legitimate
partner.

"I disagree. Foday Sankoh and his senior lieutenants need to be on notice that
their personal responsibility for war crimes isn't abstract, that there will be
practical consequences."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); TOGO (79%); RWANDA (79%); LIBERIA (79%); CHILE
(79%);

CITY: LOME, TOGO (56%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (97%); TOGO (79%); RWANDA (79%);
LIBERIA (79%); CHILE (79%);   LOME, TOGO (56%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS; HOSTAGES  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (95%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); JURISDICTION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); AMNESTY
(73%); POLITICS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); ARMED FORCES (69%); MINES
& MINING (69%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); DIAMOND MINING (69%); DIAMOND
MARKETS (54%);   LAW OF WAR (71%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; SANKOH, FODAY; KABBAH, AHMED TEJAN (PRES)  REED
BRODY (75%); FODAY SANKOH (64%); DAVID MALONE (56%);

LOAD-DATE: May 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             286 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Army Training School to Rise Again, Recast but Unmoved

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 688 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, May 19


Dogged by years of controversy over its mission and its graduates, the Army's
School of the Americas is on the verge of getting a new charter, a new
curriculum and a new name. It appears likely, however, to face the same old
protests.

The Army's plans to reorganize the school, which has trained generations of
soldiers from Central America and South America, cleared a major hurdle this
week when the House narrowly rejected an amendment that would have closed it
down.

If the Senate goes along, as expected, the school that critics have linked to
human rights violations by former students will officially "close" and "reopen"
later this year as the Defense Institute for Hemispheric Security Cooperation.

The Army proposed the changes last month, prompted by rising opposition to the
school from religious groups and, more importantly, from some members of
Congress, who nearly succeeded in cutting off the school's financing last year.

Opened in Panama in 1946 and moved to its current location at Fort Benning, Ga.,
in 1984, the school has been the primary training ground for more than 60,000
Latin American military and police. Some were later implicated in the region's
most notorious abuses, like the murder of six Jesuit priests in El Salvador in
1989.

The secretary of the Army, Louis Caldera, said in an interview that critics had
unfairly tarnished the school's reputation because of the actions of a very few.
Nonetheless, he said, the changes would give the school a focus that was more
academic and less strictly military.

"I thought it would be a mistake to close the school down," Mr. Caldera said,
"because that would be turning our backs on the countries of Latin America."

Because Congress chartered the school, the Army had to seek approval for its
changes.

In addition to having a new name, the school would have an advisory board to
review its curriculum and report to Congress. Authority over the school would be
transferred from the Army to the Department of Defense, and students would be
required to have at least eight hours of instruction in human rights in each
course.

Mr. Caldera said the Army would try to increase the number of civilian students,
and emphasize training political and military leaders in the proper role of the
military under the region's emerging democratic governments.

The school would remain at Fort Benning and still offer courses involving purely
military tactics and strategies, prompting opponents to denounce the changes as
cosmetic.

When the Army's proposal came before the House on Thursday as part of the
defense authorization bill, four members sponsored an amendment to shut the
school and create a committee to review military training for Latin Americans.

"Even with a new coat of paint, the School of the Americas has trained far too
many killers of innocent people to remain a part of our foreign policy," said
one of the sponsors, Representative John J. Moakley, Democrat of Massachusetts.

But the amendment lost on a roll-call vote of 214 to 204 after lobbying by Army,
Pentagon and Clinton administration officials. A day before the vote, Secretary
of Defense William S. Cohen and Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright sent
members a joint letter saying the Army's proposal would "allow us to move past
what had become a contentious annual debate on the school's legacy and focus on
the question of how best to engage militarily our friends and allies in the
hemisphere."

The Army's proposal won approval when the House overwhelmingly approved the
larger authorization bill late Thursday.

The Rev. Roy L. Bourgeois, a priest who has organized protests against the
school for a decade from his apartment at Fort Benning's main gate, said the
changes would not diminish the movement against the school. The protests have
grown from a handful of opponents to a crowd in November that was estimated at
more than 8,000.

"After thinking this thing out, we realized what they're really talking about is
a name change," he said in a telephone interview today. "For us, this is the
same old school doing what it's always been doing."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: LATIN AMERICA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); NORTH &
SOUTH AMERICAS (89%); PANAMA (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%); CENTRAL AMERICA (73%);

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: DEFENSE INSTITUTE FOR HEMISPHERIC SECURITY COOPERATION; SCHOOL OF THE
AMERICAS

ORGANIZATION: DEFENSE INSTITUTE FOR HEMISPHERIC SECURITY COOPERATION; SCHOOL OF
THE AMERICAS

GEOGRAPHIC: LATIN AMERICA;   LATIN AMERICA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); SOUTH
AMERICA (92%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (89%); PANAMA (79%); EL SALVADOR (79%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (73%);   GEORGIA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  ARMIES
(95%); MILITARY TRAINING (90%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (89%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CURRICULA (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%);
RELOCATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (74%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (73%); DEFENSE SPENDING
(73%); INTERVIEWS (70%); APPROVALS (70%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (68%); RELIGION
(68%);

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE  STEVEN J LEE (59%);

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             293 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 12, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Pushes To Weaken World Court On Atrocities

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 9


The United States, isolated among the nations of the world, is going into a
crucial conference Monday on the soon-to-be-established International Criminal
Court still asking for changes in its charter.

The United States says it is trying to protect American soldiers and officials
from falling under the court's jurisdiction. But all members of the European
Union and other members of NATO support the court and have told the United
States that there should be no attempt to reopen debate on how it will work.

Unless some compromise can be found, legal experts say, a major step in
international law will be taken without United States participation, even though
Americans have been at the forefront of demanding trials for leaders like Pol
Pot and Saddam Hussein.

The Clinton administration has been unable to win support for the court from the
Pentagon and Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman
of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee. He has declared that the court treaty
would be dead on arrival if submitted to his panel. So American officials
acknowledge that they are now fighting a rear guard action to try to exempt
countries that do not join from having to face prosecution.

The court, created by a treaty signed in Rome in 1998 as a permanent body to try
war criminals, may come into existence by 2002, legal experts say. Its
jurisdiction will include genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity.

In Rome, 120 nations voted for the court. The United States was one of seven
countries that did not, among them China and Iraq.

In the last two years, more than 95 nations have signed the statute establishing
the court and 12 have ratified it, with 60 ratifications needed for the court to
begin functioning.

On Friday, France became the first permanent member of the Security Council to
ratify the statute. Experts expect the French example will be followed by a
stream of European and other nations.

William Pace, convenor of the Coalition for an International Criminal Court, an
umbrella group for more than 1,000 human rights groups and independent legal
organizations, called the French action "a clear signal to the United States
that major nations and allies are continuing to progress toward completing the
ratification, and they are not willing to reopen the treaty."

Mr. Pace called the renewed American effort to change the rules an "ill-timed
and misguided effort."

Richard Dicker, counsel for Human Rights Watch, said that legal experts who
support the court are puzzled at the strength of the opposition to the court,
since it gives countries whose citizens are charged with international crimes
the right to try them in their own courts, as the United States has frequently
done through courts martial when American soldiers are involved in criminal
activity.

"Why they seem to be driving this thing over the edge to get something they
don't need is an intriguing question," Mr. Dicker said in an interview. "The
treaty has more than enough assurances to meet their concerns."

Until Dec. 31, countries can sign the International Criminal Court treaty and
ratify later. After that date, a nation will have to ratify before being able to
join. In a recent interview here, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright
indicated that there was no chance that the United States would sign this year
unless the court statute is changed.

European and other diplomats here say that most nations would like to find a way
to include the United States because the court would be considerably weakened
and undervalued without American involvement. But the conference ends on June 30
and diplomats are doubtful that there is enough time, or any flexibility in
Washington.

Critics of the court object to what they say is the legal authority it would
have without an acceptable constitutional base. John Bolton, a former assistant
secretary of state for international organizations in the Bush administration,
calls the establishment of the court "a stealth approach to eroding our
constitutionalism" for all branches of American government.

"This court is going to happen," John L. Washburn, co-chairman of the
independent Washington Working Group on the International Criminal Court, wrote
last month in an Internet column for the Carnegie Council on Ethics and
International Affairs in New York. "After almost 50 years of lip service and
neglect, the temporary tribunals for Yugoslavia and Rwanda began to enforce this
personal responsibility in real trials that sent real criminals to real prisons.
The I.C.C. will make permanent this enforcement and the moral commitment it
represents."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); FRANCE (92%);
EUROPE (92%); IRAQ (79%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (50%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (57%);
EUROPEAN UNION (57%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION  (57%);
EUROPEAN UNION (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (92%); FRANCE
(92%); EUROPE (92%); IRAQ (79%);   NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);   ROME, ITALY
(50%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW

 (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); JURISDICTION (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); GENOCIDE (78%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); MILITARY
COURTS (77%); MILITARY OFFENSES (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); EUROPEAN UNION
(76%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); FOREIGN POLICY
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (66%);   ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: SADDAM HUSSEIN (53%);

LOAD-DATE: June 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             296 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Wrongful Verdict in Iran

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 375 words


The recent conviction of 10 Iranian Jews in Iran on charges of spying for Israel
is a brazen violation of international human rights standards and the due
process of law. President Clinton and leaders of the European Union have rightly
called on the Iranian government to overturn these unjust convictions.

President Mohammad Khatami, the leader of Iran's reform movement, has been
silent on this case, except to say that the prosecution and trial would be fair.
That promise has proved illusory. He should condemn the verdicts and make clear
he is dissatisfied with a warped legal system that is controlled by Iran's
conservative clerics and used for judicial persecution.

The spying charges against the Jews drew international attention because the
charges were unfounded and the prosecution unfair. Iran's virulent hostility to
Israel added to the impression that Jews had been singled out for political
purposes.

The 13 Jewish defendants, three of whom were acquitted, were imprisoned in March
1999 and not allowed access to lawyers until just weeks before their trial began
in May. The trial was closed and the evidence against the men was kept secret.
The defense lawyers say that there was no evidence against the men other than
their own statements made during interrogations without the presence of legal
counsel. Even after the trial, the court gave few details about the alleged
illegal activities. The Jews were convicted of belonging to an illegal spy
network, recruiting others and cooperating with Israel, though it was unclear
what cooperation they could have given Israel.

Political reformers, journalists and others disfavored by the religious
hard-liners have also been victims of a system where judges act as
investigators, prosecutors and judges in the same case. Mr. Khatami and his
reformist supporters in Parliament say they want to depoliticize the courts. The
Iranian people in the recent parliamentary elections showed they want relief
from rigid fundamentalist rule. But progress for human rights in the face of the
conservative clerics who hold power over the judiciary and the security forces
is slow and fitful. This case shows how far Iran has to go to meet the
expectations that Mr. Khatami has set.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (73%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (58%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  (58%); EUROPEAN UNION (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN; ISRAEL;   ISRAEL (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%);
EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%);

SUBJECT: ESPIONAGE; JEWS; EDITORIALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  ESPIONAGE (91%);

 DUE PROCESS (90%); VERDICTS (90%); LAWYERS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%);
CONSERVATISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JUDGES
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (76%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(74%); RELIGION (73%); ELECTIONS (72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (72%); EUROPEAN
UNION (72%); ACQUITTAL (71%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%);

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             299 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tamil Rebels Said to Recruit Child Soldiers

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 895 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 14


Tamil rebels preparing for a showdown with the Sri Lankan Army for control of
the island's most important Tamil town have been invading schoolrooms and
rounding up boys and girls in their early teens to send into battle, a Tamil
rights organization said this week.

In a report issued on Tuesday, the University Teachers for Human Rights in
Jaffna, the focus of the impending battle in Sri Lanka's north, describe a reign
of terror in the region. They say rebels of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
intimidate teachers and public officials, pull the biggest children out of
classes, raid orphanages and go to homes to demand that families turn over
teenage sons and daughters. Rough estimates indicate that hundreds of children,
some as young as 9 or 10, are being conscripted.

United Nations officials here and in Colombo, Sri Lanka's capital, have
condemned the rebels' increasing use of child soldiers. Olara A. Otunnu, the
United Nations official responsible for trying to end the military use of
children, confirmed in an interview that since the Tamil Tigers began a campaign
late last year to recapture the Jaffna peninsula, the recruitment of children
has soared.

Two years ago, the Tigers promised Mr. Otunnu to stop recruiting children under
17 and sending anyone under 18 into battle.

Mr. Otunnu said the situation showed how difficult it was to translate
international agreements against child soldiers into action, particularly when
irregular forces are involved.

He said the practice of recruiting children in Sri Lanka was confined to the
Tigers. He said there had never been any evidence of recruitment of children by
the government army.

Mr. Otunnu added that the report from the Jaffna Tamil rights group was
supported by independent information he has collected from other private
organizations and United Nations officials in Sri Lanka. Colin Glennie, Unicef's
representative in Colombo, said, "We don't have figures, but we know it's
happening."

For more than a quarter of a century, Tamil rebels have been fighting for a
separate Tamil homeland in northern and eastern Sri Lanka, an island dominated
by ethnic Sinhalese. Since the mid-1980's, the Tigers -- secretive and radically
leftist -- have eliminated all moderate rivals and raised the level of violence
with suicide bombings and assassinations. These have decimated a generation of
Sri Lankan leaders from both ethnic groups and cost the Tigers support
internationally and even among Tamils.

In December, President Chandrika Kumaratunga lost the sight in one eye in a bomb
attack. Under her administration, the army pushed the Tigers out of Jaffna five
years ago, inflicting bombing raids and retaliatory ground attacks on Tamil
civilians, human rights groups say. The Tigers retook the crucial pass
connecting the Jaffna peninsula to the rest of Sri Lanka in May.

The rebels have suffered considerable losses in recent months -- as many as
1,500 dead of a core army of 7,000, the Tamil human rights group said. They are
seeking replacements for the assault on Jaffna, the group said, and meanwhile
feed themselves by seizing food aid intended for civilians.

The Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, which the United States put on its list of
terrorist organizations, raises money to buy arms, often coercively, from a
Tamil diaspora in Southeast Asia, Canada and Britain, among other places. But,
if attempted, the overseas recruitment of fighters has apparently not been so
easy.

The Tigers need many more recruits for an attempt at taking Jaffna.

"Teachers who try to protect the children from recruiters are marked," the
University Teachers said. The group has operated underground since the
assassination in 1988 of its founder, Dr. Rajani Thiranagama of Jaffna
University's medical faculty.

The report mentioned torture, public and secret executions and the chaining of
young prisoners to bunkers when they try to leave the ranks.

"Girls have been in a large majority in the current round of recruitment in
schools," said the report, which told of a 15-year-old girl who escaped from the
rebels and ran home, where her father hid her and armed himself with the only
weapon he could find, a shark jawbone, to prevent her recapture. The daughter
was apparently left alone.

The pressure on children recently has been greatest in a region known as the
Vanni, south of the Jaffna peninsula. It is the base of the Tigers' leader,
Velupillai Prabhakaran, a reclusive strategist who, the Jaffna group says, has
begun referring to himself as the Sun God. In April last year, he ordered
compulsory military training for schoolchildren.

The report told of one school where only four children in the 14-15 age group
were recruited before April 1999. From then until early this year, 15 children
were recruited. The number jumped to 24 in seven weeks from early May until late
June. The pattern in other schools was similar, the report said. The report
figures that only about 5 percent of child soldiers volunteer; the rest are
taken with varying degrees of coercion.

"Of the 15 who joined between April 1999 and early 2000, the bodies of six were
brought to their school for display before being laid to rest," the report said
of the one school. "This ceremony is intended to give the dead an aura of
heroism and to make others guilty about not joining."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); INDIA (93%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (93%);

CITY: COLOMBO, SRI LANKA (56%);

COMPANY: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA; JAFFNA (SRI LANKA);   SRI LANKA (98%); INDIA (93%);
TAMIL NADU, INDIA (93%);   COLOMBO, SRI LANKA (56%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; TAMILS (ETHNIC GROUP); CHILDREN AND
YOUTH  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); CHILD SOLDIERS (91%); ARMED FORCES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CHILDREN
(90%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%); ADOLESCENTS (90%);
BOMBINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (88%); CIVIL WAR (79%); ASSASSINATION (78%); TEACHING & TEACHERS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (77%); TERRORISM
(76%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (73%); INTERVIEWS (72%);
DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (72%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (71%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (68%); ETHNICITY (65%); ETHNIC GROUPS (60%);   CHILD RESIDENTIAL
HOMES (77%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             304 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 13, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
From Chile's Army, Little but the Sound of Fury

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 6; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1086 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


CHILEAN soldiers still march to the tune of the stern martial music -- the
Badenweiler, Nibelung and Ferbelin -- that the Prussians brought with them in
1885 when Chile invited them to modernize its army. The soldiers' medals,
uniforms and goose-stepping also evoke that era, making the force appear
profoundly anachronistic, even in a nation as traditionbound as this one.

But until recently, the misfit was only superficial. Even a decade ago, Chile's
armed forces still had a powerful grip on the country, overseeing not only its
defense, but also its economic and political affairs. A law unto themselves,
they rousted dissidents from their beds and tortured and executed them at will.

Now, though, they are losing their commanding position in Chilean society. That
became strikingly evident last week, as Gen. Augusto Pinochet, their former
leader, was stripped of his senatorial immunity by the Supreme Court, clearing
the way for his probable arrest and trial. In response, all the top military
commanders could do was grumble, publicly and bitterly.

"The political role of the military is diminishing little by little," said
Francisco Javier Cuadra, a lawyer who was General Pinochet's chief of staff
between 1984 and 1987. "And as Pinochet leaves the stage, its profile will
diminish even further."

Two major events created the slope the military is sliding down, which is all
the more noteworthy because old authoritarian habits are returning in
neighboring Peru and some other South American countries.

One, of course, was the arrest of General Pinochet in London two years ago on a
Spanish warrant charging him with gross violations of human rights, including
kidnapping, murder and torture. The arrest encouraged a rush of attention to
human rights abuses in this usually closed society and emboldened prosecuting
judges to investigate and charge scores of retired and acting police and
military officers. When the prosecutions began, the general was not around to
quash them. The military's accustomed impunity began to erode.

Then the Chilean government, pressing for General Pinochet's return, argued that
he should face Chilean rather than Spanish justice as a matter of sovereignty,
and the military -- which does not want him to face any trial at all -- went
along. Since March, when the general returned to Chile after the British
released him on humanitarian grounds, he has been too weak to block the
prosecutions of fellow officers.

The other crucial event was Chile's election of Ricardo Lagos in January as the
first Socialist president since 1973, when General Pinochet overthrew Salvador
Allende with the help of the Nixon administration. In his first months in power,
Mr. Lagos has pushed forward the economic deregulation policies first pioneered
by General Pinochet and eliminated capital restrictions loathed by Wall Street.

With Marxism no longer a problem, the United States, which strongly supported
the Pinochet coup, is now strongly backing civilian rule. Domestic fears of
Communism have faded, too, removing the armed forces' chief argument for one of
the largest per capita military budgets in Latin America. Chile's business
community, while maintaining support for General Pinochet, has drawn back from
pushing the military to intervene to protect him, because they know such
turbulence would deter international credit, investment and trade as the country
emerges from a recession.

A third factor is simply the passage of time. Commanders have rotated, and the
most senior of the Pinochet era have retired. Younger officers remain devoted to
General Pinochet, but most focus on relations with the politicians who hold the
purse strings for the new frigates, fighter jets and tanks they say they
desperately need.

Likewise, a new generation on the Supreme Court (only three of 20 justices
remain from General Pinochet's time) has ruled that cases of missing people can
be treated as kidnappings. Until a body is produced, a kidnapping case is
considered open. The approach has opened a multitude of cases that had been shut
by a 1978 amnesty for political crimes -- including killings -- decreed under
General Pinochet.

That pushed the armed forces to the negotiating table with human rights lawyers
and led to top officers' signing a document in June that promised their
assistance in finding the bodies of the missing, in exchange for testifying in
private and receiving immunity. The agreement was the first time the military
acknowledged that members of the security forces had played a role in the
wrongful death of anybody and the first time it publicly retreated from old
rebuttals that either the disappeared had been killed in civil conflicts or that
they were not dead at all, but had merely left the country.

"It was a great advance," said Mario Fernandez Baeza, President Lagos's defense
minister. "Only two years ago, a large sector of the society, including the
armed forces in a quiet way, justified those abuses."

NOW, with even its border disputes with Peru and Argentina settled over the last
three years, the military is trying to learn to live without enemies. That may
mean living with new masters.

Mr. Lagos has begun negotiations with conservative lawmakers to change the
constitution written during the Pinochet era, which gives the military special
powers, including wide-ranging autonomy and representation in the Senate. He has
also been forthright about claiming his superiority over the armed forces, on
several occasions publicly scolding military chiefs.

After Gen. Ricardo Izurieta, the army chief, defiantly told reporters he needed
no one's permission to visit General Pinochet after last week's ruling, Mr.
Lagos observed, sharply: "The command of our country rests on what I decide."

Until recently such a clash would have sent shudders through Chile. But General
Izurieta has learned to balance his relations with two civilian presidents and
hard-liners within the armed forces unhappy that he has not better defended
General Pinochet. After his words of defiance, he immediately reiterated the
military's promise to seek the whereabouts of the missing. Mr. Lagos, for his
part, said he did not mind that General Izurieta and other commanders made a
courtesy visit to their old leader.

"It's a completely regulated conflict," said Mr. Cuadra, the former Pinochet
aide. "It's political theater with both Lagos and Izurieta each playing a role
and each knowing the other's lines in the libretto."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (69%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE (99%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND
(69%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ARMED FORCES (91%); ARMIES (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); TORTURE (88%); COUPS (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (76%); ECONOMIC
POLICY (75%); ECONOMIC NEWS (75%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(74%); DEREGULATION (73%); ARREST WARRANTS (72%); MURDER (72%); LAWYERS (71%);
INVESTIGATIONS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%); SUPREME COURTS (68%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (67%); US PRESIDENTS (63%);

PERSON: AUGUSTO PINOCHET (95%); RICARDO LAGOS (55%);

LOAD-DATE: August 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: In August 1997, cadets marched at the officers' training academy
in honor of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, who gave up the presidency in 1990 but
commanded the army until 1998. (Helen Hughes)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             309 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Clears Way for Aid to Colombia

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 162 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 22


President Clinton has signed a waiver allowing distribution of $1.3 billion in
aid to Colombia to help that nation fight drug trafficking even though the
Colombian government has not met a variety of requirements for improvement in
its rights record, administration officials said today.

The president's action had been expected and comes a week ahead of his planned
trip to Colombia, where he will offer his support to the beleaguered government
of President Andres Pastrana.

Human rights groups had urged the administration to scrap the aid plan, arguing
that it would embolden the Colombian military to step up rights abuses. In
legislation authorizing the aid, Congress set conditions including an overhaul
of Colombia's military justice system.

But administration officials said President Clinton believed that the situation
in Colombia was so desperate that he needed to waive some conditions to get aid
to the government there as quickly as possible.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; UNITED STATES;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (93%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FOREIGN AID; LAW AND LEGISLATION; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); DRUG POLICY (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (88%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (88%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (87%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (90%);

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             311 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

New Yorker Imprisoned in Peru Gets New Trial in Treason Case

BYLINE: By SHAILA K. DEWAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 952 words


Peru's top military court yesterday revoked the life sentence imposed more than
four years ago on Lori Berenson, a New Yorker accused of treason, and granted
her a new trial in civilian courts.

A statement from the Supreme Military Justice Commission gave no reason for the
decision, and there was no immediate comment from the office of President
Alberto K. Fujimori, who had insisted for years that Ms. Berenson would remain
in prison for life as a convicted terrorist. She had been charged with helping
rebels of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement plan an aborted attack on
Peru's Congress.

One of her lawyers, Grimaldo Achahui, said that the new trial would begin soon
and that she would remain in prison in the meantime.

Human rights officials and the Berenson family were not satisfied by the plan
for a new trial. They said her first trial was unfair, and that they had no
confidence the second would be any better.

The Berenson case has long bedeviled relations between Peru and the United
States, and the new trial may represent a gesture by Peru to soothe relations,
especially after the country's recent tarnished presidential election. Mr.
Fujimori was reelected in May after a campaign marked by irregularities and
charges of voter fraud.

In Washington yesterday, the new development was hailed by the State Department,
which had criticized the conduct of Ms. Berenson's January 1996 trial and the
harsh conditions of her imprisonment, while not taking a stand on her guilt or
innocence.

"We're very pleased by the decision by the military court," said Philip Reeker,
a department spokesman. "Since Ms. Berenson's conviction nearly five years ago,
we have maintained that the trial proceedings against her did not meet
due-process standards, and so we welcome the court's decision."

He cautioned, however, that "there remain serious concerns about the openness
and fairness of trial proceedings in the military court and in cases related to
terrorism in civilian courts." In this he echoed concerns outlined in a State
Department report issued in February that Peru's courts did not meet
international standards of fairness.

Human rights officials and Ms. Berenson's parents also warned that in a country
whose court system has been sharply criticized, the decision did not mean the
new trial would be fair.

At a news conference in front of their Manhattan apartment, Ms. Berenson's
parents demanded her immediate release. "There is no basis in truth or law for
holding Lori another day," said her father, Mark L. Berenson, adding that it was
impossible for her case to be heard in an impartial court.

Ms. Berenson, now 30, was tried in secret before a tribunal of military judges
wearing ski masks to conceal their identities. Her lawyers were not permitted to
cross-examine witnesses.

At the time, hundreds of Peruvian civilians were also being tried in "faceless
courts," under emergency measures that the government justified as necessary to
combat guerrilla violence. But in recent years, more than a thousand Peruvians
convicted under the draconian antiterrorism law used to convict Ms. Berenson
have been pardoned and released after their cases were reviewed.

But Ms. Berenson has languished, for the first three years in Yanamayo, a
high-mountain prison for terrorists, and then, after she developed health
problems including intermittent blindness in one eye, in the lower-altitude
Socabaya jail.

Jose Miguel Vivanco, executive director of the Americas division of Human Rights
Watch, said it was not clear whether the same antiterrorism law would be used in
Ms. Berenson's new trial. Under the law, he said, "the definition of terrorism
is so broad and so vague that almost any activity could qualify as terrorist."

Mr. Vivanco added that the new trial could be influenced by political concerns
whether or not the law was used. "If there is one serious problem in Peru," he
said, "it's lack of rule of law."

"The World Bank has suspended its programs on judicial reform in Peru because
there's no evidence of an independent judiciary," he said.

The Berensons complained yesterday that high-level Peruvian officials and judges
had made prejudicial comments about the guilt of their daughter, whose defiant
television appearance before her first trial made her a controversial figure in
Peru.

Her imprisonment even became a campaign issue when Alejandro Toledo, the
opposition candidate, said in April that he would review her case if elected.
Mr. Fujimori accused him of advocating her release, and Mr. Toledo suffered in
the polls as a result.

Ms. Berenson, whose parents describe her as having been empathetic with the
downtrodden even as a child, grew up in Manhattan and attended the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology before beginning extensive travels in Latin America in
1988.

In 1994 she moved to Peru, telling her parents that she wanted to write magazine
articles about the poverty and suffering she found there.

She does not deny that once there, she befriended the rebels, but has said that
she believed the group's violent history was exaggerated. One of her attorneys,
Thomas Nooter, has said that she was romantically involved with the rebel who
testified against her, and that he may have incriminated her in exchange for a
life sentence.

Before her trial, an angry, defiant image of Ms. Berenson was imprinted in the
minds of Peruvians whose lives have been scarred by terrorism. She was taken
before journalists at a detention center and taped raising a fist to the
cameras. "If it is a crime to worry about the subhuman conditions in which the
majority of this population lives," she said, "then I will accept my
punishment."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%);

COMPANY: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT (PERU)

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT (PERU)

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; ;  PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (94%);
NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ELECTIONS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); TREASON; LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS
TREASON (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); SENTENCING (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (87%); DUE PROCESS
(78%); LAWYERS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); FRAUD &
FINANCIAL CRIME (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); POLITICS (76%);
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); TERRORISM (75%); CROSS
EXAMINATIONS (73%); JUDGES (73%); PRESS CONFERENCES (72%); ELECTION FRAUD (71%);

 VOTERS & VOTING (71%); STANDARDS & MEASUREMENTS (62%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%);

PERSON: DEWAN, SHAILA K; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K (PRES); BERENSON, LORI  MARK L
BERENSON (96%); ALBERTO K FUJIMORI (58%);

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 31, 2000, Thursday

CORRECTION:

A front-page article on Tuesday about a decision by a Peruvian military court to
revoke a life sentence and grant a new treason trial to Lori Berenson, a New
Yorker,included an erroneous detail in an account of an appearance by Ms.
Berenson before journalists at a detention center in 1996. She did not raise a
fist to the cameras.

The article also included an outdated statement by one of her lawyers, Thomas
Nooter. While he said four years ago that Ms. Berenson had had a romantic
relationship with a member of the Tupac Amaru rebel group, Mr. Nooter now says
that he knows from speaking to her since then that she did not.

The article also misstated what Mr. Nooter had said about a rebel who testified
against Ms. Berenson. He said that the rebel might have incriminated her in
exchange for a lighter sentence, not in exchange for a life sentence.


GRAPHIC: Photos: Lori Berenson in 1995. (Associated Press)(pg. A1); Lori
Berenson's parents, Mark L. Berenson and Rhoda Berenson, at news conference in
Manhattan with their lawyer, Ramsey Clark, right. (Frances Roberts for The New
York Times)(pg. A8)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             312 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Mexico Imprisons Two Generals, Longtime Suspects in Drug Cases

BYLINE: By TIM WEINER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 584 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Sept. 1


Two generals long suspected of corruption have been arrested and imprisoned by
the military on charges of collaborating with the Juarez drug cartel,
prosecutors said today.

The suspects are Gen. Francisco Quiroz Hermosillo, who retired from the army in
July, and Brig. Gen. Mario Arturo Acosta Chaparro, a counterinsurgency expert
with a reputation for repression who is on active duty.

Their arrests on charges of drug trafficking and bribery on Thursday, on the eve
of President Ernesto Zedillo's final State of the Union Address, were an
additional blow to the reputation of the Mexican armed forces in their role as a
narcotics enforcer.

President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada, who takes office on Dec. 1, has promised to
withdraw the military from the drug war after a decade in which the drug barons
bought off the armed forces as much as the military fought the traffickers. The
Constitution bars the military from any role other than national defense.

The corruption at the highest levels became painfully apparent in 1997, when
Gen. Jesus Gutierrez Rebollo, appointed by President Zedillo as the first
military figure to be the government's drug czar, was arrested on charges that
he had been paid off by Amado Carrillo Fuentes, leader of the Juarez cartel.

Though his American counterpart, Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, director of the Office
of National Drug Control Policy, had called General Gutierrez Rebollo "a man
with a reputation for impeccable integrity" before his arrest, events proved
otherwise. The general is now serving a 71-year prison sentence.

One of the arrested officers, General Acosta Chaparro, has long been identified
by Mexican human-rights organizations as involved in the repression and torture
of leftists in the state of Guerrero. Army and police forces in Guerrero have
spent years battling a small armed insurgency and a larger civilian movement
that is seeking land rights and political freedom. The general has been a leader
in counterinsurgency operations there, according to several authoritative
military histories.

In 1996, Virgilia Galeana Garcia, a human rights advocate, gave eyewitness
testimony placing General Acosta Chaparro at the scene of one of Mexico's worst
massacres.

In the killings, which were videotaped, the state police ambushed, shot and
killed 17 rural advocates at a roadblock in Aguas Blancas, not far from
Acapulco, in June 1995. General Acosta Chaparro denied involvement in the
massacre.

General Quiroz Hermosillo retired in July as a director of Army health services.
He had previously held high rank in the intelligence and military transport
directorates.

The generals were implicated by the testimony of at least three witnesses who
are under government protection, according to military prosecutors. The
prosecutors said the witnesses tied the generals to the Juarez drug cartel
organized by Mr. Carrillo Fuentes, who died in 1997.

General Acosta Chaparro's name is in the files of investigators from the United
States and Switzerland who have spent years trying to trace connections between
drug barons and the Mexican political and military elite, according to court
records. Published Mexican documents dating from 1997 name him as being
suspected of corruption.

Other documents, from the attorney general's office, identify General Quiroz
Hermosillo as a suspect. One military prosecutor, Rafael Macedo de la Concha,
said both generals had been the targets of investigations since at least July
1999.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (72%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%);

COMPANY: OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY (54%);

ORGANIZATION: OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); SWITZERLAND (72%);   MEXICO CITY,
MEXICO (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (93%);
ARRESTS (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); CORRUPTION (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%);
ARMIES (90%); DRUG POLICY (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); WITNESSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); CARTELS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); SENTENCING
(78%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES

 (78%); BRIBERY (78%); TESTIMONY (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (73%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (73%); LIBERALISM (71%); APPOINTMENTS (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (71%);
POLICE FORCES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%); SHOOTINGS (60%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%);

PERSON: VICENTE FOX QUESADA (55%);

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             313 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 13, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Europe Lifts Sanctions on Austria, but Vows Vigilance

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1121 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Sept. 12


The European Union lifted its sanctions against Austria today, seven months
after hurriedly imposing a diplomatic freeze on Vienna for bringing a rightist
party into its governing coalition.

But the Europeans said they remained deeply concerned about the Freedom Party's
role in the government and vowed to maintain a "particular vigilance."

The lifting of the sanctions came four days after a panel of experts issued a
report on human rights and political life in Austria. The report recommended an
end to the sanctions, which had increasingly become an embarrassment to the
European Union.

Austrian officials quickly welcomed the news.

"This is a great success for Austria resulting from our patience and firmness,"
Austria's chancellor, Wolfgang Schussel, said on national television soon after
the sanctions were lifted.

Mr. Schussel said there had been efforts behind the scenes to suspend the
measures rather than lift them and to keep them in place for a longer time or to
set up a monitoring mechanism. Ultimately, all those efforts were dropped.

Although the sanctions were adopted unanimously by Austria's 14 European Union
partners, enthusiasm for them waned quickly as they threatened to strengthen
opposition to the group and to a common European currency, particularly in a
crucial referendum on the euro in Denmark this month.

The sanctions -- which included a boycott of cultural exchange programs and
military exercises -- did not amount to much more than a crimp in the social
life of Austria's ambassadors. But critics said the sanctions went too far: they
represented an unparalleled intrusion into the internal affairs of a member
country and they infuriated the Austrians.

Predictions that the boycott would affect tourism or the Austrian economy never
came to pass. But early on the sanctions did cause some awkward diplomatic
moments as various officials did their best to avoid their Austrian
counterparts. At a summit meeting of the European Union in Portugal, for
instance, the usual group picture was done away with because various leaders,
including France's president, Jacques Chirac, did not want to be seen standing
next to Mr. Schussel.

In Washington today, a State Department official said that the United States was
examining the European Union report but would maintain the modest diplomatic
sanctions that it imposed in February to "limit" contacts with Austrian
officials.

"Our policy has not changed," the official said. "We remain concerned about the
Freedom Party's participation in the Austrian government."

Canada followed the Europeans' lead, lifting its sanctions against Austria on
the ground that it no longer feared Vienna would adopt policies that infringed
on human rights, Reuters reported.

Throughout the weekend it seemed clear that many European Union members were
eager for the sanctions to be lifted immediately. But France, which had led the
move to impose the freeze and which now holds the group's rotating presidency,
refused to be rushed. Its officials hinted that a monitoring system was still
needed.

France, however, was apparently forced to settle for the vague promise of
"vigilance."

In lifting the sanctions, the 14 members issued a joint statement in Paris this
evening. "The measures taken by the 14 were useful," the statement said. "They
can now be lifted." But the statement added: "The nature of the Freedom Party
and its uncertain evolution remains cause for serious worry. The 14 consider
that a particular vigilance should be exercised with regard to this party and
the influence it exerts on the government it is a part of."

At the sanctions continued month after month, it became clear that some of the
smaller European member countries felt threatened by what was happening to
Austria. In Denmark, for instance, some experts believe that lifting the
sanctions can help make sure that Danes vote to adopt the euro when the issue
goes to a referendum on Sept. 28. Even before the joint statement was issued
this evening, Danish officials were promising that the sanctions would be gone
by the end of the day.

By the begining of summer, signs of a thaw were already apparent. On Bastille
Day, the Austrian ambassador was among the dignitaries sharing a reviewing stand
with Mr. Chirac. The Belgians extended a similar invitation to their Austrian
ambassador. Meanwhile, European Commission officials, trying to build a
face-saving way to wriggle out of the sanctions, appointed a three-member panel
to assess human rights and political life in Austria before making a
recommendation on lifting the freeze.

The report, issued last Friday, found that the sanctions had served a useful
purpose by focusing attention on common values in the European Union and
increasing the Austrian government's self-awareness. But the report said that
prolonging the sanctions would be counterproductive by creating ill will from
Austrians.

The three experts -- Prof. Jochen Frowein, the director of the Max Planck
Institure in Germany; Martti Ahtisaari, the former president of Finland, and
Marcelino Oreja, a former Spanish government minister -- also gave the Schussel
government high marks for taking concrete steps to fight racism, xenophobia and
anti-Semitism.

But they called the Freedom Party, which was led by the controversial Jorg
Haider until he stepped aside in February, "a right-wing populist party with
radical elements." Some of its members continued to use xenophobic, even racist,
language and were not reproached in any way, they said.

Mr. Haider's party became part of the current Austrian government when
Chancellor Schussel and his People's Party decided that a coalition was the only
way to end months of a political stalemate after the October elections.

Since the sanctions were imposed, Mr. Haider has several times lashed out at Mr.
Chirac. This weekend, he stepped up his attacks, calling Mr. Chirac "a
pocket-sized Napoleon" who had just met his "Waterloo."

Mr. Chirac has not spoken on the issue, though other French officials have
scoffed at the remarks.

"Whatever decision is made by the 14, it is not a question of giving absolution"
to the Freedom Party, said the French minister for European affairs, Pierre
Moscovi, on Monday. "I don't see how the party can be exonerated."

In their statement today, the 14 European Union members also noted that the
panel of experts had recommended that they develop a mechanism within the group
to monitor and evaluate the commitment and performance of individual member
countries with respect to "common European values." And the members said they
would continue to study how best to monitor, analyze and act in similar
situations in the furure.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (98%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); FRANCE

 (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); PORTUGAL (79%); DENMARK (79%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(78%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (93%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (94%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRIA;   AUSTRIA (98%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES

 (94%); FRANCE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); PORTUGAL (79%); DENMARK (79%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (78%);   VIENNA, AUSTRIA (93%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; EMBARGOES AND
ECONOMIC SANCTIONS  EUROPEAN UNION (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
POLITICS (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%); BOYCOTTS (89%); EURO (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); FOREIGN POLICY
(78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS

 (76%); MONETARY UNIONS (73%); CURRENCIES (66%); REFERENDUMS (51%);

PERSON: HAIDER, JORG; DALEY, SUZANNE  JACQUES CHIRAC (50%);

LOAD-DATE: September 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Chancellor Wolfgang Schussel, right, and the vice chancellor,
Susanne Riess-Passer of the Freedom Party, at a news conference yesterday.
(Agence France-Presse)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             317 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World: Cold War Echoes;
Our (and Their) Man in Peru

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 3; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1023 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


IN recent years President Clinton has apologized for the C.I.A.'s training of
death squad leaders in Guatemala and has made public once-secret files on the
killing of leftists in El Salvador, Chile and Argentina. The aim was to show
that democracy and human rights have a new importance in American policy in
Latin America now that the cold war is over.

But the rise and fall of Vladimiro Montesinos, President Alberto K. Fujimori's
intelligence chief, who recently fled for asylum in Panama with a helping hand
from Washington, suggests that the change in priorities may not be so great.

Until his recent disgrace, Mr. Montesinos flourished all during President
Clinton's watch. Long after there were credible reports that he was involved in
torture, disappearances, election-fixing and taking bribes from drug
traffickers, the C.I.A. continued to use him as a valued asset. Even the State
Department, which has pushed hard for a democratic opening in Peru, used him as
a go-between in negotiations with President Fujimori.

The experience raises the question of what has changed since the days when
Washington more or less openly promoted the autocratic likes of Anastasio Somoza
in Nicaragua, Augusto Pinochet in Chile and Manuel Noriega in Panama.

In those days, too, there was talk of "democratic values." In practice, though,
those values won out in policy debates only when they converged with cold war
interests -- like containing Cuba, overthrowing Nicaragua's Sandinistas or
stemming the rise of Salvadoran leftist rebels. The heyday of doing business
with generals and dictators was the 1950's, 1960's and early 1970's. Then the
Carter, Reagan and Bush administrations incorporated the sponsorship of free
elections into their playbooks for keeping leftists out of power. With
confidence in electorates that were not radical, they helped support Latin
America's dramatic emergence from the era of military rule. So by the time
President Clinton was proclaiming his support for democracy, he was in the
morally comfortable position of dealing almost exclusively with civilian
presidents.

Here and there, though, new short-term policy imperatives were also cropping up.
In Colombia and Peru, the drug trade was rising and old guerrilla movements
survived. Tips were needed to locate the newest cocaine traffic route and to
foil terrorist attacks. So there were still temptations (and rewards) for
dealing with the likes of Mr. Montesinos. "The problem is the C.I.A. people want
to collect intelligence and the D.E.A. people want to show good numbers on
interdictions and the human rights argument gets short shrift," said Elliott
Abrams, who was President Reagan's assistant secretary of state for
inter-American affairs. "There comes a point when you have to say, 'I don't care
that he is useful because he is a monster.' "

In Mr. Montesinos's case, that point finally came in September, when a domestic
scandal erupted over his involvement in bribing a legislator. Months before,
United States officials say, the State Department had questioned continuing the
American relationship with him because he had designed the dirty tricks campaign
that led to Mr. Fujimori's tainted election in May. But what finally tilted the
balance against him had little to do with human rights or democracy. By the time
the bribery scandal broke, he had lost the C.I.A.'s sympathy because it had
evidence that he was involved in, or at least knew about, Peruvian gunrunning to
Colombia's guerrillas at the very moment Washington was preparing a push against
drugs in rebel-held areas.

The situation recalled the fall of Panama's General Noriega, who would do favors
for the White House one day and for Fidel Castro the next, until President Bush
finally pushed him from power. Mr. Montesinos, like General Noriega, also
shamelessly flaunted his closeness to Americans in order to enhance his power at
home. In 1998, when another scandal threatened, he practically ambushed retired
Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, President Clinton's drug czar, in order to appear on
Peruvian television shaking his hand during an official visit.

ACCORDING to former Peruvian intelligence officials, Mr. Montesinos became a
paid informant of the C.I.A. in the early 1970's when, as a young captain, he
worked in the office of the prime minister. A left-wing military dictator was in
power, and Mr. Montesinos funneled documents to the American embassy that
detailed Russian arms purchases. He was charged with treason in 1976, and served
a year in jail.

Through the 1980's, Mr. Montesinos kept a close relationship with the American
embassy even while serving as the lawyer for drug traffickers. By the late
1980's, though, his most important relationship was with Mr. Fujimori; the spy
made himself invaluable by leaking the presidential candidate government polls
and then using his lawyerly skills to fix a tax problem. Years later, Mr.
Montesinos even took care of Mr. Fujimori's divorce.

When Mr. Fujimori took power in 1990, Mr. Montesinos became his unofficial
intelligence chief and soon the C.I.A.'s main liaison. When the C.I.A. created a
counter-narcotics operation in Peru's intelligence agency, it put Mr. Montesinos
in charge. As the man who could coordinate Peru's often fractious military and
police commands, he became invaluable to the American war on drugs. Between 1994
and 1998, cocaine production and trafficking shrank sharply, and American
diplomats still give Mr. Montesinos grudging credit in that.

The relationship worked two ways. When terrorists took diplomats and officials
hostage at the Japanese ambassador's residence in 1996, former American
officials say, American officials helped Mr. Montesinos in the planning of the
rescue with advice, satellite imagery and listening devices.

"Undoubtedly the United States benefited in some manner dealing with
Montesinos," said Robert A. Pastor, the top Latin America adviser in the Carter
White House. "But the benefits were outweighed by the costs of being used by
Montesinos for his own purposes and the United States ultimately being tainted
by the relationship."


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (58%);

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHILE (93%); ARGENTINA (92%);
NICARAGUA (92%); PANAMA (92%); EL SALVADOR (92%); GUATEMALA (92%); LATIN AMERICA

 (90%); COLOMBIA (79%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (75%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (58%);   CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (91%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHILE (93%); ARGENTINA (92%);
NICARAGUA (92%); PANAMA (92%); EL SALVADOR (92%); GUATEMALA (92%); LATIN AMERICA

 (90%); COLOMBIA (79%);   LIMA, PERU (75%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   COLD WAR (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES

 (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); TORTURE (78%);
FOREIGN POLICY (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (73%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (73%); TERRORISM (72%); COCAINE (68%);
BRIBERY (54%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (50%);   MILITARY RULE (71%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); RONALD REAGAN (89%); JIMMY CARTER (58%);

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Peruvian widows in 1998 after their Andean village, Quinrapaq,
was caught in a guerrilla war crossfire. (Reuters); In effigy: President Alberto
Fujimori, left, and Vlademiro Montesinos. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             318 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Court Frees Serbian Journalist Jailed by Milosevic Government

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 768 words

DATELINE: NIS, Serbia, Oct. 10


A Serbian journalist, Miroslav Filipovic, walked free from a military prison
here today, the first political prisoner to be released since the democratic
opposition wrested power from Slobodan Milosevic last week.

The Supreme Military Court in Belgrade ordered his release pending a retrial,
ruling that his trial had serious violations of legal procedure. The new
leadership of Yugoslavia under President Vojislav Kostunica appears to have
influenced the decision, because it released news that Mr. Filipovic would be
freed the day before the ruling.

Sentenced to seven years and imprisoned five months ago for reporting on
Yugoslav Army war crimes in Kosovo, Mr. Filipovic was one of three Serbian
political prisoners who rights groups and democratic leaders said were victims
of Mr. Milosevic's increasingly vindictive government.

Some 700 ethnic Albanians from Kosovo are also in Serbian jails, a majority
considered political prisoners because they were arbitrarily detained in the
conflict last year in Kosovo. In perhaps the most serious case, the whereabouts
of former President Ivan Stambolic of Yugoslavia, who was abducted a month ago,
remain unknown. His wife and his lawyer have said Mr. Milosevic is behind his
disappearance.

Since Oct. 5, when Mr. Milosevic's power crumbled in the face of public outrage,
Barbara Davis, the representative of the United Nations high commissioner for
human rights, and other rights advocates have appealed to the new leaders to
focus on victims of rights abuses.

Mr. Kostunica has not issued an amnesty but has said he wants politics out of
the courtroom, a European diplomat said.

The appeals have resulted in the releases without charges of seven European
foreigners who were held in recent months without visas and accused, in the
state news media, of spying. Dozens of protesters arrested at demonstrations on
Thursday in Serbia were also released.

Mr. Filipovic's release gives hope to remaining political prisoners, some of
whom face sentences as long as 20 years. It is a sign that the military is
moving with the new democratic changes.

But Mr. Stambolic's case looks particularly desperate. Rights advocates fear
that he has been killed, the last of a group of murder victims of the Milosevic
era.

He was kidnapped on Aug. 25 while jogging. It took five days for the state news
media to mention his disappearance. His lawyer, Nikola Barovic, said that fact
led him to suspect state involvement. The abduction occurred in the presidential
election campaign, a period of increased repression, police surveillance and
attacks on Mr. Milosevic's critics.

The police have failed to announce any leads, and the justice minister has
denied that Mr. Stambolic is being detained in any jail in Serbia. When the
United Nations inquired about his whereabouts, another minister accused a United
Nations envoy, Jiri Dienstbier, of complicity in the abduction.

At least Mr. Filipovic can celebrate. He hugged his wife, Slavica, in front of
the military prison in Nis, home to the Third Army, which did the bulk of the
fighting in Kosovo. "The hardest time of my life was spent in Nis," he said.
"For much of the time, I did not know what was going on outside. I did not know
how much time I would spend without my family."

Mr. Filipovic, 49, had been reporting from the southern town of Kraljevo for a
national daily, Danas, and Agence France-Presse. He was seized after an article
he wrote in April for the Institute for War and Peace Reporting on the Yugoslav
Army's participation in atrocities in Kosovo.

He interviewed unidentified army officers who described comrades who committed
atrocities, and he referred to an internal army report that revealed a morale
crisis at the prospect of another war in neighboring Montenegro.

The interview was published in English. Although it did not appear in Serbia, it
was available on the Internet.

Mr. Filipovic said he thought that it was the reference to the plans for war in
Montenegro that caused his arrest. But fellow journalists ascribed it to his
reporting witnesses' accounts of war crimes and linking them to Mr. Milosevic's
government.

"I spent five months inside for no reason," Mr. Filipovic said. "But that is the
fate of journalists in our country, although that time is past now."

He said that a radio had helped him follow the protests that ended Mr.
Milosevic's tenure and that he had swung from desperation to hope in recent
weeks, some of them in solitary confinement.

"Suddenly," he said, "I had a feeling of hope, and there is no place with less
hope than prison."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR HUMAN RIGHTS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%);

SUBJECT: NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA; POLITICAL PRISONERS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS
NEWS REPORTING (90%); PRISONS (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); SENTENCING (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); MISSING PERSONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ARMIES (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(87%); ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); POLITICS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (77%); LAWYERS (77%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (77%); ARRESTS (75%);
ESPIONAGE (75%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (71%); MURDER (58%);   CORRECTIONS
(90%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%);

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA; FILIPOVIC, MIROSLAV  SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (94%);

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Miroslav Filipovic and his wife, Slavica, embraced after he was
released yesterday in Nis, Serbia. He was imprisoned five months ago. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             320 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Myanmar Reported Ready to Free Briton In Rights Campaign

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 293 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 16


A British human rights campaigner who has been held in a Myanmar jail for more
than a year is to be released, the British government said today.

The Myanmar ambassador to Britain, Kyaw Win, told the Foreign Office that the
prisoner, James Mawdsley, would be freed and deported to Britain, said the
Foreign Office minister, John Battle. The timing was not announced, but the
Foreign Office said it was unconditional.

Mr. Mawdsley, 27, was sentenced last year to 17 years in prison after he slipped
into Myanmar to protest the military government. He was charged with immigration
offenses and violating publications law by handing out democracy leaflets.

"I'm delighted," said Mr. Mawdsley's father, David. "I'm choking up on this
news. All the family are phoning each other up madly. It's just overwhelming,
fantastic. It just shows the Burmese junta will listen when international
pressure is strong enough."

The United Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention ruled last week that
James Mawdsley was being unlawfully jailed.

"I am relieved that the Burmese regime has recognized that there is no
justification in keeping James in prison and has decided to deport him as soon
as possible," Mr. Battle said.

Mr. Mawdsley, of Lancashire, in northwestern England, had been arrested in
Myanmar twice before. In 1998, he served 99 days of a seven-year sentence and
was pardoned on the condition that he not return to the country.

Last month, British consular officials said guards had beaten Mr. Mawdsley at
Keng Tung prison, 390 miles northeast of Yangon, the capital. Foreign Secretary
Robin Cook called the attack "an outrageous violation of his human rights."

Myanmar said Mr. Mawdsley had "accidentally" injured himself in a scuffle.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MYANMAR (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); ENGLAND (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);   YANGON, MYANMAR (58%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MYANMAR; GREAT BRITAIN;   MYANMAR (97%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%);
ENGLAND (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);   YANGON, MYANMAR (58%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; GREAT
BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-MYANMAR; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); DEPORTATION (90%); SENTENCING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); PRISONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); IMMIGRATION (77%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); ARRESTS (75%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (73%); PARDONS (72%);

 ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS (72%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%);   CORRECTIONS
(90%); MILITARY RULE (78%);

PERSON: MAWDSLEY, JAMES  JAMES MAWDSLEY (94%); JOHN BATTLE (67%);

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             327 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Spy Agency In Brazil Is Accused Of Abuses

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: RIO DE JANEIRO, Dec. 13


First came accusations of domestic spying, then the firings of top officials
said to have been involved in the torture of political prisoners many years ago.

Now the Brazilian government's intelligence agency is coming under increasingly
heavy fire for what appear to be violations of its charter and a return to some
of the more odious practices of the past.

The director of the Brazilian Intelligence Agency, Col. Ariel Rocha de Cunto,
has been dismissed. News reports last month that his agents were spying on an
opposition governor, reporters, a prosecutor and even the president's son were
quickly followed by charges that at least two of his senior aides supervised the
torture of dissidents during the military dictatorship that ruled the country
from 1964 to 1985.

In a sworn deposition to federal prosecutors last week after he stepped down,
Colonel de Cunto identified some of the many entities that his agency has had
under surveillance. Among those were the environmental group Greenpeace, the
human rights organization Americas Watch, the Monsanto chemical company and the
religious sect led by the Rev. Sun Myung Moon.

The responses of those named have ranged from puzzlement to indignation.

"The money spent to obtain this type of information would be better employed in
investigations of the various accusations we have made of industrial pollution,
illegal commercialization of genetically modified food and the destructive
exploitation of the Amazon Forest," said Roberto Kishinami, executive director
of the Brazilian branch of Greenpeace.

For President Fernando Henrique Cardoso, a sociologist with a social democratic
philosophy, such disclosures, especially those relating to torture, strike
especially close to home.

He was himself forced into exile during the military dictatorship and had
friends who were jailed or even killed by the state security apparatus.

"I have a loathing of anyone who has links to torture," Mr. Cardoso said this
month. Nevertheless his government has been placed in the awkward position of
having to fend off demands to abolish the intelligence agency while
simultaneously curbing the abuses that have come to light.

The agency, known in Portuguese as ABIN for short, was established a year ago
this month as the successor to the Secretariat for Strategic Affairs, created in
1990. The predecessor of both agencies was the notorious National Intelligence
Service, or SIN, which was in charge of all aspects of state security during the
military dictatorship, when an estimated 3,000 Brazilians disappeared.

To replace Colonel de Cunto, Mr. Cardoso has nominated Marisa del'Isola e Diniz,
a psychologist who, if confirmed by the Senate, would be the first woman to head
an intelligence service in Latin America.

Little is known about Ms. Diniz or her background. She is reported to have
worked for Brazilian intelligence agencies since the mid-1970's and to have most
recently been in charge of personnel and training of ABIN's 1,740 employees.

Political analysts regard the selection of Ms. Diniz as an effort to defuse the
scandal by appointing someone without a formal military background.

Nevertheless, opposition legislators have threatened to hold up her confirmation
until the government supplies a complete list of the agency's staff so that the
names of employees can be checked against a master registry of torturers that
human rights groups have compiled.

"We are going to have a relationship of permanent conflict that will not be
camouflaged," vowed Senator Heloisa Helena, who represents the leftist Workers'
Party on a new congressional intelligence oversight committee.

The leadership of the Workers' Party includes survivors of some of the worst
abuses of the period of dictatorship, and Ms. Helena said that "there are still
some worries we need to put to rest" before Ms. Diniz can be confirmed.

Members of the oversight committee say 15 percent of the new agency's employees
worked for the SIN. But military leaders oppose a thorough investigation,
likening it to a witch hunt and accusing supporters of the plan of exaggerating
the situation to obtain belated revenge.

"These are people who feed on their own bile and rancor," said Gen. Gleuber
Vieira, commander in chief of the Brazilian Army. He dismissed the accusations
of torture as "isolated instances" that "have nothing to do with those of us who
are on active duty today," and criticized those who he said were "stirring up
the past without necessity in order to make a lot of accusations that have no
basis or proof."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: MON (NYSE) (55%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS424910 FARM SUPPLIES MERCHANT WHOLESALERS (55%); NAICS325320
PESTICIDE & OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (55%); SIC5191 FARM
SUPPLIES (55%); SIC2879 PESTICIDES & OTHER AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS (55%);

COUNTRY: BRAZIL (99%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (58%);

COMPANY: MONSANTO CO (55%);   GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL  (83%); GREENPEACE
INTERNATIONAL (83%); AMERICAS WATCH  (55%); AMERICAS WATCH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL  (83%); GREENPEACE INTERNATIONAL (83%);
AMERICAS WATCH  (55%); AMERICAS WATCH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BRAZIL;   BRAZIL (99%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA,
USA (79%);   RIO DE JANEIRO, BRAZIL (58%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION; ESPIONAGE; SUSPENSIONS, DISMISSALS AND RESIGNATIONS  ESPIONAGE
(93%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%);
TORTURE (90%); POLITICS (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DISMISSALS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); EXECUTIVES (76%); TESTIMONY (74%); RESIGNATIONS
(73%); RAIN FORESTS (72%); PSYCHOLOGY (72%); DEPOSITIONS (70%); ENVIRONMENT &
NATURAL RESOURCES (67%); CHEMICALS (67%); CHEMICALS MFG (67%); SOCIOLOGY (67%);
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD (53%); RELIGION (52%); INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION (51%);
MILITARY RULE (88%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; DE CUNTO, ARIEL ROCHA (COL)  FERNANDO HENRIQUE CARDOSO
(54%);

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             328 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 17, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nassau Amends Civil Rights to Cover Gays

BYLINE: By JOHN T. McQUISTON

SECTION: Section 14LI; Page 3; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: GARDEN CITY


WITH little fanfare, the Nassau County Legislature has unanimously approved a
civil rights bill barring discrimination against gay men and lesbians in
employment, housing and other areas open to the public.

The measure vastly extends the scope and powers of the laws governing the Nassau
County Human Rights Commission and the county's open housing regulations. The
laws, many enacted some 30 years ago, barred discrimination based on race,
creed, color and national origin. Amended, they now include discrimination based
on sexual orientation and several other new categories: gender, age, disability,
source of income, religion and ethnicity.

The bill was co-sponsored by all 10 Democratic county legislators, led by Judith
A. Jacobs, the majority leader. "I had been trying for the last four years to
get this matter before the Legislature," she said. "It became one of the
commitments we Democrats made when we became the majority in January."

"This measure is very good for Nassau," she added. "It spells out in great
detail that Nassau will not tolerate any kind of discrimination. I said when I
submitted the bill that I was embarrassed to think that something like this was
not already on the books."

Mrs. Jacobs said she was particularly troubled by the fact that people with
physical disabilities had never been included. "Our initial concern was sexual
orientation," she said. "Then we began to realize how many other categories were
missing."

The measure defines sexual orientation as "reference to a person's actual or
perceived identity as being lesbian, gay, bisexual or heterosexual."

Mrs. Jacobs said plans to enact the bill earlier this year were delayed by the
county Legislature's preoccupation with budget and fiscal problems.

Peter J. Schmitt, the leader of the nine-member Republican minority, said that
after reviewing the bill, he and his fellow Republicans agreed that it had
merits.

"This was an opportunity to plug up many loopholes and add these groups to the
list of categories covered by the county's civil rights law," Mr. Schmitt said.

When the Democrats submitted the bill, Mr. Schmitt said that he, too, was
surprised to discover that physical disabilities were not covered. "We have long
been in the forefront in the fight for aiding the handicapped," he said. "This
bill corrects that oversight."

The provisions of the new law took effect immediately upon its approval during
last Monday's regularly scheduled meeting of the county Legislature.

Thomas S. Gulotta, the county executive, plans to sign the measure once the
final draft reaches his desk, an aide said.

Adoption of the measure makes Nassau the fifth jurisdiction in the state to
outlaw anti-gay discrimination and provide redress to its victims. The others
are Albany County; New York City; Onondaga County, which includes Syracuse; and
Westchester County.

New York State law does not now cover anti-gay discrimination, said Matt
Foreman, the executive director of the Empire State Pride Agenda, a statewide
nonpartisan lesbian and gay political lobbying group with 25,000 members. The
group joined 30 other organizations backing the Nassau measure, including the
Long Island Council of Churches, the Nassau County Anti-Defamation League,
Bias-HELP Long Island, the Long Island Alliance for Peace and Justice, and the
AIDS Education and Resource Center.

Mr. Foreman was one of several speakers who addressed the Legislature on Monday.
All urged passage.

Mr. Foreman said a countywide poll commissioned by his group in April indicated
that likely voters in Nassau "overwhelmingly favored" the proposed amendment.
The poll showed that 79.9 percent of the 501 respondents said they were
"somewhat likely" to support a candidate who was in favor of protection from
discrimination for all people, including gays and lesbians.

"A year ago, after our bitter struggle to win over Westchester, we would never
have dreamed of a unanimous vote, particularly in Nassau County," Mr. Foreman
said. "Perhaps our poll allayed some fears." He noted that four of the nine
Republicans had also run as Conservative Party candidates a year ago.

He said he hoped that the victory in Nassau would send a message to Albany,
where a similar measure was first introduced in the New York State Legislature
on Feb. 4, 1971.  "It's been sitting in Albany for 30 years," he said, "and as
far as we know, it's the oldest un-acted-upon piece of legislation in the
state."

"The measure passed the State Assembly last year by a vote of 109 to 39 but has
never come to a vote in the State Senate, even though we have 32 of the 61 state
senators on record in support of the bill," Mr. Foreman continued. "I hope the
unanimous vote in Nassau will convince the Republican majority in the State
Senate to let the measure go forward."

He said he also hoped for approval of stronger anti-gay legislation in Suffolk
County. He said the Suffolk Human Rights Commission lacked the powers of
enforcement that were now available to the Nassau Human Rights Commission.

"They have different rights and authority," he said. "For example, in Tompkins
County, as in Suffolk County, if you file a complaint, it's investigated, and
attempts are made to reach a mediated agreement between the complainant and the
discriminating party. If no agreement is reached, you cannot fine the offending
party, and there is no remedy. In a sense, the local commission acts like a
mediation service but has no authority to enforce any of its findings.

"In Nassau, if parties sign an agreement," he said, "it can be enforced in
court. And since most victims don't have the money to hire a lawyer and pursue
their case, it's important to have a commission with authority to impose a
judgment. That's why we need a statewide law."

Among those who lobbied the county legislators was Daniel Lishansky, a retired
deputy chief of the Nassau County Police Department who now serves on the board
of the Anti-Defamation League.

"It was important that the amendment include all the different categories of
people who had been overlooked," Mr. Lishansky said. "This was not a bill just
to include the rights of gays but of all people who had been left out." He
credited the unanimous support of the measure to "its inclusiveness."

"This is not a unique piece of legislation, but it's certainly ground-breaking
legislation for many of the people who live in Nassau County," he said. "They
can now live a little bit easier and a little bit better."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SYRACUSE, NY, USA (50%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NASSAU COUNTY (NY);   UNITED STATES (92%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);
NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); SYRACUSE, NY, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: HOMOSEXUALITY; LAW AND LEGISLATION; DISCRIMINATION  COUNTIES (91%);
GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); DISCRIMINATION (91%); LGBT
RIGHTS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); GENDER EQUALITY
(90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (89%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); ETHNICITY
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); REAL PROPERTY LAW (78%); APPROVALS
(78%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); DISABLED PERSONS (75%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); BUDGETS (70%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS
(63%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);

PERSON: MCQUISTON, JOHN T  MATT FOREMAN (78%); JUDITH A JACOBS (60%); PETER J
SCHMITT (59%);

LOAD-DATE: December 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Empire State Pride Agenda staff members, from left: Ralph
Wilson, Matt Foreman and Joseph S. Grabarz Jr. (Steve Hart for The New York
Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             330 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 28, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Drug Aid at Home

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 82 words



To the Editor:

Re "Bush Should Start Over in Colombia," by Paul Wellstone (Op-Ed, Dec. 26):

Senator Wellstone is correct in declaring that "strong human rights conditions"
be maintained in Colombia as a requirement for its receiving American drug-war
aid.

But some American drug-related human rights also need more support. Drug addicts
are mentally and physically ill, but they do not always receive treatment.

ABRAHAM G. WHITE, M.D.
Forest Hills, Queens, Dec. 26, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA
(90%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC  SUBSTANCE ABUSE
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(84%); DRUG POLICY (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: WHITE, ABRAHAM G (DR); WELLSTONE, PAUL (SEN)  PAUL WELLSTONE  (94%);

LOAD-DATE: December 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             331 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World -- Scales of Justice;
In Chile, Democracy Depends on a Delicate Balance

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 924 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile


In theory, at least, the endless succession of legal hearings dogging General
Augusto Pinochet's retirement years could provide a golden opportunity for
Chile.

It could help a nation, once known for goose-stepping soldiers and torture
chambers, to clarify the historical record, consolidate the rule of law and
establish the primacy of the judiciary and civilian government.

But this is Chile, a country where open conflict in personal and political
affairs is so disliked that the people have a word for avoiding it:
"Convivencia,"which translates as "living together" or "coexistence."

Convivencia may explain why General Pinochet's fate will probably not be
determined in a court of law. Instead, in the next few weeks he will undergo a
neurological and psychological examination in Santiago's military hospital,
after which doctors are expected to conclude that the 85-year-old is mentally
unfit to stand trial for kidnapping and murder.

"I am convinced the final solution for Pinochet and the country will be the
medical exams," said Ricardo Israel, a political scientist at the University of
Chile. "In Chile there is a long tradition of compromise."

Of course, the Pinochet case has already produced several surprises, so no one
is certain what will happen. One possibility is that the results of the medical
examination will be kept secret until after the former dictator is interrogated
and charged. An indictment of the general would have great political and
historical significance, even if he was never brought to trial. Still, the
eagerness with which many Chileans are anticipating a negotiated outcome says a
lot about how much Chileans accept -- indeed embrace -- ambiguity in the
respective authority of their governing institutions.

The last time the equilibrium between the civilian and the military broke down
was in the early 1970's, after the Socialist Salvador Allende won a close
presidential election. Mr. Allende embarked on a policy of land redistribution
and nationalization of the country's major industries, creating a vehement
reaction by the military on behalf of the upper and middle classes.

In 1973, after the Allende government moved to introduce Socialist ideals into
the predominantly Roman Catholic education system, and after the leader of the
Socialist party called for a barracks rebellion against senior officers, the
military broke its tradition of being apolitical and staged a bloody coup,
backed by Washington.

For the next 17 years General Pinochet ruled as the most authoritarian dictator
in South America, killing more than 3,000 leftists and torturing tens of
thousands of Chileans. Not until 1990, following a plebiscite election in which
Chileans called for an end to dictatorship, was he forced to share power with a
coalition of Socialists and Christian Democrats.

In 1998, General Pinochet retired from his position as head of the army and an
uneasy calm prevailed until two years ago, when he was arrested in London on
human rights charges detailed in a Spanish warrant.

"It brought the skeleton out of the closet and put it into our faces," recalled
Jose Miguel Vivanco, a Chilean human rights lawyer who works for Human Rights
Watch. Still, he added: "The period of the 1970's was so traumatic, Chileans go
out of their way to minimize conflict and pretend that conflict does not exist.
Unfortunately I think the political establishment wants the medical exam to be
the way out. That is their strategy."

President Ricardo Lagos, the military, and judicial officers have all sworn
publicly that the courts are functioning without outside interference. But there
is abundant evidence of ongoing bargaining intended to preserve the balance of
power.

One day the Supreme Court stripped General Pinochet of his Senatorial immunity,
then on another it tossed out kidnapping and murder charges filed against him.
Two weeks ago it ruled that the general ought to be interrogated without delay,
then last week it ordered that he be should undergo medical tests first.

One day President Lagos, the first Socialist to govern Chile since Salvador
Allende's downfall, lectured the military to stay out of the affairs of the
judiciary. Shortly afterwards, he acceded to the wishes of the top military
officers for a meeting of the National Security Council, a creation of Mr.
Pinochet, to let them air their grievances.

President Lagos further perplexed many of his Socialist supporters when he
recently invited a general accused of being an accomplice to the murder of a
labor leader to the presidential palace to personally congratulate him on his
retirement.

FOR its part, several months ago, under the leadership of the army chief, Gen.
Ricardo Izurieta, the armed forces for the first time accepted responsibility
for the disappearances of dissidents and promised to help locate their remains.
Next week the military is scheduled to report on its search, but church
officials acting as monitors say few of the missing will be accounted for.

President Lagos, meanwhile, has approved new weapons purchases, and his aides
are reportedly working on a compromise allowing military personnel to be
prosecuted but then qualify for clemency. In return, the military would provide
more information on missing people.

"Gen. Izurieta knows that he needs Lagos for a political solution, something
that can only come from the left," noted Mr. Israel of the University of Chile.
"And Lagos knows only bad things can happen if Izurieta is weakened."

That's convivencia.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARMIES (78%); RETIREMENT & RETIREES (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); HISTORY (77%); COUPS (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS
(77%); ELECTIONS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); LIBERALISM (76%); POLITICS
(76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (76%); NEUROSCIENCE (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); MURDER (72%); MILITARY HOSPITALS (72%);
POLITICAL SCIENCE (71%); FAITH BASED SCHOOLS (71%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(67%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (67%); ARRESTS (64%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(60%); RELIGION (60%);   RULE OF LAW (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (62%);



PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; LAGOS, RICARDO (PRES); PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

 AUGUSTO PINOCHET (93%); SALVADOR ALLENDE (69%); RICARDO LAGOS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: General Augusto Pinochet (left) arrived in Chile last March
after being held in Britain. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             333 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 965 words



THE AMERICAS

ECUADOR: EMERGENCY DECLARED
Faced with a collapsing currency and the threat of renewed strikes and street
protests that his government attributes to groups seeking his ouster, President
Jamil Mahuad, left, has declared a national emergency for the fourth time in
less than 18 months in office. The currency has depreciated by 15 percent
against the dollar this week, leading to fears of higher prices and
unemployment. The decree gives the government special powers to put troops in
the street to monitor protests.   Larry Rohter (NYT)

VENEZUELA: SOLDIERS INVESTIGATED
Prosecutors have begun an investigation into complaints by a human rights group,
Provea, that security forces committed abuses during relief efforts after deadly
floods and landslides last month. The group accuses soldiers of summarily
executing thieves who were looting abandoned homes, beating residents of
storm-damaged neighborhoods, illegally entering homes and restricting freedom of
movement. Minister of Defense Raul Salazar has denied the charges.   Larry
Rohter (NYT)


MEXICO: AIR QUALITY IMPROVES
The air in Mexico City last year was cleaner than at any previous time in the
decade as a result of stricter enforcement of laws limiting the emission of
pollutants by vehicles and factories, according to a government study. Air
pollution forced authorities to adopt emergency measures like keeping
schoolchildren inside during recess only 5 days last year, compared with 62 days
in 1990 and 37 in 1998, the study said.   Sam Dillon (NYT)

ASIA

SRI LANKA: COLOMBO CURFEW
An overnight curfew was imposed on the capital, Colombo, hours after the police
arrested the parents and sister of a woman who killed at least 13 people in a
suicide bombing in front of the prime minister's office, the state radio said.
The parents were among 200 Tamils rounded up for questioning.   (AP)

EUROPE

FRANCE: PAPON IN HOSPITAL
Maurice Papon, the highest ranking Vichy government official to be convicted of
crimes against humanity for collaborating with the Nazis, has been taken to a
hospital with heart problems. Mr. Papon, 89, tried to flee the country in
October rather than begin his 10-year jail term. But he was quickly apprehended
and has been held in prison in Paris. Mr. Papon's lawyers have been hoping for a
presidential pardon on medical grounds.   Suzanne Daley (NYT)

FRANCE: PRESIDENTIAL HEAD START
A former interior minister, Charles Pasqua, has given the race for the French
presidency an early start, throwing his hat into the ring more than two years in
advance of the next elections. Mr. Pasqua broke from President Jacques Chirac's
Gaullist party last year to start his own party. His bid is expected to weaken
Mr. Chirac by splitting his supporters.   Suzanne Daley (NYT)

BRITAIN: SUSPECTED NAZI LEAVES
A suspected Nazi war criminal left Britain and headed for Australia, as the
British government insisted that the police did not have enough evidence to
arrest him. Home Secretary Jack Straw recently ordered that Konrad Kalejs, 86,
be deported, but Mr. Kalejs left on his own and paid for his own ticket. He is
accused of having led a group responsible for more than 30,000 deaths in Latvia
in World War II.   Sarah Lyall (NYT)

IRELAND: I.R.A. EXTRADITION REVIEWED
The High Court agreed to review an extradition order sending a convicted Irish
Republican Army killer, Angelo Fusco, 43, to Northern Ireland, but it ordered
him held in prison without bail until a hearing this month. Mr. Fusco was
arrested and was being driven to the border to be turned over to the Ulster
police on Tuesday when the Dublin court intervened. He faces life imprisonment
for shooting a British captain, Herbert Westmacott, in 1980.   Warren Hoge (NYT)


UZBEKISTAN: SUNDAY ELECTION
Uzbekistan appears certain on Sunday to grant its autocratic president, Islam
Karimov, a second five-year term in elections that independent observers have
already said will be rigged. The nation's 24 million citizens voted for a
pro-Karimov Parliament in December in an election that the Organization for
Security and Cooperation in Europe refused to monitor, saying it was
anti-democratic. The group is also boycotting Sunday's vote.   Michael Wines
(NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

WEST BANK: 2 ARAFAT CRITICS FREED
The Palestinian Authority released two dissidents from a Jericho jail who signed
a petition called "A Cry from the Homeland," which directly criticized the
Palestinian leader Yasir Arafat and condemned corruption in the Palestinian
Authority. Dr. Abdel Sattar Qassem, 56, and Ahmad Shaker Doodeen, 63, were freed
after 40 days in detention without charges, the last of the petition's signers
to be released after a swift, harsh crackdown.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)

AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: VOTE SET FOR MARCH
Dispelling confusion about the date of the next national elections, President
Robert Mugabe announced that the parliamentary vote would be held in March. It
will be the first time that Mr. Mugabe's party, the Zimbabwe African National
Union-Patriotic Front, will have strong opposition from rival parties. Mr.
Mugabe and his party have dominated the country's political life since
independence in 1980.   Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

BURUNDI: REFUGEES INCREASING
The flow of refugees from fighting in southeast Burundi swelled to at least
30,000 last month, the United Nations reported. The number rose especially over
the holidays, with nearly 3,000 people arriving in refugee camps in western
Tanzania on New Year's Day. In November nearly 10,000 refugees reached Tanzania,
with another 8,000 arriving in October, all fleeing an upsurge of fighting
between soldiers and rebels.   Ian Fisher (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FRANCE (93%); MEXICO (92%); INDIA (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); EUROPE (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (79%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

COMPANY: KARIMOV PARLIAMENT (55%);

ORGANIZATION: KARIMOV PARLIAMENT (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FRANCE (93%); MEXICO (92%); INDIA (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); EUROPE (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA (79%);   MEXICO CITY,
MEXICO (79%); PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  NATURAL DISASTERS (90%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CURRENCIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); WORLD WAR II (76%);
WAR & CONFLICT (76%); ARRESTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (75%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (75%);
JAIL SENTENCING (75%); CURFEW (74%); LARCENY & THEFT (74%); PRISONS (74%);
BOMBINGS (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); AIR QUALITY (72%); AIR QUALITY REGULATION

 (72%); AIR POLLUTION (72%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); LAWYERS (69%); PARDONS (68%); CHILDREN (68%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (68%); PROPERTY VACANCIES (68%); LANDSLIDES (58%); SUICIDE
BOMBINGS (50%);   STATES OF EMERGENCY (90%); SEVERE WEATHER (74%); CORRECTIONS
(69%);

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (57%);

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             340 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

After Sex Case, Guards' Union Vows To Keep Men's Jobs in Women's Jail

BYLINE: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 2; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: WHITE PLAINS, Jan. 27


The day after sex abuse charges were brought against four Westchester County
jail guards, their union said today that it would file suit to block the
county's plan to stop using men to guard female inmates' living units.

But County Executive Andrew Spano and advocates for female inmates said Mr.
Spano's change in jail policy, which he plans to have in place in 10 days, would
withstand any legal challenge.

Officials said they did not know of any other jail in the state that has barred
male guards from women's residential units, but jails in other states have taken
the step, legal experts said.

The charges against the four male guards in the women's housing block included
raping and sodomizing inmates and forcing them to strip in exchange for
medication. The four guards were suspended from their jobs on Wednesday, and two
were still in custody today.

About half the 21 guards who work in the Westchester jail's women's block are
women.

Robert Goodstein, a lawyer for the guards' union, the Westchester Correction
Officers Benevolent Association, said he would file a federal lawsuit charging
that the new policy would violate federal laws against sexual discrimination. He
said federal law kept authorities from assigning jobs on the basis of sex,
except under unusual circumstances.

Advocates for prisoners say that protecting the privacy and rights of female
inmates meets that exception.

The question of the proper means of guarding female inmates is complicated by
the fact that the vast majority of corrections officers in the nation and the
state are men. The issue has been the subject of at least two reports by
advocacy groups and a handful of lawsuits in the last four years, asserting that
the sexual abuse and harassment of female inmates is common.

"The threat of sexual abuse is a systemic problem," said Christine Doyle, a
lawyer for Amnesty International, which distributed a report last year including
anecdotal evidence of widespread abuse in all 50 states. "It is not an isolated
problem."

Another advocacy group, Human Rights Watch, published a similar report four
years ago that included New York among the states surveyed. The authorities in
one of the other states, Michigan, were later sued in state and federal courts
by female inmates asserting a pattern of abuse.

Female guards have used federal laws against sex-based discrimination to win the
right to patrol all facilities, not just those for women, in the last two
decades.

And Mr. Goodstein represented the guards' union in a successful 1984 federal
lawsuit in which two male sergeants sued to win the right to work in the women's
jail, which a union official said is perceived as less volatile than the men's
jails.

"Anybody who violates the law or who engages in sexual relations with an inmate
should be penalized to the full extent of law," Mr. Goodstein said today. "But
for somebody who is not even accused of doing anything like this, this is guilt
by association and sexual stereotyping."

Rocco A. Pozzi, correction commissioner of Westchester County, said that since
1989, the county has had the right under a contract clause to establish some
posts in the jail as being "gender-specific."

Ms. Doyle said she knew of no women's prison or jail in the country that
entirely excluded male officers, although many states and cities put
restrictions on their duties or their procedures with female inmates --
forbidding them to conduct either strip searches or frisk searches, or to guard
shower areas.

At the two women's jails at Rikers Island, where about 60 percent of the guards
are female, partitions have been put up in showers that allow guards to see
inmates only from the neck up.

Thomas Antenen, a spokesman for the New York City Correction Department, said he
was not aware of the arrest of any male guard for sex crimes against women in
his 14 years.

At least one recent inmate at the Westchester County jail said the charges of
sexual activity between inmates and guards did not surprise her. The inmate,
Valerie C. Courreges, 39, of Peekskill, who spent 18 days in the jail in
September on charges of disorderly conduct, said she had heard many rumors in
jail about sexual relations between guards and inmates but never knew whether
the rumors were true.

"I didn't see anything like rape," said Ms. Courreges, a musician. "I heard
about sexual relationships going on, but I think it was consensual. It was the
kind of thing where someone would point to a woman in the yard and say she was
having a relationship with some guard."

State law classifies any sexual intercourse between inmate and prisoner as rape,
on the ground that an inmate is not free to give consent.

Ms. Courreges said she did not encounter any hostility from the male guards,
whom she considered kinder than the female guards.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

COMPANY: WESTCHESTER COUNTY JAIL (VALHALLA, NY); WESTCHESTER CORRECTION OFFICERS
BENEVOLENT ASSN

ORGANIZATION: WESTCHESTER COUNTY JAIL (VALHALLA, NY); WESTCHESTER CORRECTION
OFFICERS BENEVOLENT ASSN

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%);   MICHIGAN, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: PRISONS AND PRISONERS; SEX CRIMES; GUARDS; SUITS AND CLAIMS AGAINST
GOVERNMENT; WOMEN; DISCRIMINATION  CORRECTIONS WORKERS (92%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(91%); LITIGATION (90%); COUNTIES (90%); PRISONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (90%);
COUNTY GOVERNMENT (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); LAWYERS (78%); GENDER &
SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (78%); WOMEN (78%);
LABOR UNIONS (73%); PRIVACY RIGHTS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%);   DISCRIMINATION
LAW (71%);   CORRECTIONS (92%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (66%);

PERSON: ARCHIBOLD, RANDAL C; SPANO, ANDREW J (COUNTY EXEC); GOODSTEIN, ROBERT
ROBERT GOODSTEIN (70%); VALERIE C COURREGES (66%); ANDREW SPANO (58%); CHRISTINE
DOYLE (56%);

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             348 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1256 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Russian Front Companies Linked to Bank of New York
Two Moscow banks that figure prominently in the Bank of New York case were not
really banks but front companies that aided schemes to funnel money out of
Russia and into illegal accounts at the Bank of New York, bankers and
investigators said.   A1

Torture Reports in Chechnya
Three men seized by Russian troops and imprisoned in northern Chechnya this
winter have told human-rights observers of beatings, torture and rapes that
occurred. The Kremlin denounced the reports as lies.   A12


Iranians Going to the Polls
Parliamentary elections today will be seen as a referendum on defining the
ideals at the heart of the Iranian revolution, as well the popularity of
President Mohammad Khatami.   A1

Anti-U.S. Rallies in Lebanon
Protesters outside the United States Embassy threw rocks and tomatoes at
Lebanese soliders and police. The protests appeared to have been organized with
the help of Hezbollah, which condemned the United States for statements
supporting Israeli air strikes in southern Lebanon.   A8

India-Pakistan Tensions
India is conducting military exercises about 60 miles from its border with
Pakistan, a month before President Clinton is to visit the region.   A3

Mexico Mental Hospital Report
Long-term patients live in filthy, abusive, dangerous conditions and up to half
are epileptic or mentally retarded and do not even belong in a psychiatric
institution, an international human rights group said.   A5

U.N. Assigns Child Advocates
The United Nations has begun assigning full-time advocates of children to
operations centers abroad, an official said. The move follows reports from an
array of United Nations agencies and private relief groups detailing the plight
of children in an era of civil wars.   A8

The U.N.'s Next Member State
The Security Council cleared the way for Tuvalu, a Pacific island nation of
10,000 people, to become the 189th member of the United Nations. The General
Assembly is expected to admit the country later this year.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-27

Republicans Pursue Votes With Different Approaches
Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain raced across South Carolina with
diverging strategies, two days before their Republican primary showdown. Mr.
Bush pressed a relentless attack on his opponent, while Mr. McCain made a broad
appeal for the votes of Republicans independents and Democrats alike.   A1

Pledge to Labor on China
Labor leaders meeting in New Orleans said that behind closed doors Mr. Gore had
reiterated a pledge that if elected president he would negotiate a tougher trade
agreement with China than President Clinton had.   A27

Pentagon Faulted on Anthrax
A House panel issued a scalding critique of an effort to vaccinate American
troops against the biological agent anthrax, and said the program should be
suspended.   A14

Reacting to Fear of Hackers
The E.P.A. has temporarily taken itself offline after a lawmaker said on his Web
site that its computers were vulnerable to hackers.   A23

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Treating Deadly Liver Disease
A possible new approach to treating cirrhosis has emerged from studies of
telomerase, an agent that indefinitely prolongs the life of human cells grown in
the laboratory.   A18

Tests Rebut 'Terrible Scare'
Reports that some two dozen childhood brain cancer patients in a gene therapy
experiment may have been exposed to viruses that cause AIDS and hepatitis C were
not substantiated, an F.D.A. official said.   A16

Meningitis Vaccine Approved
The F.D.A. approved Prevnar, the first vaccine to prevent a leading cause of
meningitis in infants and toddlers, a day after a panel of scientific experts
recommended against giving it to all children under the age of 5 in part because
of its cost.   A20

An Asteroid, From Up Close
The asteroid Eros, now under study from the NEAR spacecraft, appears to be
composed of dense material and battered by many ancient collisions, scientists
reported.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Death Leads State to Bar Surgeon From Operating
The state Health Department ordered Staten Island University Hospital to ban any
treatment of patients by its chief of neurosurgery, Ehud Arbit, following the
death of one of his patients. Dr. Arbit is the same doctor fired from Memorial
Sloan Kettering for operating on the wrong side of a brain five years ago.   A1

Recalling Assault on Prisoner
Justin Volpe, left, the former police officer serving 30 years for the
brutalization of Abner Louima, gave his account at the federal trial of three
officers accused of conspiring to cover up the attack. As expected, Mr. Volpe
said a fellow officer convicted in the assault, Charles Schwarz, was not
involved, and he pointed to another officer, Thomas Wiese, who he said had stood
by without intervening.   A1

Lesser Charges in Diallo Trial
The judge in the Amadou Diallo trial granted a request from both sides to let
jurors consider lesser charges in the trial of the four officers accused of
murdering Mr. Diallo.   B6

Anger Over Nuclear Accident
Public officials and citizen groups accused the Nuclear Regulatory Commission
and Con Edison of mishandling events leading up to the radiation leak at the
Indian Point 2 nuclear plant on Tuesday, and then of not notifying the public
properly.   B1

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SPORTS   D1-8

WEEKEND   E1-38; E39-54

OBITUARIES   C21

EDUCATION

Creationism in a Curriculum
A publicly financed charter school to open in Rochester plans to teach that
creationism is a competing theory to evolution. The plan has drawn opposition
from civil liberties groups.   B1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20, 22

Putting the Brakes On
The Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, said the powerhouse economy showed few signs
of slowing despite four interest rate increases in eight months, and he warned
that the central bank would probably raise rates further to avert a buildup of
inflation and to slow down stock markets.   A1

The Nasdaq jumped 121.27 points, or 2.74 percent, to 4,548.92, a record, but the
S.& P. 500 managed only a 0.59-point gain, to 1,388.26, and the Dow lost 46.84
points, to 10,514.57.   C9

Toymaker Sues Ex-Chairman
F.A.O. Schwarz has sued John Eyler, its former chairman and chief executive, for
jumping to the rival Toys "R" Us last month.   C1

A Giant Divides Itself
The world's largest accounting firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers, said it would
separate its auditing and consulting businesses into two or more free-standing
organizations. The move is intended to address market regulators' increasing
concerns and to enhance the ability to compete in the Internet economy.   C8

Improved Energy Technology
The Energy Department and G.E. will announce a major breakthrough in
natural-gas-powered generating plants today that will result in the production
of electricity using 5.3 percent less fuel than the best current technologies.
   C10

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: Bill Clinton's Asian itinerary; a new universe in Manhattan; Michael
M. Weinstein on America's rags-to-riches myth.
Columns: Gail Collins, Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E53

TV Listings   E37

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D8


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: BK (NYSE) (92%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (92%); NAICS522110
COMMERCIAL BANKING (92%); SIC6712 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (92%);

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); LEBANON (93%); INDIA
(92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); CHINA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ISRAEL
(79%); TUVALU (79%);

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: BANK OF NEW YORK MELLON CORP (92%);   UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%); HEZBOLLAH (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%); HEZBOLLAH (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); LEBANON (93%); INDIA
(92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); CHINA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ISRAEL
(79%); TUVALU (79%);   LOUISIANA, USA (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%);

 NEW ORLEANS, LA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); NEWS
BRIEFS (90%); TORTURE (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (89%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); US PRESIDENTS
(88%); CHILDREN (86%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE LAW (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%);

 ARMED FORCES (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); ELECTIONS (75%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS
(75%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS (75%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%);
TRADE TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (74%); PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS (70%); REFERENDUMS (70%); CHILD WELFARE
(69%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (69%); HEZBOLLAH (68%); EPILEPSY (65%); MENTAL
RETARDATION (65%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(75%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (56%); JOHN MCCAIN (54%);

LOAD-DATE: February 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             358 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Death Squad Or Paladins? A Colombian Defends Role

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 793 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, March 11


His private army has killed thousands of people in the past decade, making him
perhaps the most feared man in this violent country. But a decision to submit to
a grilling on television early this month has allowed the paramilitary leader
Carlos Castano to come out of the shadows and present himself as one more victim
of the violence he had previously been seen as personifying here.

The 90-minute interview was not Mr. Castano's first appearance on Colombian
television. In the past he has occasionally been shown with his back to the
camera or with sunglasses and a fake beard to disguise his features. But never
before had the main leader of the country's right-wing death squads discussed
his philosophy and background in such detail or with such startling candor.

"I know that what I do violates international law, but the violation of
international law is inherent in a guerrilla war," he said, adding that, "Wars
are to be won, period" and arguing that, "Our methods produce excellent
results." At another juncture, he said, "I'm an extortionist, just like the
guerrillas, but with more delicacy" and warned, "If an enemy has to be killed,
then I say kill him."

The timing of the interview suggests that Mr. Castano has been attentive to the
shifting political currents here. His mortal enemies on the left, the guerrilla
group known as the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, toured
Europe in February with Colombian government peace negotiators, and their
stature grew as a result.

In contrast, the Colombian United Self-Defense, as Mr. Castano's private
5,500-member army is called, has been described as a band of murderous thugs in
human rights reports published in the last month by the State Department, the
United Nations and the private monitoring group Human Rights Watch. As a result,
the State Department is seeking to have Mr. Castano's group added to its list of
terrorist organizations along with the likes of Osama bin Laden, who is accused
of blowing up American embassies.

During the interview on the private network Caracol, Mr. Castano, wearing a blue
dress shirt and matching tie that made him look like a young executive,
expressed hurt at being cast in such a role. "I am a patriot, not a bandit," he
said indignantly, adding that his group acts on behalf of "the middle class,
which has no one to defend it" because the armed forces and police are too busy
defending "the oligarchy."

Nevertheless, a damaging new report from the government ombudsman's office here
blames paramilitary death squads for the executions of 902 people in 155
"massacres" last year. So Mr. Castano was under pressure to do something to
"consolidate his status as chief of a counterinsurgency project" and "paladin
and defender of property," as the country's main daily, El Tiempo, put it, and
dispel the notion that he is a mere butcher and drug trafficker.

"I want the country to know Carlos Castano, and my sons their father," he said.
"I don't want my sons to have to do this. It is very difficult and cruel."

If Mr. Castano's strategy was to appear more human, it seems to be succeeding.
In an opinion poll published on Thursday by El Tiempo, 38 percent of those
questioned said their image of Mr. Castano had improved as a result of the
interview, and 72 percent said the government should bring his group into peace
negotiations now under way with left-wing guerrillas.

"I saw that he is not the monster I had always thought him to be," said Alba
Rosa Guerrero Castro, a 46-year-old waitress. "He has done many bad things, but
he has suffered a lot in this war too, maybe even more than most people."

In a biographical sketch published in 1996, Mr. Castano explained that his
hatred of the country's various leftist insurgencies dates back to September
1981, when he was 15 years old and a leftist guerrilla unit kidnapped his
father. When the family was unable to come up with the ransom the guerrillas
were demanding, his father was killed.

Since then, the family has waged a campaign of vengeance aimed at anyone thought
to be supplying the guerrillas, or to even be sympathetic toward them. Four of
Mr. Castano's brothers have been killed in clashes with guerrilla groups, he
said in the television interview, and a sister was killed during a bungled
kidnapping attempt.

"As a result of this interview, Castano has undergone a surprising
metamorphosis," the columnist Maria Isabel Rueda wrote in the weekly news
magazine Semana. "Overnight he manages to transform himself from a barbarian
with hands stained with blood into a father forced to live apart from his
children as the result of a patriotic mission that obliges him to commit
atrocities only because it is necessary to halt the guerrillas."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (57%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (71%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (71%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (96%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (57%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; TELEVISION  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); TERRORISM
(78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); EXTORTION (66%);
POLITICS (65%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (62%); PEACE PROCESS (52%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY; CASTANO, CARLOS  OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%);

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             359 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Justice in Cuba, Too

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words



To the Editor:

Re "No Victory for Dictators" (Op-Ed, March 7), by Greg Grandin: It is
commendable that injustices committed in Chile under the dictator Augusto
Pinochet or in Guatemala are finally being exposed. But we should not forget
another country that has suffered countless human rights abuses -- Cuba, under
the dictatorship of Fidel Castro.

For 41 years Mr. Castro has gotten away with heinous crimes against his own
people. The fact that his government has systematically executed thousands,
jailed thousands more who opposed him and denied the Cuban people the basic
freedoms that we in democratic nations take for granted is reason enough for the
international community to condemn him.

It is necessary to call for justice in Central America or in Chile; it is an
injustice to forget about what has happened in Cuba.

MARIO LUIS RAMIREZ
Kew Gardens, Queens, March 7, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CUBA (95%); CHILE (94%); GUATEMALA (92%); CENTRAL AMERICA (56%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CUBA; CHILE; GUATEMALA;   CUBA (95%); CHILE (94%); GUATEMALA (92%);
CENTRAL AMERICA (56%);   NEW YORK, USA (90%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%);

PERSON: RAMIREZ, MARIO LUIS; CASTRO, FIDEL (PRES)  FIDEL CASTRO (87%);

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             365 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Spain to Investigate Guatemalan Abuses

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 179 words

DATELINE: MADRID, March 22


Spain's High Court has decided to open an investigation into accusations of
genocide against former Guatemalan dictators, judicial officials said today.

The court plans to accept a request forwarded by Rigoberta Menchu, a Guatemalan
campaigner for human rights, to look into a series of killings in the 1980's,
they said. The inquiry could lead to possible charges and extradition bids for
five generals and other senior officials.

Ms. Menchu's suit, filed in December, accused three former dictators of
genocide, torture, and state terrorism. The High Court, which secured the arrest
of Gen. Augusto Pinochet of Chile in London in 1998, was expected to issue its
ruling formally on Thursday.

In Guatemala today, anthropologists said they had unearthed the remains of 15
peasants, including a two-week-old baby and a 5-year-old child, from wartime
mass graves.

The discovery in Choyomche, 65 miles northwest of the capital, will have no
bearing on Ms. Menchu's suit, but it underscores the brutality of Guatemala's
36-year civil war, which ended in 1996.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (96%); SPAIN (91%); CHILE (79%);

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (74%); LONDON, ENGLAND (54%);

COMPANY: HIGH COURT (84%);

ORGANIZATION: HIGH COURT (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA; SPAIN;   GUATEMALA (96%); SPAIN (91%); CHILE (79%);
MADRID, SPAIN (74%); LONDON, ENGLAND (54%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS; EXTRADITION  EXTRADITION (91%); INVESTIGATIONS (91%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);

 CIVIL WAR (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); TORTURE (88%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (86%);
INFANTS & TODDLERS (85%); TERRORISM (54%);

PERSON: MENCHU, RIGOBERTA  RIGOBERTA MENCHU  (93%);

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             371 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Tribunal Gains Steam as It Tries Balkan Horrors

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1402 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, April 9


Confounding the many critics who long called the international tribunal here a
mere fig leaf for Western shame, the court dealing with Yugoslav war crimes has
just completed an extraordinary month.

It has opened the first United Nations trial ever to focus exclusively on sexual
violence against women, including gang rape and the use of women as sexual
slaves as part of a war strategy.

It has begun the trial of one of the top generals accused of being responsible
for the carnage in 1995 at the Bosnian town of Srebrenica, probably Europe's
worst massacre of civilians since World War II.

And on Friday, prosecutors brought before the court a top Bosnian Serb political
leader who is charged with complicity in the genocide that the prosecutors say
his people perpetrated against Bosnia's Muslims and Croats, but who not so long
ago was accepted as a figure who could meet with Western presidents and prime
ministers.

While problems remain, and the recent momentum is the result of slow shifts by
Western governments and tribunal prosecutors themselves, the changes have
engendered a rare sense of excitement in the sober high-security building on the
outskirts of this Dutch city where judges are quietly testing and defining
uncharted international laws.

Usually the building feels more like a subdued hospital for the Balkan heart, a
place that tries to put patches on the wrenching pain of witnesses while lawyers
haggle over legal remedies.

But last week, which began with the capture of Momcilo Krajisnik (pronounced
mohm-chee-loh cry-ish-nik), the senior Bosnian Serb politician who was brought
before the court on Friday, seemed to galvanize staff members and visitors. He
is the highest-ranking Serb in the tribunal's custody.

"The momentum and the energy at the tribunal have been amazing," said Heather
Ryan of the Coalition for International Justice, who has monitored proceedings
on behalf of several human rights groups for almost two years. "I've not seen so
much substance at any one time, at least in the public arena. The tribunal seems
to have hit a new stride."

For Mr. Krajisnik's first appearance, at which he pleaded not guilty to all nine
counts against him, the usually empty public gallery overflowed and hundreds
crowded the lobby to follow the event on television monitors.

Other courtrooms here heard testimony of great moment. United Nations
peacekeepers gave the most vivid accounts yet of the tense days in July 1995
around Srebrenica that led up to the alleged massacre by Serbs of perhaps 8,000
Muslim men.

Two Dutch peacekeepers at the trial of Gen. Radislav Krstic, one of the Bosnian
Serb commanders at Srebrenica, for the first time publicly testified that even
before the peacekeepers' forced departure, there had been blatant signs of
impending slaughter.

One of the Dutch soldiers, Paul Groenewegen, detained by the Serbs at the time,
said he believed that executions had been going on, as he heard repeated single
gunshots for a whole day, "perhaps 20 to 40 shots" per hour.

Andre Stoelinga, another Dutch soldier, said he had seen clothes and shoes piled
by the roadside and a truck loaded with blue and bloated bodies. "It's a smell I
won't forget," he told the court on Thursday.

Those accounts are significant because they differ widely from past tribunal
testimony by the Dutch commander, Lt. Col. Ton Karremans, who said that while
the peacekeepers had no choice but to hand over the civilians under their
protection, they had no reason to suspect the coming executions of the Muslim
men.

Such details have long been known inside the Dutch government, but their
disclosure has shocked the Dutch public. Politicians and newspaper editorial
writers have demanded a parliamentary inquiry.

The drama now going on at the the tribunal, with young women sobbing as they
speak of gang rape and senior political and military war leaders standing in the
dock, can also be followed by more people in the Balkans, for whom these trials
are most intended.

The new South East News Service for Europe, financed mainly by the European
Union, has begun to broadcast regular live television and radio programs and
summaries from the trials, allowing people in Montenegro, Bosnia and parts of
Serbia and Croatia to follow the tribunal's many activities.

Several factors have contributed to the tribunal's new momentum.

Western governments, which long appeared to pay only lip service to the court,
lauding its objectives but starving it of funds and intelligence, now find it
more politically convenient to have their soldiers arrest important suspects,
like camp commanders and Bosnian Serb and Croat generals.

British troops were the first to do so, after the election of a Labor government
in 1997 that succeeded the Conservatives who were in power during the 1991-95
wars in Croatia and Bosnia. American, Dutch and German soldiers followed.

Court investigators, whose work has often been painfully slow, have also managed
to speed up indictments as the body of evidence has grown. A third courtroom,
added in late 1998, has helped.

But it took public complaints from Louise Arbour, the former chief prosecutor,
for NATO countries to release more intelligence reports and to use peacekeepers
to seize key documents in Bosnia.

It appears that Carla Del Ponte, the former attorney general of Switzerland who
took over as chief prosecutor last fall, has now pressed France into greater
action.

French troops were seen as providing a de facto safe haven for key suspects in
their sector of Bosnia, which covers much of the Bosnian Serb republic in the
eastern part of the country.

Mrs. Del Ponte, who gained a record for toughness as a prosecutor fighting
organized crime, called on the defense and foreign ministers in Paris in
January. On Feb. 29, when President Jacques Chirac of France visited the
tribunal, she handed him a piece of paper with the names of three Bosnian Serbs
in the French sector whose indictments she had just signed days before.

Tribunal officials will not identify the two others, but the third, Mr.
Krajisnik, was the right-hand man of the Bosnian Serb wartime political leader,
Radovan Karadzic, who was indicted by the tribunal in 1995.

Mr. Krajisnik was pulled out of bed by French troops a month after Mr. Chirac's
visit to The Hague. By NATO standards, a month between indictment and arrest is
a record time.

"Contrary to my predecessors, I've had no cooperation problems with France,"
Mrs. Del Ponte bluntly told Le Monde last week.

Insiders say it does not hurt either that the new tribunal president is French.
Judge Claude Jorda took over from Gabrielle Kirk McDonald, an American, last
fall.

Of course, the tribunal still faces obstacles. With 39 detainees in custody at
special cells near The Hague, it now faces a bottleneck. The new government in
Croatia, unlike that of the late President Franjo Tudjman, is eager to have
indicted Croats face their day in court. It has already handed over a major war
crimes suspect, Mladen Naletilic, after years of stalling by Mr. Tudjman.

There was some talk here last week about whether Mr. Krajisnik's arrest has sent
Dr. Karadzic, the tribunal's most wanted political leader, across the border
into Serbia, beyond the reach of NATO.

He is known not to be welcome in the circles of the Yugoslav president, Slobodan
Milosevic, his onetime patron. But the capture of Mr. Krajisnik, a close ally,
has left Dr. Karadzic more isolated. He is said to move from place to place,
accompanied by bodyguards, in the French sector of Bosnia.

Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb wartime military commander, who personally
oversaw the capture of Srebrenica and like Dr. Karadzic has been indicted twice
by the tribunal on charges of genocide, has long been in Belgrade. Twelve days
ago he even appeared there at a match between the Yugoslav and Chinese soccer
teams.

Some observers of the tribunal fear that the arrest of Mr. Krajisnik may have to
be a surrogate for General Mladic and Dr. Karadzic, whose capture, if attempted,
is likely to be far riskier.

Graham Blewitt, the tribunal's deputy prosecutor, said he was optimistic. "We
see this new arrest as the precursor of the arrest of Karadzic," he said in an
interview. "We want to believe that the French are going to comply with their
promise, which is to detain the people who have been indicted in Bosnia."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(89%); EUROPE (79%); CROATIA (79%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  UNITED NATIONS
(84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  UNITED NATIONS

 (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA; SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(96%); NETHERLANDS (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); EUROPE (79%); CROATIA
(79%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; SEX CRIMES
WAR CRIMES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(89%); TESTIMONY (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); WITNESSES (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); WOMEN (77%); PRIME MINISTERS
(74%); WORLD WAR II (73%); RANKINGS (73%); LOBBYING (72%); ARMED FORCES (71%);
RELIGION (68%);

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KRAJISNIK, MOMCILO; ARBOUR, LOUISE  MOMCILO KRAJISNIK
(56%);

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Momcilo Krajisnik, right, making his first public appearance at
the war crimes tribunal in The Hague on Friday. He pleaded not guilty.
(Associated Press)(pg. A6)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             373 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 10, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
The Search for Truth in Old Burial Grounds

BYLINE: By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 832 words


In December 1981, the Atlacatl Battalion of the army of El Salvador arrived in
El Mozote, a hamlet in the war zone of Morazan. Most of the local men, terrified
of being labeled guerrillas, fled to the mountains as the soldiers approached.
But the women, children and elderly remained. Over the next three days, soldiers
killed around 800 of them in the largest massacre of the war.

Eleven years later, El Mozote was invaded again. Four young Argentines and a
dozen or so Salvadorans, this time armed with shovels and brushes, entered the
hamlet and began to dig. The Argentine Forensic Anthropology Team found the
skeletons of at least 143 people in El Mozote, 131 of them children under 12.
But because an amnesty law passed in 1993 is interpreted as barring even the
investigation of wartime crimes, the group was unable to get permission to look
at graves in the surrounding hamlets -- until last week. Nineteen years after
the massacre, families in the villages of La Joya and Jocote Amarillo will soon
receive the bones of their loved ones.

The field of forensic anthropology -- the study of skeletal remains for legal
purposes -- is not new. But only since 1984 has it been used as a human rights
tool. Since then, small groups of people have been finding and digging up
skeletons in mass graves and potters' fields around the world, trying to figure
out who lies buried and how they died. Exhumations have taken place in Iraqi
Kurdistan, Zimbabwe, Bosnia, Ethiopia, South Africa, Kosovo, East Timor and
various nations in Latin America, among other places. Investigators for the war
crimes tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda are performing hundreds of
them.

The exhumations have brought comfort to families and communities. In a few
cases, they have provided crucial evidence at trials or proof of atrocities that
galvanized a previously indifferent public. A victim's testimony is easily
dismissed by those who wish not to believe it. "But it's hard to argue with a
skull that has a gunshot wound to the back of the head," says Clyde Snow, the
Oklahoma forensic anthropologist who is the father of the movement.

In 1984, Argentina had just returned to democratic rule after seven years of a
murderous dictatorship. A truth commission was trying to write the full story of
that era's crimes. Its members were learning a lot from the survivors, but very
little from the dead. Eric Stover, an official at the American Association for
the Advancement of Science in Washington, assembled a team of forensic experts.
It included Mr. Snow, who had examined skeletons as part of criminal
investigations all over the United States.

The visiting Americans found few trained Argentines with whom they could work --
the medical examiner's office was implicated in the killings and torture, and
other experts either wanted high salaries or, quite understandably, were afraid.
But a group of anthropology students heard about the mission and showed up at
Mr. Snow's hotel to volunteer. A few days later, using string, spoons and
screens from their parents' houses, they performed their first exhumation. The
group eventually found more than 500 skeletons, and Mr. Snow presented a
dramatic slide show as testimony in the 1985 trial of nine top junta members.

Of the original Argentine students, 3 are still members of the 11-person team.
The group, which is financed by foundations and European governments, has worked
or helped to train local investigators in more than 20 countries.

The exhumation in the Guatemalan village of Rio Negro shows the impact such work
can have. Digging began in 1993, at the request of courageous local citizens'
groups. A team of Guatemalan students trained largely by Mr. Snow found the
skeletons of at least 143 people, including 44 women and 99 children.  In April
1994, the remains were returned to the survivors of Rio Negro for a formal
reburial with full Catholic and Mayan ritual.

The case was the first massacre investigation that received extensive coverage
in the Guatemalan press. The exhumation helped achieve the only convictions that
have resulted from the scorched-earth massacres of the early 1980's -- although
of low-level triggermen. The Rio Negro publicity helped insure there would be a
truth commission, which described the armed forces' slaughter of Mayan Indians
as "genocide."

Today, Guatemalan forensic investigators, like the Argentines, participate in
digs around the world. Missing, however, is a concentrated effort to train
investigators in countries with histories of mass murder. As advances in the use
of DNA allow easier identification of remains and as trials for human rights
abuses become more widespread, exhumations will be even more valuable for
exposing -- and thus helping to deter -- mass killings. Murderers can count on
eliminating or intimidating witnesses. Even years later, however, forensic
anthropology can make eloquent and effective testimony from the silence of the
dead.




http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (52%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ARGENTINA (93%); EL SALVADOR (92%); TIMOR-LESTE
(79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); LATIN AMERICA (58%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (52%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); ARGENTINA (93%); EL SALVADOR (92%); TIMOR-LESTE

 (79%); ETHIOPIA (79%); KOSOVO (79%); RWANDA (79%); IRAQ (79%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%); ZIMBABWE (79%); LATIN AMERICA (58%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; FORENSIC MEDICINE  WAR & CONFLICT (91%);
FORENSICS (90%); ARMIES (90%); ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); EVIDENCE
(89%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); ARMED FORCES (78%); CORONERS
COURTS & OFFICES (76%); WITNESSES (73%); CEMETERIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES
(72%); SHOOTINGS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); TORTURE (70%); AMNESTY (69%); HEAD
INJURIES (69%); TESTIMONY (67%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (60%); LEGISLATION (54%);

 GUNSHOT WOUNDS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: ROSENBERG, TINA  CLYDE SNOW (79%);

LOAD-DATE: April 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             375 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Why Not Speak Out?

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: BOSTON


When the Serbs captured three U.S. soldiers during the Kosovo war a year ago,
President Clinton warned President Milosevic of Yugoslavia: "Make no mistake --
America takes care of its own."

It is a fine sentiment. But the president has signally failed to apply it in a
case that should nag at his and the country's conscience. It is the case of Lori
Berenson.

Ms. Berenson, a 30-year-old American, is being held in an isolation cell in Peru
-- a cell without light, heat or running water. "She has been in prison four
years, four months, ten days today," her father, Mark Berenson, said when I met
her parents Monday.

The Peruvian government of Alberto Fujimori says that Ms. Berenson helped the
Tupac Amaru terrorist movement: a charge that she firmly denies. She was
convicted of "treason" -- against a country of which she is not a citizen --
after what no civilized society would regard as a trial.

Military officers wearing ski masks to conceal their identities conducted the
proceeding. Ms. Berenson was not allowed to call witnesses or testify herself.
She was sentenced to life in prison without parole.

"I have never participated in the planning of a violent act . . .," she wrote to
human rights groups. "I do not believe in violence, and it would not be possible
for me to participate in violence."

What she does believe -- a left-wing view of poverty and misery in Peruvian
society -- she does not conceal. Indeed, her outspoken statement of those views
played into the hands of President Fujimori.

When she was arrested, in November 1995, she was held without access to the
outside world for 39 days, the last 11 in a cell with a naked, desperately ill
woman who was given no medical care. Suddenly Ms. Berenson was brought out, put
in front of television cameras and told to talk.

Speaking in angry tones, in Spanish, she said: "Nobody can deny that in Peru
there is much injustice. . . . If it is a crime to worry about the sub-human
conditions in which the majority of this population lives, then I will accept my
punishment."

Mr. Fujimori used the video clip to paint Ms. Berenson as a terrorist -- and an
interfering American. One of his popular achievements as president has been the
crushing of terrorist movements.

I cannot know for sure whether Ms. Berenson conspired with the Tupac Amaru or,
as she says, simply interviewed some members -- names unknown to her -- as a
freelance journalist. What is beyond doubt is that her trial lacked any
semblance of due process of law. Amnesty International called it a "parody of
justice." Javier Valle Riestra, a noted constitutional lawyer, was Peru's prime
minister until he condemned the Berenson trial methods and said she should be
pardoned. He did not last long in the Fujimori government after that.

The flagrantly illegitimate trial makes President Clinton's passive posture on
the case puzzling. When 180 members of the House urged him last year to secure
Ms. Berenson's release by carrying out a statute that calls for U.S. action on
behalf of Americans held improperly abroad, he replied only that he was seeking
a "just and expeditious solution." He has not condemned the lack of due process
at the trial.

Senator John McCain, who knows about unjust imprisonment firsthand, signed a
copy of his book for Ms. Berenson: "To Lori, Best Wishes & Admiration. God
Bless." But he has not spoken out against the nature of her trial.

The election in Peru this week demonstrated, in two ways, why the Berenson case
demands U.S. action. Mr. Fujimori used smears, dirty tricks and ballot-rigging.
But when other Latin countries and the U.S. put on real pressure, he held off
from giving himself a first-round victory. Pressure works.

"The lack of law, the innuendoes in the election were there in Lori's case all
along," her mother, Rhoda Berenson, said to me.

Her father was a professor of statistics at Baruch College in New York for 30
years, her mother a professor of physics at Nassau Community College for 25.
Both have given up their jobs, their normal lives and their savings to campaign
for Lori Berenson's freedom. Every two weeks or so, one of them flies 8,000
miles to speak with Lori for an hour through a screen.

"I totally believe my daughter," Mr. Berenson said. "One day, God willing,
you'll see for yourself."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO
(92%); SERBIA (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU;   PERU (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
KOSOVO (92%); SERBIA (92%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   US PRESIDENTS (90%); PRISONS (90%);

 EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TERRORISM (88%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); WITNESSES (77%);
SENTENCING (75%); TREASON (75%); LITIGATION (75%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (75%);
JAIL SENTENCING (75%); CONSPIRACY (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%);
TESTIMONY (72%); DUE PROCESS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); PRIME
MINISTERS (69%); ARRESTS (68%); JOURNALISM (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); WRITERS
(65%); FREELANCE EMPLOYMENT (60%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: LEWIS, ANTHONY; BERENSON, LORI; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO (PRES)  BILL CLINTON
(73%);

LOAD-DATE: April 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             378 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

For Colombia, a Fork in the Road

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 161 words



To the Editor:

I agree with Thomas L. Friedman (column, April 11) that many Colombians exhibit
awe-inspiring courage in the face of life-threatening adversity. But I disagree
with his bottom line. If Congress passes President Clinton's billion-dollar
Colombia aid package, we will not be giving the Colombian majority the aid it
needs to fight the drug lords but rather escalating the country's human rights
and humanitarian crisis.

"Plan Colombia" does not effectively address the following issues: that roughly
300,000 people were internally displaced by violence in 1999, that 3,000
politically motivated killings occurred in the same year, and that paramilitary
groups continue their close relationship with the Colombian Army.

We will not save Colombia with Mr. Clinton's thinly veiled counterinsurgency
effort.

PAUL PAZY MINO
Oakland, Calif., April 12, 2000

The writer is Colombia country specialist at Amnesty International U.S.A.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (95%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (75%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (56%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (95%); UNITED STATES (92%);   CALIFORNIA, USA
(75%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%); OAKLAND, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; FOREIGN AID;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (87%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE
(87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); SUBSTANCE
ABUSE (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (70%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (68%);

PERSON: PAZ Y MINO, PAUL; FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L  THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (88%);

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             379 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Seeking Stronger Ties, Putin Goes to London

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 231 words

DATELINE: LONDON, April 16


President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia arrived in Britain today for his first
visit to the West since he won the presidential election last month.

Mr. Putin was expected to use the trip to try to strengthen his nation's ties
with Europe and to improve his international image, tarnished by strong Western
criticism of the continuing Russian offensive against separatist rebels in the
southern Russian republic of Chechnya.

During his 24-hour stay in London, he is to meet on Monday with Prime Minister
Tony Blair, British business leaders and Queen Elizabeth.

Groups have announced that they plan to hold protests against what they say are
widescale human rights violations by Russian forces in Chechnya.

In an Internet broadcast on Friday, Mr. Blair said there was "real concern" over
what is happening in Chechnya, which he would repeat "clearly and frankly" to
Mr. Putin.

But Mr. Blair also says he wants to use the visit to build a better working
relationship with Russia on behalf of Britain and the 15-nation European Union.

"The E.U. is Russia's largest trading partner, and we are increasingly
interdependent," said Alastair Campbell, Mr. Blair's spokesman. "It is on our
interest that we cooperate more on issues such as drugs, crime, terrorism,
weapons of destruction and the Balkans."

Mr. Putin has shown a strong interest in cultivating ties with Britain.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (93%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; GREAT BRITAIN; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(96%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); EUROPE (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);
   LONDON, ENGLAND (93%);

SUBJECT: GREAT BRITAIN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-RUSSIA; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); ELECTIONS

 (79%); POLITICS (79%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); BRITISH PRIME
MINISTERS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (71%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (69%); TERRORISM (65%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS
(65%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (79%);

PERSON: PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRES); BLAIR, TONY (PRIME MIN)  VLADIMIR PUTIN (93%);

 TONY BLAIR (90%); ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (58%);

LOAD-DATE: April 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             380 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Inaction on China: Fault U.N., Not U.S.

SECTION: Section A;  Page 28;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 121 words



To the Editor:

In "U.N. Rights Group Foils U.S. Effort to Condemn China" (front page, April
19), you describe the United Nations' decision not to act on an
American-sponsored resolution to criticize Chinese human rights abuses as "an
embarrassing defeat" for the Clinton administration.

It is the United Nations, not the Clinton administration, that deserves the
brunt of any embarrassment stemming from the resolution's failure.

The international community for too long has turned a blind eye to China's
authoritarian rule and mistreatment of the Chinese people. The State
Department's position on this issue may be unpopular, but at least it is
principled.

MICHAEL ULRICH
Austin, Tex., April 19, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (93%);

STATE: TEXAS, USA (79%);

CITY: AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (93%);   TEXAS, USA (79%);
AUSTIN, TX, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: ULRICH, MICHAEL  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (91%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
(91%);

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             385 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 25, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Nike's Chief Cancels a Gift Over Monitor Of Sweatshops

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 6; National Desk

LENGTH: 709 words


The chairman of Nike, Phil Knight, will not make a planned $30 million
contribution to help his alma mater, the University of Oregon, renovate its
athletic stadium because the university joined a factory monitoring group other
than the one he supports, a senior Nike official said yesterday.

Mr. Knight, a billionaire who heads the world's largest footwear company, has
given about $30 million to the university over the last decade, but company
officials said he was disturbed that the university joined the Workers Rights
Consortium, a student-backed monitoring group.

Nike, which has faced criticism over working conditions in its overseas
factories, has often faulted the consortium for being unfriendly to apparel and
footwear manufacturers. Nike is an enthusiastic member of another monitoring
group, the Fair Labor Association, a White House-backed organization that,
unlike the Workers Rights Consortium, has apparel companies on its board.

In a statement, Nike said: "The University of Oregon, despite its unique
relationship with Nike and Phil, is free to align itself with the Workers Rights
Consortium. However, it does not mean that we are required to support those
efforts with which we have fundamental disagreements."

The University of Oregon, based in Eugene, has been developing plans to renovate
and expand Autzen Stadium, a project that is expected to cost $80 million.
University officials said they still hoped to talk with Mr. Knight to see
whether he might reconsider his decision.

Randy Newnham, a university senior and a coordinator of the Survival Center,
which supports social justice and human rights, criticized Mr. Knight's
decision.

"It's kind of amusing, considering that he's upset that we joined some
labor-monitoring body," Mr. Newnham said. "He keeps claiming that his company is
socially responsible and they don't use sweatshop labor. If that's the case, why
is he so upset that we joined this monitoring group? It kind of implies that
something isn't quite up to par."

Over the last six months, student groups at dozens of campuses have held sit-ins
and demonstrations to pressure their universities to join the Workers Rights
Consortium, instead of the Fair Labor Association. The consortium, set up by
students with the backing of several labor unions, now has 45 universities as
members. It monitors overseas factories that make hats, T-shirts and other
apparel that are made under license and carry a university's logo.

The students assert that the Fair Labor Association is dominated by corporations
and will not be vigorous in its monitoring. Its members include several consumer
groups, human rights groups and 130 colleges.

Nike officials criticize the consortium's makeup and its requirement for
surprise monitoring visits.

"We object to the Workers Rights Consortium because it does not provide a seat
on the table for companies," said Vada Manager, a Nike spokesman. "Another issue
is it has a 'gotcha' monitoring system, which in our minds is not a serious way
to achieve the common goal that we all want to achieve, which is to eradicate
sweatshop conditions."

To pressure Nike, United Students Against Sweatshops, the umbrella group backing
the consortium, the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees and
other groups issued a report yesterday that criticized Nike for using
sweatshops. The report faults Nike for doing much of its production in China,
where independent unions are prohibited and where, the report said, workers are
paid at most $1.50 for a pair of shoes that sells for $100.

Nike officials assert that the company has made great strides in improving its
factories, that they do more monitoring than most companies and that their
factories usually pay more than other factories in the regions where they are
situated.

Last month, Nike said it was ending its agreement to supply Brown University's
hockey teams after Brown joined the consortium. Brown officials said Nike's move
resulted from miscommunication.

Nicholas Reville, a Brown junior active in United Students Against Sweatshops,
said Nike and Mr. Knight moved against Brown and the University of Oregon, to
warn other universities against join the Workers Rights Consortium.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (97%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (97%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS'
& INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (97%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT
& SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (97%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (97%);
SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (97%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (97%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (97%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: OREGON, USA (94%);

CITY: EUGENE, OR, USA (79%);

COMPANY: NIKE INC; UNIVERSITY OF OREGON; WORKERS RIGHTS CONSORTIUM  NIKE INC
(97%);   UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (94%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (94%);

ORGANIZATION: NIKE INC; UNIVERSITY OF OREGON; WORKERS RIGHTS CONSORTIUM
UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (94%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   OREGON, USA (94%);   EUGENE, OR, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: APPAREL; PHILANTHROPY; COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES; SWEATSHOPS; LABOR;
SHOES AND BOOTS  BUILDING RENOVATION (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); FOOTWEAR (90%);
GARMENT WORKERS (90%); FOOTWEAR MFG (90%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (90%); STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (89%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (89%); APPAREL MFG (89%); UNIVERSITY
ADMINISTRATION (78%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (78%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES

 (78%); CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (74%); PHILANTHROPY (73%); WEALTHY
PEOPLE (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%); LABOR UNIONS (70%); CIVIC &
SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (69%);   CONSUMER WATCHDOGS (70%);   MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; KNIGHT, PHIL  PHILIP H 'PHIL' KNIGHT  (93%);
PHILIP KNIGHT (94%);

LOAD-DATE: April 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phil Knight

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             386 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 708 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-12

South Asia Called Major Terrorism Hub
The State Department has for the first time identified South Asia as a major hub
of international terrorism, accusing Pakistan, a traditional American ally, and
especially Afghanistan of providing support to international terrorist groups.
   1


Cambodia Talks on Tribunal
Senator John Kerry said that Cambodia and the United Nations had reached a
compromise that would allow the creation of an international court to try former
leaders of the Khmer Rouge.   12

China Evades Rights Scolding
In debate at the annual session of the main United Nations human rights forum,
which ended on Friday, China emerged free of condemnation of its human rights
record while Russia and others were chastised.   12

Russia and Japan Leaders Meet
President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori of Japan,
in their first meeting as new leaders, pledged to meet often, and to try to
conclude a long-sought peace treaty by the end of the year.   4

U.N. Look at Kosovo Progress
The eight-member delegation from the United Nations Security Council wound up
its visit to Kosovo somewhat muted by the complexities on the ground.   4

Malaysian's Conviction Upheld
A Malaysian court upheld the 1999 corruption conviction of former Finance
Minister Anwar Ibrahim and his six-year jail term. Mr. Anwar's lawyers said he
would file an appeal. But barring a reversal, the decision means Mr. Anwar will
remain in jail until at least 2003 and be barred from public office until 2008.
   (Reuters)

NATIONAL   14-33

Gore to Offer Harsh View Of Bush on Foreign Policy
Vice President Al Gore plans to say in a speech that Gov. George W. Bush is
stuck in a cold war time warp and has serious gaps in his experience, in one of
his harshest assessments to date of his Republican rival.   1

Donald L. Evans, the new appointed campaign manager for Governor Bush, is an old
friend who has been present at pivotal junctures in the candidate's life.   28

Sharply contradictory approaches on how to use the budget deficit are perhaps
the biggest differences between Vice President Gore and Governor Bush.   30

Worries on Microsoft
Many consumers are worried about possible confusion as federal regulators
propose splitting the Microsoft Corporation in two.   32

Women and Medical Research
Medical researchers who receive federal money often flout a law that requires
them to analyze the effects of new drugs and treatments on women, studies have
found.   16

Nuclear Procedures Faulted
A report by a former Energy Department adviser is critical of the agency's
procedures, especially a lack of radiation monitors on trucks that carry nuclear
weapons.   21

National Gay March
Throngs of gays and lesbians and their supporters will march on Washington to
demand public legitimacy and to mobilize as a voting bloc.   24

Consumer Privacy
The Clinton administration is preparing legislation limiting how banks, insurers
and other companies share consumer information.   17

NEW YORK/REGION   35-42

Giuliani's Candor on Cancer Part of Trend Toward Openness
Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani's swift disclosure of his prostate cancer contrasts
with how little public figures in earlier eras revealed about theirailments.
Savvy public figures and political candidates now reveal all before the rumor
mill, fed by an aggressive press, does it for them.   35

Squabbling in Louima Civil Suit
The police officers named as defendants in a civil suit by Abner Louima are
fighting with their union over whether it will pay all of their lawyers' fees.
   37

Change in Taxi Rules Sought
The head of the livery-cab drivers' association repeated his pleas to drivers to
install bullet-proof partitions, but then called for allowing such cabs to pick
up passengers on the street.   37

OBITUARIES   43-44

Jack Best
One of the last survivors of an audacious group of prisoners who constructed a
glider under the noses of their Nazi captors in World War II in order to fly to
freedom, he was 87.   43

Chess   43

Weather   45

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: MSFT (NASDAQ) (81%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (81%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE
(81%);

COUNTRY: ASIA (94%); CAMBODIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES
(93%); KOSOVO (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); MALAYSIA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); JAPAN
(92%); SOUTHERN ASIA (90%);

COMPANY: MICROSOFT CORP (81%);   UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL  (55%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ASIA (94%); CAMBODIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES
(93%); KOSOVO (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); MALAYSIA (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); JAPAN
(92%); SOUTHERN ASIA (90%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TERRORISM (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (89%); MEDICAL RESEARCH (86%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(79%); GOVERNMENT BUDGETS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); PUBLIC FINANCE
(78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); RADIATION DETECTORS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (78%); CORRUPTION (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS
(77%); COLD WAR (77%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); JAIL SENTENCING (76%); LEGISLATION (75%); US
PRESIDENTS (74%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); FOREIGN POLICY (73%); PUBLIC
FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (73%); GOVERNORS (73%); ENERGY DEPARTMENTS (73%);
BANKING & FINANCE AGENCIES (73%); MARKET RESEARCH FIRMS (73%); LAWYERS (72%);
PEACE PROCESS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); APPOINTMENTS (70%); BANKING &
FINANCE (70%); BUDGETS (65%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (64%); INSURANCE (60%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%); MILITARY WEAPONS (50%); APPEALS (50%); BUDGET
DEFICITS (50%);   CORRECTIONS (76%);

PERSON: JOHN KERRY (79%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%); AL GORE (76%); VLADIMIR PUTIN
(58%);

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             387 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 2, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1352 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-16

TV Confession in Iran At Jew's Espionage Trial
The first of 13 Jewish men charged with spying went on trial in Shiraz, and
Iranian television showed him making an admission that he had spied for Israel.
The public confession came after the government refused to allow family members,
human rights groups or the public to witness the opening of the trial.   A1


Few Takers on China Visit
Only two congressmen undecided on whether to vote to give China permanent normal
trade relations accepted an administration invitation to let a Cabinet officer
lead them on a trip to China to gauge trade and human rights conditions.   A1

European Opposes U.S. Plan
The foreign policy chief for the European Union, Javier Solana, said European
officials were concerned about possible damage that the Clinton administration's
plan for a missile defense system could do to Europe's security ties with the
United States.   A16

May Day Mass With the Pope
Pope John Paul II, pre-empting the trade unions' traditional hold on May 1,
presided over a workers' rally that combined a solemn Catholic Mass with a
raucous rock concert dedicated to third world debt relief. But the day was less
about the Vatican or pop music than about the changes it showed taking place in
Italy.   A6

Dispute on Red Cross Symbols
Concern is spreading among international relief organizations that the American
Red Cross may be on the verge of withdrawing from the International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies because the umbrella organization has
not agreed to admit an Israeli contingent under a Star of David flag.   A8

Philippines Hostages Examined
A doctor made the first visit to a group of 21 hostages held by armed rebels of
the Islamic separatist group Abu Sayyaf. The hostages were suffering from hunger
and diarrhea and some pleaded for water, as 50 to 70 rebels guarded the area. On
a nearby island, another group of Abu Sayyaf rebels escaped with their 27
hostages when government troops overran their mountain base over the weekend,
the military said.   A5

Turkey Leader Lacks Votes
Parliament failed for a second time to muster the two-thirds vote necessary to
elect Ahmet Necdet Sezer, the reformist candidate for president favored by the
leaders of all five parties, although Mr. Sezer finished far ahead of other
candidates, with 314 votes. The next ballot is set for Friday; in that round,
just a simple majority of 276 will be necessary.   A12

World Briefing   A10

SPORTS   D1-8

Devils Lead Series, 2-1
The Devils beat the Toronto Maple Leafs, 5-1, in Game 3 of their
five-of-seven-game playoff series.   D1

NATIONAL   A18-25

Some Big Corporations Are Forsaking Soft Money
Soft-money donations are on a pace to set a record, even though many big
corporations have stopped making them because executives are disillusioned with
the process and feel there are better ways to spend their companies' money and
still stay politically involved. But other corporate interests, senior
executives and unions are increasing their unrestricted gifts to political
parties.   A1

McCain-Gore Meeting
Senator John McCain and Vice President Al Gore met for 20 minutes on Sunday. Mr.
Gore said they discussed changing campaign financing, Mr. McCain's signature
issue and one that Mr. Gore is also advancing. Mr. McCain is to meet with Gov.
George W. Bush next week.   A24

Document Request Rebuffed
The White House said it would invoke executive privilege and lawyer-client
privilege, as it told the House Government Reform Committee that it would not
surrender some documents subpoenaed in an inquiry about missing e-mail messages.
The action prompted an angry reply by the committee's chairman, Dan Burton.
A23

Challenging Asylum Case
Elian Gonzalez was pressured by "distant" relatives to sign a political asylum
claim that he neither wanted nor understood, a lawyer for his father said in
federal court papers.   A22

Ruling on Retroactive Law
The Supreme Court overturned a Texas man's sex abuse conviction on the ground
that a change in state law had made it easier for the prosecution to prove its
case than at the time the crime was committed.   A24

Judge Mediates Settlement
Lawyers said a tentative settlement had been reached in a 16-year-old case
involving accusations that Baltimore public schools had woefully neglected
physically and mentally disabled students. The settlement was reached through
the mediation of a federal judge, a procedure thought to have been used only
once before, and then unsuccessfully, in the Microsoft antitrust case.   A18

Retiring 6.2% of National Debt
The government said it would pay off $216 billion of the $3.5 trillion national
debt by Sept. 30, the end of the fiscal year. In February, the projection was
$167 billion. The Treasury secretary said the bigger payment resulted from the
booming economy and a growth in tax revenue.   A23


NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

State Challenges U.S. Law In Bid for Cleaner Air
The Legislature gave final passage to a bill intended to reduce air pollution
drifting into New York from coal-burning power plants in the Midwest and South.
The measure would stop New York companies from keeping money they make by
selling pollution credits, earned by cleaning their own smokestacks, to major
polluters elsewhere. The action is the first by a state that directly challenges
a major provision of the Federal Clean Air Act of 1990.   A1

Postponing 'Monologues' Role
Donna Hanover will not take the lead in "The Vagina Monologues" on May 30
because of "family circumstances." Her husband, Mayor Giuliani, has disclosed he
has prostate cancer.   B1

Catskills Casino Plan
Park Place Entertainment signed an option to buy Kutsher's Country Club, the
oldest resort in the Catskills, to create an entertainment and gambling complex
that would be owned by the St. Regis Mohawks.   B1

OBITUARIES   C26-27

Pham Van Dong
An early revolutionary who became premier of North Vietnam after independence
from France in 1954 and head of the government of all Vietnam from 1976 to 1987,
he was 94.   C27

David Mahoney
Sometimes described as the foremost lay advocate of research into the brain, he
was 76.   C26

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Roots of the Human Family Tree
Geneticists tracing the DNA patterns found in people throughout the world have
identified lineages descended from 10 sons of a genetic Adam and 18 daughters of
Eve.   F1

Health & Fitness   F6

BUSINESS DAY   C1-26

Time Warner-ABC Dispute
Time Warner Cable removed ABC television stations from cable systems it runs in
seven cities serving 3.5 million homes, in a dispute with ABC's parent, Walt
Disney, over fees for Disney cable channels.   A1

Actors in Commercials Strike
The Screen Actors Guild and the American Federation of Television and Radio
Artists told their members not to work on television and radio commercials until
an agreement was reached with advertisers.   C2

Microsoft on Counterattack
Microsoft plans to ask the judge in its antitrust case for broad access to
government records and for permission to summon witnesses, in arguing against
the government's proposal to break up the company.   C1

New Long-Distance Plan
Bell Atlantic is expected to introduce a calling plan today offering
long-distance interstate calls for 8 cents a minute at any time, without monthly
fees or minimum charges.   C1

A European Exchange Merger
The London and Frankfurt stock exchanges are expected to announce a merger
tomorrow.   C1

Business Digest   C1

FASHION   B11

ARTS   E1-10

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: The blackout battle; peace overtures in Colombia; Dudley Clendinen
on the gay march in Washington.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E4
TV Listings   E10
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D7


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); EUROPE (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); CANADA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); HOLY SEE (76%);

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (79%);

CITY: TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%); SHIRAZ, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (73%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN RED CROSS  (72%); AMERICAN RED CROSS (72%); EUROPEAN UNION
(56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN RED CROSS  (72%); AMERICAN RED CROSS (72%); EUROPEAN
UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (94%); EUROPE (93%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); CANADA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); HOLY SEE (76%);   ONTARIO, CANADA (79%);   TORONTO, ON, CANADA (79%);
SHIRAZ, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (73%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); VOTERS & VOTING
(89%); RELIGION (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (88%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); PUBLIC DEBT (79%); WITNESSES (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); TOURNAMENTS (75%); MOST FAVORED NATION
STATUS (75%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (74%); US
PRESIDENTS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (71%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); FOREIGN
POLICY (69%); LABOR UNIONS (69%); DEFENSE ELECTRONICS (68%); POP & ROCK (66%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (65%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (64%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS
(62%); SPORTS & RECREATION (62%); SPORTS (62%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (62%);
ARMED FORCES (61%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (53%); MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEMS (53%);
EXTERNAL DEBT REDUCTION (51%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%);

PERSON: JAVIER SOLANA (53%); AHMET NECDET SEZER (50%);

LOAD-DATE: May 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             389 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

When Peace Is Worse Than War

BYLINE: By William Reno;  William Reno, who teaches political science at
Northwestern, is the author of "Warlord Politics and African States."

SECTION: Section A; Page 31; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 573 words

DATELINE: EVANSTON, Ill.


Sometimes it is better to wage war than to agree to an unstable and unworkable
peace, a proposition that the current crisis in Sierra Leone bears out.

A peace agreement signed in July 1999 was supposed to help rebuild Sierra Leone
by installing a coalition government, composed of the current president, Ahmad
Tejan Kabbah, and Foday Sankoh, the ruthless leader of the main rebel group.

Under the accord, Mr. Sankoh became a vice president and commissioner of diamond
resources, the country's main source of income. Three of his lieutenants became
ministers of government. All were offered a blanket amnesty for past crimes. In
exchange, United Nations peacekeepers were to take the weapons of all
combatants. Instead, the rebels have captured and disarmed 500 peacekeepers, and
the country is in chaos once again.

This agreement failed for several related reasons. It mistakenly assumed that
the rebels were interested in peace, let alone had an interest in real
governing. It assumed that there was a civil war and treated Mr. Sankoh as a
legitimate champion of the rural poor, whose interests he claimed to represent.
In reality, Mr. Sankoh is not rebelling in any political sense. He has been
interested only in taking advantage of a corrupt state that had collapsed.

So, from the rebels' point of view, why have peace when it is the absence of law
and order that enables one to loot? Why let peacekeeping troops enter the
country's diamond mining area if one is profiting from the sale of these riches
on the black market?

In fact, the rebels never had any intention of honoring the peace accord; they
were only interested in waging war and looting the country.  The United Nations,
so reflexively attached to the mantra of peace at any price, sent peacekeeping
troops when there was no peace to keep. The United Nations and the State
Department, which helped negotiate the peace accord, should have known better.
As recently as March 1999, the United Nations Security Council had threatened to
prosecute Mr. Sankoh for war crimes. Earlier, a State Department report on
Sierra Leone had noted the discovery of civilian mass graves in areas where the
rebels had attacked.

Why would the United Nations and the United States agree to a power-sharing
agreement with Mr. Sankoh, whose forces have killed, raped and maimed tens of
thousands of men, women and even children?

The answer can be found in President Clinton's statement during his April 1999
visit to Rwanda, when he lamented the lack of United States action to stop the
genocide there. After this speech, the Clinton administration wanted to show
that it cared about human rights in Africa. Engineering a peace accord in Sierra
Leone, however slapdash, sent the desired message.

In the last few days, Nigeria has agreed to send its own forces back to Sierra
Leone, provided the West pays their costs. The West should jump at this, not
only because these soldiers are likely to be better equipped and trained than
the United Nations forces, but because they can fight back.

Unconstrained by the rules of peacekeeping, the Nigerians can wage war against
the rebels. And Nigeria, unlike the West, has national interests at stake.
Trouble anywhere in West Africa is a threat to its stability.

The peace agreement in Sierra Leone was quick and cheap, but doomed. Let us hope
that the West now recognizes this -- and doesn't opt for a second try at an
accord.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%);
NIGERIA (79%);

STATE: ILLINOIS, USA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (97%); UNITED STATES (93%); RWANDA
(79%); AFRICA (79%); NIGERIA (79%);   ILLINOIS, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; ETHICS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  PEACEKEEPING (90%);
CIVIL WAR (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (77%);

 POLITICS (77%); CORRUPTION (75%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); AMNESTY

 (71%); ETHICS (71%); DIAMOND MINING (71%); ARMED FORCES (69%); UNOFFICIAL
ECONOMY (66%); MINES & MINING (50%);

PERSON: RENO, WILLIAM; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); SANKOH, FODAY  BILL CLINTON (73%);

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Scott Menchin)

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             392 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 20, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Does China Deserve Trade Status?

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words



To the Editor:

William Safire (column, May 18) says President Nixon told him that "we may have
created a Frankenstein" in United States dealings with China. In "Beyond Peace,"
finished shortly before his death, Nixon wrote that "the giant is awake and is
beginning to move the world," making clear that he saw China's internal
dynamics, rather than United States policy, as the force behind the country's
emergence as a major power.

Nixon also argued that "economic freedom inevitably leads to political freedom.
. . . It will happen in China, but only if economic freedom is not suppressed by
frightened political dictators or sabotaged by shortsighted U.S. policies
cutting back on trade with China because of its human rights abuses."

JOHN H. TAYLOR
DIMITRI K. SIMES
Washington, May 19, 2000

The writers are, respectively, executive director of the Richard Nixon Library &
Birthplace Foundation and president of the Nixon Center.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%);

COMPANY: RICHARD NIXON LIBRARY (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA; UNITED STATES;   CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%);

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; LAW AND LEGISLATION; FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US PRESIDENTS
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (88%); POLITICS (88%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(88%); WRITERS (88%); PUBLIC POLICY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
EXECUTIVES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (66%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (66%);

PERSON: SIMES, DIMITRI K; TAYLOR, JOHN H; NIXON, RICHARD MILHOUS (1913-94)
RICHARD NIXON (92%);

LOAD-DATE: May 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             393 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

ECONOMIC VIEW;
Lighting Up A Lesson In China Trade

BYLINE: By TOM REDBURN

SECTION: Section 3; Page 4; Column 5; Money and Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 795 words


WANDERING through a flea market in Shanghai earlier this year with Craig Smith,
The Times's new correspondent there, I stopped at a stall that was selling cheap
cigarette lighters with pictures of Mao Zedong pasted on them. Flick one open,
and it plays the tune of "The East Is Red." I don't smoke, but I couldn't resist
buying a handful.

Not far away, another merchant offered hundreds of hand-painted posters from the
days of the Cultural Revolution. I bought one dated 1976, showing a smiling Mao
leading a parade of workers and students into the promised land. We bargained a
bit before settling on a price of about $5.

Say what you will about capitalism, but you must admit it has a marvelous way of
turning even the most violent and earthshaking upheavals into safe, salable
kitsch.

And that, above all, is why it is worth continuing to encourage Beijing to move
along the path toward freer markets, private investment and open trade. Karl
Marx (remember him?) said it as well as anybody in, of all places, the Communist
Manifesto:

"The bourgeoisie, by the rapid improvement of all instruments of production, by
the immensely facilitated means of communication, draws all nations, even the
most barbarian, into civilization. The cheap prices of its commodities are the
heavy artillery with which it batters down all Chinese walls, with which it
forces the barbarians' intensely obstinate hatred of foreigners to capitulate."

What does this have to do with today's debate over China? Plenty.

The choice facing Congress this week over granting China what is called
"permanent normal trade relations" -- part of a deal to admit China to the World
Trade Organization -- turns on conflicting views of how to best induce change in
China's authoritarian regime.

On one side -- opposed to normalizing trade -- are those who argue that Congress
should vote every year on China's trade status, thus maintaining outside
pressure on Beijing to respond to complaints of human rights abuses. The annual
vote should not be given up, they say, because it is Washington's only stick for
persuading China to ease repression and to free dissidents. Treating China as a
normal trading partner, they say, will just entrench the current regime and
encourage its belligerence.

Opposing that view are those who believe that change inside China can exert
greater leverage for reform than any diplomatic pressure. Through broader trade
and contact with the outside world, the Chinese people will be exposed to the
full range of Western life, from the sublime to the ridiculous. In the end, the
temptation will prove irresistible. Treat China as a normal country, this side
argues, and it will eventually turn into one.

"Openness is a two-way street," Nicholas Lardy, a senior fellow at the Brookings
Institution, said last week in a telephone interview from Beijing. "Already
there are thousands of foreigners living in China and interacting on a daily
basis across a very broad spectrum. That will only grow as China joins the
W.T.O. At the same time, tens of thousands of the most promising Chinese have
gone to the West as students. They've come back -- often to very high positions
in government, banking and business -- changed for good."

I VISITED China for the first time this year. But even without an earlier point
of reference, it was clear that though the economy remains very basic, the
country has changed immensely in the last two decades.

As recently as the early 1980's, nearly everybody in Shanghai, the most
Westernized city in China, still wore the famous blue Mao suits. Only top
officials had cars; everyone else pedaled bicycles or rode buses. Lights were
dim. Public restaurants and private enterprises barely existed. Architecture
seemed frozen in a pre-World War II time warp. Today, everything is different:
jeans and khakis are ubiquitous; cars and taxis compete with bikes on crowded
streets; glass-sheathed skyscrapers abound; Shanghai throbs with activity day
and night.

"We tend to forget," Mr. Lardy said, "how much change has already occurred."

As private enterprise spreads and markets open to real competition from domestic
and foreign companies alike, tens of millions of Chinese are shedding their
dependence on the state. They are richer and freer. It's not democracy, but it
is the first step toward a genuinely pluralistic society.

And that is just the beginning.

"China now feels competitive heat across continents and oceans," Robert Wright
wrote in a recent issue of The New Republic. "It must face the same logic the
rest of the world faces. In the age of the Internet, even more than in the age
of industry and print, granting enough liberty for cutting-edge prosperity while
denying political liberty is a tall order."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); EAST CHINA (90%);

CITY: SHANGHAI, CHINA (91%); BEIJING, CHINA (88%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA; SHANGHAI (CHINA);   CHINA (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);   NORTH
CENTRAL CHINA (90%); EAST CHINA (90%);   SHANGHAI, CHINA (91%); BEIJING, CHINA
(88%);

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED
STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  MOST FAVORED NATION STATUS (87%); TRADE
DEVELOPMENT (87%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (86%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); GLOBALIZATION (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%);   RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (75%);   COMMODITIES PRICES (69%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(50%);

PERSON: REDBURN, TOM  CRAIG R SMITH (74%);

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             395 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1107 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

China Trade Bill Passes By Wide Margin in House
Lawmakers voted, 237 to 197, to give China permanent normal trading privileges.
A Republican majority that was larger than expected made good on President
Clinton's top remaining legislative priority; three out of four Republicans
voted in favor of the measure, while two out of three Democrats voted against
it. The vote virtually assures the end of the annual review of China's trade
status, a ritual for 20 years that Beijing considers humiliating but opponents
say maintains leverage over improving human rights.   A1

Pinochet Loses Immunity
A Chilean appeals court stripped the immunity of Gen. Augusto Pinochet, removing
an important obstacle to his possible trial. He faces charges of involvement in
the kidnapping, murder and torture of thousands during 17 years as dictator.
A1


Israeli Admonishes Neighbors
Prime Minister Ehud Barak told Lebanon and Syria that cross-border attacks on
Israel following its recent withdrawal from Lebanon would be viewed as "an act
of war."   A8

Eritrea Announces a Retreat
Eritrea said it was withdrawing from the land it seized two years ago during its
war with Ethiopia. The Foreign Ministry said Eritrean troops would withdraw to
positions held before the war started. The retreat follows Ethiopia's punishing
12-day offensive into Eritrea.   A5

Russia Warns Afghanistan
Moscow said it might bomb targets in Afghanistan if the Taliban-led government
there sheltered and aided rebels fighting in Chechnya and other former Soviet
republics.   A7

U.N.-Cambodia Compromise
The United Nations, after months of rancorous exchanges over who should
ultimately control war crimes trials for the Khmer Rouge, has conceded to
Cambodia the right to appoint one of two prosecutors. Human rights groups
criticized the deal.   A9

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A12-27

U.S. to Seek Reductions Of Arsenic in Tap Water
The Clinton administration intends to propose strict new regulations of arsenic
in tap water, reducing by 90 percent the public's maximum exposure to the
chemical, which causes cancer and is found at harmful levels in at least 1 out
of 10 of the nation's community water supplies.   A20

Gore on Social Security
Vice President Al Gore, explaining a shift in his position, said the stock
market was an attractive place for Americans to invest over the long run but not
for seeking a solution to Social Security's problems.   A27

Representative Charles B. Rangel of New York and Senator Robert G. Torricelli of
New Jersey say Mr. Gore's presidential campaign is adrift and may weaken the
Democratic drive to regain the House.   A26

A Democratic fund-raiser in Washington took in $26.5 million.   A26

Wiretapping Charges Dropped
A Maryland state prosecutor said a judge's ruling on evidence had made it
impossible to proceed with the case against Linda R. Tripp, left, who secretly
recorded conversations with Monica S. Lewinsky.   A12

Federal Building Security Test
Investigators for the General Accounting Office easily gained access to the
C.I.A., F.B.I. and other federal buildings using fake police badges and other
bogus identification.   A17

Giving to Charity Rises
Charitable giving grew faster than the economy last year, though not as fast as
the accumulation of wealth. Donations rose $16 billion, to $190.2 billion, 9.1
percent above 1998.   A12

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Gene Program Scaled Back
The University of Pennsylvania said that the scientist who ran a gene therapy
study that killed a patient would no longer conduct human experiments, and that
the institute he founded would be scaled back.   A20

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-15

Governor Signs Into Law 2 Environmental Initiatives
Governor Pataki signed legislation banning the use of a common gasoline
additive, M.T.B.E., that has polluted underground water supplies. He also signed
a bill to limit the amount of pollutants that drift into New York from
coal-burning power plants in the Midwest and South, causing acid rain. But the
laws potentially place New York at odds with provisions of the Federal Clean Air
Act of 1990, and energy and oil companies say they may sue.   B1

Mr. Pataki imposed conditions on his signing of a bill to require cigarettes to
meet fire-safety standards.   B5

Abortion and the Senate Race
Abortion rights leaders said they would endorse Hillary Rodham Clinton over
Representative Rick A. Lazio. Mrs. Clinton said she would make abortion rights a
key issue.   B1

Dismantling of Art Panel Urged
City Council members introduced legislation to abolish the Art Commission, a
mayoral panel that sits in judgment over artwork and architecture on city-owned
property.   B3

A Long Way From Home
There have been several Northeast sightings, including in the metropolitan area,
of a yellow-nosed albatross, a Southern Hemisphere denizen.   B1

ARTS   E1-12

EDUCATION

CIRCUITS   G1-16

SPORTS   D1-8

Devils Force a Game 7
The Devils beat the Philadelphia Flyers, 2-1, to even the Eastern Conference
finals, 3-3.   D1

Dodger Suspensions
Sixteen players and three coaches were suspended from three to eight games for
going into the stands during a fight with Chicago fans.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-26

Reviewing Microsoft Plans
The federal judge in the Microsoft antitrust case seemed to suggest that the
government plan to break up Microsoft did not go far enough.   A1

Analyzing Proposed Airline Deal
James E. Goodwin, chairman and chief executive of United's parent, expressed
optimism that the acquisition of US Airways would go through, despite its
challenges. Some analysts were less sanguine, and there was skepticism on Wall
Street.   C1

Stocks Halt Slide
The Dow climbed 113.08 points, or 1.1 percent, to 10,535.35; the Nasdaq rose
106.06, or 3.4 percent, to 3,270.61; and the S.& P. 500 rose 1.8 percent.   C1

Reconsidering Tax Shelters
Corporate tax shelters would be much less lucrative under revisions proposed by
the bipartisan staff of the Senate Finance Committee.   C1

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   B16

HOUSE & HOME   F1-20

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: Opening China to goods and ideas; an ambitious airline merger; Mr.
Clinton's disbarment case.

Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E7
TV Listings   E11
Crossword   E6
Weather   D7
Public Lives   B2


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%); ERITREA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(92%); ISRAEL (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ETHIOPIA (92%); CAMBODIA (92%); LEBANON
(92%); CHILE (79%); SYRIA (79%);

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (58%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (74%); BEIJING, CHINA (73%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (94%); ERITREA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(92%); ISRAEL (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); ETHIOPIA (92%); CAMBODIA (92%); LEBANON
(92%); CHILE (79%); SYRIA (79%);   MARYLAND, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA
(58%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (74%); BEIJING, CHINA (73%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LEGISLATION

 (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); WAR CRIMES

 (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (79%);
STOCK EXCHANGES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); APPOINTMENTS
(77%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (77%); TORTURE (75%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (74%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); TALIBAN (73%);
FUNDRAISING (73%); CAMPAIGN FINANCE (72%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING
(72%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (70%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (70%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); AGENCY RULEMAKING (69%);
JUDGES (69%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%);
WIRETAPPING (62%); APPEALS COURTS (55%); MURDER (54%); CANCER (50%);   HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (88%); AL GORE (78%); CHARLES B RANGEL (58%); EHUD BARAK
(52%);

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             396 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 25, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Ruling on Immunity Puts Chile Closer to Trial of Pinochet

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 795 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 24


A Chilean appeals court has stripped the immunity of Gen. Augusto Pinochet,
removing an important obstacle in the way of his possible trial. He faces
charges that he was involved in the kidnapping, murder and torture of thousands
during his 17 years as Chile's dictator.

The decision of the Court of Appeals is subject to a possible reversal by the
Supreme Court, and even lawyers working to prosecute General Pinochet say it
could take years of legal wrangling before a trial could begin, and that is
assuming that the general, now 84, lives that long. He has circulatory problems
and has a history of strokes and diabetes.

Nevertheless, the 13-9 decision by the appellate judges, voted in private on
Tuesday but leaked to local reporters, demonstrates that Chile's courts are
willing to take independent stands after decades of subservience to the armed
forces.

It also demonstrates the commitment of President Ricardo Lagos, the recently
inaugurated Socialist, to let the mechanisms of justice go forward despite
friction with military commanders and threats by congressional conservatives to
bottle up much of his program if the prosecution of General Pinochet continues.

Carlos Salinas, acting legislative director of Amnesty International USA, said:
"Throughout Pinochet's captivity in Great Britain, the Chilean government
repeatedly insisted that he be returned for prosecution in Chile. This appears
to be the first step toward the Chilean government making good on its promise."

General Pinochet's legal troubles began in earnest in late 1998 when he was
arrested in London on a Spanish warrant charging him with human rights
violations. The general, who is a senator for life under a constitution written
while he ruled, and thus has immunity, was released by British authorities in
February after doctors said he was not physically and mentally fit to stand
trial.

While legislators have a cloak of immunity, judges may strip it away if they
have evidence that a crime may have been committed. General Pinochet has the
right to challenge the court's ruling on immunity.

Once the matter is settled, there are several legal issues that must be ruled
on, including whether General Pinochet is mentally fit to stand trial and
whether he would be tried by a civilian or military court.

General Pinochet now faces 108 criminal complaints, mostly filed by family
members of about 3,000 people who disappeared after his violent 1973 coup
against President Salvador Allende Gossens.

Through a spokesman, General Pinochet recently said, "I never ordered anybody to
be killed or tortured."

Judge Juan Guzman, who is prosecuting Mr. Pinochet, has anchored his case on 19
people who have been missing since they were dragged out of prisons by soldiers
led by some of General Pinochet's top aides in the weeks after the coup.

The 19 people -- who were among 75 prisoners believed to have been summarily
executed -- have never been found, but the Supreme Court has accepted Judge
Guzman's interpretation that they should be considered kidnap victims, rather
than dead. If the bodies were found, the slayings could possibly be covered by a
general amnesty involving most rights violations committed during the early
years of the dictatorship, though there is a court challenge arguing that mass
murder and torture are crimes against humanity superseding any amnesty. But
considering the prisoners to be kidnapped, and possibly still held, offers a
loophole for the prosecution.

Congressman Pablo Longueira of the Independent Democratic Union, who is opposed
to the general's prosecution, recently called the legal interpretation behind
Judge Guzman's prosecution "a ridiculous joke." He added, "We all know those
people are dead."

The Independent Democratic Union and another conservative party had been in
negotiations with President Lagos to rewrite sections of the Constitution that
limit the president's appointment powers over military commanders and that give
the military powers to appoint senators. But the talks have bogged down as Mr.
Lagos has refused to interfere in the judicial proceedings and as government
attorneys have joined in the prosecution.

President Lagos has been equally forceful in displaying his resolve as top
military commanders have showed displeasure with the prosecution of their former
commander in chief. After a high-level lunch of top military and police
commanders on May 15 was interpreted as a show of defiance, President Lagos
publicly scolded them in a diplomatic but pointed statement.

Since his return from Britain, Mr. Pinochet has been keeping as low a profile as
possible. He has not been attending Senate sessions, even for important votes,
and he has not spoken out on the issues of the day.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); PERU (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);   LIMA, PERU (71%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (55%);   AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (99%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); PERU (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);   LIMA, PERU (71%);

SUBJECT: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  APPEALS COURTS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MURDER (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%);
TORTURE (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); APPEALS (89%); COUPS (89%); ARMED
FORCES (88%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (88%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS
(78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); FALSE IMPRISONMENT (78%); LITIGATION
(78%); IMMUNITY (78%); ARRESTS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); JUDGES (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (73%); POLITICS (68%); CONSERVATISM (67%); DIABETES (55%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); LAGOS, RICARDO (PRES)

 CARLOS SALINAS  (55%);

LOAD-DATE: May 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Patricia Silva, left, the president of the group Relatives of
Executed Political Prisoners, at a news conference to discuss the immunity
ruling. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. A4)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             399 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 27, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Rebels Release More Hostages In Sierra Leone

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: FREETOWN, Sierra Leone, May 26


The Liberian government said today that Sierra Leone's rebels had released 180
more United Nations peacekeepers, even as the country's president announced that
the rebels' leader, Foday Sankoh, would be prosecuted.

The peacekeepers were handed over to authorities in Foya, a border town in
neighboring Liberia, the statement released in Monrovia said. Liberia said the
latest release left fewer than 100 of the original 500 peacekeepers who were
taken hostage still in rebel hands.

In the government's first announcement on Mr. Sankoh's fate since his capture
earlier this month, President Ahmed Tejan Kabbah accused the rebel chief of
committing serious crimes. "This time around Sankoh will be prosecuted," he
said.

He did not say what charges the rebel chief would face or when a trial would be
held. The government has said that any prosecution would be for crimes that were
committed after the signing of a peace accord a year ago that ended Sierra
Leone's eight-year civil war.

The United Nations said today that it believed that several mutilated corpses
found on Monday were the bodies of peacekeepers. The bodies appear to be those
of four Zambians and one or two Nigerians, said a United Nations spokesman,
David Wimhurst.

The United Nations has been collecting information from the various forces who
had fighters in the area near Rogberi Junction, about 50 miles east of the
capital, Freetown, where there was a battle on May 6 between peacekeepers and
rebels.

Four Zambian and two Nigerian soldiers were reported missing after the battle,
Mr. Eckhard said.

Some of the bodies were dressed in Zambian military uniforms bearing the United
Nations insignia. However, in the past rebels have stripped United Nations
captives of their weapons and uniforms and used them in battle, so there could
be rebel bodies among them, Mr. Eckhard said. The bodies were discovered not far
from where two foreign journalists were killed on Wednesday.

The rebels killed tens of thousands of people and intentionally mutilated many
more during the country's eight-year civil war, which ended in July with a shaky
peace accord. The conflict re-ignited earlier this month when the Revolutionary
United Front took the United Nations peacekeepers hostage and began advancing
toward Freetown.

Since then, an alliance of pro-government forces has been pushing the rebels
away from the capital.

Human rights officials have also received reports that both rebels and
government forces abused civilians in recent weeks.

Human Rights Watch accused the rebels of imposing a "reign of terror" during its
weeklong occupation of the area around Masiaka, a town 45 miles east of
Freetown.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (95%); LIBERIA (95%); NIGERIA (92%); LEBANON (79%);

CITY: FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (79%);   MONROVIA, LIBERIA (73%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE; LEBANON;   SIERRA LEONE (95%); LIBERIA (95%); NIGERIA
(92%); LEBANON (79%);   FREETOWN, SIERRA LEONE (79%);   MONROVIA, LIBERIA (73%);



SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   PEACEKEEPING (91%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (91%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); CIVIL WAR (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); VIOLENT CRIME (77%); HOMICIDE (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (74%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (68%); ARMED FORCES (64%); JOURNALISM
(64%);

PERSON: SANKOH, FODAY; KABBAH, AHMED TEJAN (PRES)

LOAD-DATE: May 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             400 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Indonesia Inquiry: Digging Up Agonies of the Past

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, May 30


Investigators who are struggling to break through the mental fog of former
President Suharto as they question him are searching for something that is
perhaps more valuable than the billions of dollars he is said to have stolen
from his country.

They are fighting to reclaim a piece of their nation's history.

The fitful interrogations of the ailing 78-year-old former president, who was
placed under house arrest on Monday, are one part of a broad campaign by
President Abdurrahman Wahid to dig into a past that is filled with hidden
abuses.

As with the national treasury, which Mr. Suharto used as his personal bank
account, he ravaged his country and then concealed the evidence. The abuses have
ranged from shady business deals to dirty political tricks to military
massacres.

Now Mr. Wahid is pushing to dig up the bones of the past in a series of
investigations and trials. In response, he is receiving mostly abuse, either
from people who shout that he is moving too slowly or from others who fear
instability or personal exposure.

"The main motivation is a hunger to explore this period of Suharto's
government," said Adam Schwarz, the author of "A Nation in Waiting" (Allen &
Unwin, 1999), the basic history of Indonesia's recent past. "I don't think it's
really about the money, and it's only partly about issues of justice. What is
really driving this is a strong desire for an accounting of what happened in the
past, whether in the case of human rights violations, judicial misconduct or
corruption.

"The positive thing is that Indonesians will to some extent be able to put the
past behind them. The negative is that a lot of bad things will be dragged back
up to the surface and confronted."

Some of Indonesia's most powerful people are resisting this process. Most of
those who prospered during the 32 years of Mr. Suharto's rule were complicit to
some degree in the abuses or corruption that were the order of the day.

"If they are really serious," said one victim of a violent raid on an opposition
party office in 1997, "then the police headquarters would be empty, because
everyone was involved."

As they push to uncover the truth about past abuses, the investigations also
have become a battleground of contemporary politics, enabling Mr. Wahid to keep
some of his opponents from the Suharto years on the defensive.

Some powerful people apparently are fighting back, instigating violent incidents
in an attempt to derail Mr. Wahid's government and the threat it poses to them.
Defense Minister Juwono Sudarsono, who was also a cabinet member in the previous
government, said he knew of several former civilian and military officials who
are paying to foment unrest.

Some analysts have noted that on several occasions when a new investigation is
opened or new charges are brought, a riot erupts or bombs go off somewhere in
this volatile nation.

The investigation of Mr. Suharto did not begin in earnest until Mr. Wahid took
office in October. During the previous 17 months, after Mr. Suharto's forced
resignation in May 1998, the interim government of President B. J. Habibie --
stocked with Suharto loyalists -- protected him.

The interrogations are moving slowly now because Mr. Suharto's mind has been
affected by three strokes. The disability is apparently being maximized by his
team of lawyers, and perhaps by Mr. Suharto himself, to hamper the questioning.

Mr. Wahid and his attorney general, Marzuki Darusman, are also meeting
resistance as they probe a number of other difficult areas of the past.

The most startlingly successful initiative so far, perhaps because it was
politically insulated, was the trial and conviction on May 18 of 24 soldiers and
a civilian for the massacre of an Islamic teacher and more than 50 students last
year in the province of Aceh. The defendants received jail terms of up to 10
years each, although human rights campaigners now ask why none of their
superiors have been charged in the killings.

It will be much more politically difficult to complete an investigation into a
campaign of violence last year in East Timor after that former Indonesian
province voted for independence. General Wiranto, the former military chief,
resigned his cabinet post this month as he continued to undergo questioning as
one of 21 high-ranking officers and civilians implicated by a government
commission.

Opening another highly sensitive investigation this month, the National
Commission on Human Rights began summoning former generals for questioning about
the killings of at least 50 Muslim protesters in the Tanjung Priok district of
Jakarta in 1984. Among those questioned were the former military chief, Benny
Murdani, and a former vice president, Try Sutrisno.

So far there has been no full-scale investigation into the riots in May 1998
that helped bring down Mr. Suharto. It was clear from many accounts by witnesses
that much of that violence was instigated and that a campaign of rapes of ethnic
Chinese women was orchestrated and involved members of the military.

And although Mr. Wahid has raised the issue, there has been no formal
investigation yet into the massacres that began it all: the killing of 500,000
people and the jailing without trial of hundreds of thousands more in an
anti-Communist purge that began in 1965.

The origins and responsibility for those atrocities have never been fully
explored, but their ultimate outcome was clear: Mr. Suharto became president of
Indonesia.


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (91%);

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (95%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (87%);

COMPANY: ALLEN & UNWIN (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA;   INDONESIA (95%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (87%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION  INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); CORRUPTION (89%); POLITICS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
MISCONDUCT (74%); HISTORY (72%); ARRESTS (71%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (70%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (68%); POLICE FORCES (60%); HOUSE ARREST (56%); LEGAL ETHICS

 (50%); JUDICIAL ETHICS (50%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; SUHARTO

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Indonesian student protesters, passing the attorney general's
office in Jakarta yesterday, demanded that former President Suharto be placed on
trial. He is now under house arrest as a government inquiry proceeds.
(Associated Press)

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             403 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 13, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey and the Kurds

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words



To the Editor:

Re "As War Wanes, Tourists Return to Turkey's East" (Kars Journal, June 7):
Tourism is indeed a positive sign of a newly stabilized region. But it should
not come at the cost of human and civil rights.

You state that in the 1990's, "violence was common and tourism all but
unthinkable" and that current conditions "are more relaxed than they have been
in years." Your reasoning is this: "Today the Kurdish rebel leader is in jail.
His guerrillas have stopped fighting." You ignore the oppression of 20 million
Kurds by the Turkish government.

Kurds have been arrested for speaking their own language and practicing the
traditions that have been part of their culture for thousands of years. Just
this month, two Kurdish mayors were denied the right to travel to the United
States to speak about human rights violations.

The Kurdish struggle is not over.

BOB FILNER
Member of Congress, 50th Dist.
San Diego, June 9, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

SUBJECT: TRAVEL AND VACATIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; KURDS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CIVIL RIGHTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(71%); ARRESTS (69%);

PERSON: FILNER, BOB (REPR)  BOB FILNER (65%);

LOAD-DATE: June 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             405 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 20, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Affairs;
Knight Is Right

BYLINE: By THOMAS L. FRIEDMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 728 words


Some things are true even though Phil Knight, the chairman of Nike, believes
them.

Mr. Knight recently made news by suddenly withdrawing a contemplated $30 million
gift to the University of Oregon after the university balked at joining a
coalition -- the Fair Labor Association (F.L.A.) -- that was formed by human
rights groups, colleges, the U.S. government and companies such as Nike to
alleviate global sweatshop conditions. Oregon opted to join an alternative group
being pushed on college campuses, the Worker Rights Consortium (W.R.C.), which
also plans to combat sweatshops, but refuses to cooperate with any companies,
such as Nike.

The natural assumption is that Mr. Knight is wrong. The truth is, Nike has a
shameful past when it comes to tolerating sweatshops. But on the question of how
best to remedy those conditions in the future -- which Nike has now agreed to do
-- Mr. Knight is dead right and Oregon wrong: The best way to create global
governance -- over issues from sweatshops to the environment -- when there is no
global government is to build coalitions, in which enlightened companies,
consumers and social activists work together to forge their own rules and
enforcement mechanisms. That's what the F.L.A. represents and it's what the
W.R.C. doesn't.

We've heard plenty this year about the downsides of globalization. The question
is what to do about it. The more radical protesters, such as the W.R.C., want to
trash multinationals and get the World Trade Organization to set rules for
workers and the environment, not just for trade. And what practical effect have
the protesters had so far? Zero.

So what to do? Well, it comes down to this: Do you want a make a point or do you
want to make a difference? The F.L.A. was formed to make a difference. The
W.R.C. was formed to make a point.

The F.L.A. was founded four years ago, and it now includes the Lawyers Committee
for Human Rights, the National Council of Churches, the International Labor
Rights Fund, 135 universities and major apparel companies such as Liz Claiborne,
Levi Strauss, Nike, Reebok and Adidas. After long talks, this diverse group
agreed on a nine-point code for any apparel factory anywhere in the world --
including rules against forced labor and child labor, as well as freedom of
association, minimum wages, maximum working hours, lighting, bathrooms and
safety. They also agreed on a system of independent monitoring, surprise
inspections and follow-ups, which is now being tested in five developing
countries.

Companies whose factories comply will be able to sew an "F.L.A." label into
their clothing, and the 135 universities have agreed that their logos will go
only on F.L.A.-made products. Global brands can't afford any longer to be
associated with sweatshops, and the F.L.A. creates a credible system for
empowering consumers to punish dirty companies and reward improving ones.

The W.R.C., by contrast, is backed by protectionist U.S. unions, such as Unite,
that don't want any system that would give a stamp of approval to any production
outside the U.S. That's one reason the W.R.C. won't work with companies. But
that means the W.R.C. has no way of consistently monitoring factories or
following up remedies, and it is only focused on clothing sold on college
campuses.

It's good that there's a W.R.C. out there noisily protesting sweatshops and
embarrassing companies. But the W.R.C. is not a substitute for the F.L.A., which
has a comprehensive strategy for upgrading the whole apparel industry. It's a
pity that some cowardly college presidents -- intimidated by a few vocal and
often uninformed students -- have quit the F.L.A. in favor of the W.R.C.

"If you want to improve people's lives in the absence of a global government,
you need to align the economic interests of the better global companies with the
social interests of the least advantaged people," said Sam Brown, the 1960's
antiwar activist, former U.S. ambassador and now director of the F.L.A. "We need
to make these companies our allies, not our opponents. We won't change the world
overnight. But it is foolish to dismiss the F.L.A. because it does not go far
enough or fast enough. The issue is how to get from here to there, and the
F.L.A. has a real strategy for harnessing U.S. consumer power to change the
lives and working conditions of real people."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (95%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (95%);
NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (95%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS' & INFANTS'
CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (95%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC
(95%); SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (95%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', &
JUNIORS' OUTERWEAR, NEC (95%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (95%);
SIC2325 MEN'S & BOYS' SEPARATE TROUSERS & SLACKS (52%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: OREGON, USA (72%);

COMPANY: FAIR LABOR ASSN  NIKE INC (95%); LEVI STRAUSS & CO (52%);   UNIVERSITY
OF OREGON  (84%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (84%);

ORGANIZATION: FAIR LABOR ASSN  UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (84%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON

 (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%);   OREGON, USA (72%);

SUBJECT: LABOR; SWEATSHOPS  SWEATSHOPS (90%); SOCIAL JUSTICE (90%); GARMENT
WORKERS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%);
APPAREL MFG (89%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); MULTINATIONAL CORPORATIONS (76%);
GLOBALIZATION (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (72%); WAGES & SALARIES (72%);
MINIMUM WAGE (72%); CHILD LABOR (72%); INSPECTIONS (71%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT
(69%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (66%); CLOTHING LABELS (65%);
FASHION DESIGNERS (65%); RELIGION (50%);   FORCED LABOR (77%);   MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (89%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: FRIEDMAN, THOMAS L  THOMAS L FRIEDMAN (50%);   PHILIP KNIGHT (92%);

LOAD-DATE: June 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             406 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 21, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone Asks U.N. For Role In War Court

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 776 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 20


Sierra Leone has asked the United Nations to set up a war crimes tribunal to try
rebel leaders whose troops maimed and killed Sierra Leoneans and abducted 500
international peacekeepers, plunging the country into a new round of violence in
May.

But the proposed court, as outlined in a letter to Secretary General Kofi Annan
from Sierra Leone's president, Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, would be a far cry from an
international tribunal of the sort established in the 1990's for the Balkans and
Rwanda. Instead, it would be closer to the one now being created for Cambodia's
Khmer Rouge, with considerable power in the hands of the national government.
Prosecutors and judges would be a mix of Sierra Leoneans and foreigners.

The hybrid court envisioned by Sierra Leone would be based there and limited to
hearing cases against only one faction, the Revolutionary United Front of Foday
Sankoh. This spring, Mr. Sankoh broke a year-old peace agreement that had given
him a role in government and turned his troops on both Mr. Kabbah's army and
United Nations peacekeepers. He is now in custody.

Britain, which sent troops to Sierra Leone last month, helped Sierra Leone draft
its proposal for a tribunal, diplomats said today. The court would be
established under one of possibly three Security Council resolutions on Sierra
Leone to be debated in coming weeks. The other two would impose an embargo on
arms sales and diamond exports and enlarge the United Nations peacekeeping force
and strengthen its powers.

Diplomats say the United States originally appeared to want a more international
tribunal, but now seemed to be closer to supporting the British-assisted plan
outlined by President Kabbah. An American official said that the United States
was still far from a decision on the shape of the court.

At a Security Council meeting today, the American Ambassador, Richard C.
Holbrooke, said that he was against creating a new tribunal for Sierra Leone but
that "some form of extension of the international war crime umbrella to cover
these odious people must be undertaken."

A copy of President Kabbah's letter and its detailed annex, sent a week ago, was
made available to The New York Times by experts outside the United Nations.
Officials in the organization would not discuss the plan, saying it is still
being studied.

The limitations on the proposed court's reach and the large role reserved for
the weak government and justice system of Sierra Leone raise fears among some
international human rights experts, who say numerous factions have been involved
in abuses in Sierra Leone, in a war marked by the hacking off of civilians'
limbs and the destruction of countless communities.

"There are two main concerns that we have," said Peter Bouckaert of Human Rights
Watch, who recently returned from Sierra Leone. "One is that it deals only with
the R.U.F. We think for a tribunal to have any kind of international
credibility, it would have to address the criminal responsibility of all sides
in the conflict."

In addition to the Revolutionary United Front, he said, there are the Armed
Forces Revolutionary Council; one of its most violent factions, known as the
West Side Boys; and bands of former government soldiers who joined the rebels to
attack Freetown, the country's capital, in January 1999 after Mr. Sankoh broke
an earlier peace agreement.

A second concern cited by Mr. Bouckaert was "the dominant role that Sierra Leone
would play in this proposed hybrid court, considering the politicization that
would take place and also the limited capacity that the Sierra Leone judiciary
has at this stage."

President Kabbah said in his letter and annex that a court created by the
Security Council would have "the advantage of strong enforcement powers that
will call for cooperation from states in investigations, arrest, extradition and
the enforcement of sentence." He also asked that it be paid for through an
international trust fund.

Turning to the working of the court, Mr. Kabbah called for a "narrow" list of
those to be charged from the Revolutionary United Front, possibly in the dozens.
He said this would allow the court to be "quick and efficient."

Mr. Kabbah asked for a blend of Sierra Leone and international law to be applied
in order to include crimes against humanity and crimes against peacekeepers,
which are not in the national code. He expected the court to sit in Sierra Leone
unless security made it necessary to move elsewhere. It would have West African
and possibly other judges. For appeals, the tribunal could make use of an
appeals panel in The Hague, which hears cases from the Balkans and Rwanda.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA (79%); CAMBODIA (79%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  SIERRA LEONE PETROLEUM REFINING CO LTD (92%); SIERRA
LEONE ORE & METAL CO (92%); SIERRA LEONE ROAD TRANSPORT CORP (92%); SIERRA LEONE
CEMENT CORP LTD (92%); SIERRA LEONE TELECOMMUNICATIONS CO (92%); SIERRA LEONE
INSURANCE CO LTD (92%); SIERRA LEONE SHIPPING AGENCIES LTD (92%); SIERRA LEONE
NATIONAL PETROLEUM CO (92%);   UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); RWANDA
(79%); CAMBODIA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT; KIDNAPPING  UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%);
PEACEKEEPING (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); MILITARY
COURTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); ARMIES (78%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (73%); EMBARGOES
& SANCTIONS (73%); JUDGES (72%); POLITICS (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (53%);
ARMS EMBARGOES (50%); DIAMOND MARKETS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(70%);

PERSON: KABBAH, AHMAD TEJAN (PRES)  RICHARD HOLBROOKE (50%);

LOAD-DATE: June 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             413 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Report Says U.S. and Others Allowed Rwanda Genocide

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1085 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 7


The United States and other nations that failed to prevent or stop the genocide
in Rwanda in 1994 should pay a "significant level of reparations," an
independent panel said today.

The seven-member international panel, assembled by the Organization of African
Unity, also singled out France and Belgium as well as the United Nations and the
Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches as those most guilty of not doing enough to
prevent or stop the atrocities that killed up to 800,000 people.

The group acknowledged that Rwanda's Hutu-led government was behind the
killings, in which Hutu militias rampaged through the country, massacring ethnic
Tutsi and moderate or antigovernment Hutu who defended them, but it added that
"external forces" had also had a responsibility for what has happened to Rwanda
in a century of crisis.

The panel asked Secretary General Kofi Annan to establish a commission to
formally identify the countries that owe Rwanda the money to rebuild the
devastated country, and to set an appropriate scale of compensation. It also
demanded that Rwanda's international debts be canceled.

In its report, "Rwanda: The Preventable Genocide," the panel said that the
events of 1994 cannot be forgotten, and that Rwanda should no more be assigned
to "ancient history" than the Holocaust.

It also noted that the long-term effects of those weeks of horrific violence and
brutality continue to be felt throughout the region, especially in Congo. "The
1994 genocide in one small country ultimately triggered a conflict in the heart
of Africa that has directly or indirectly touched at least one-third of all the
nations on the continent," the report said.

The report reviews the same issues and reaches many of the same conclusions as
another independent experts' study commissioned by the secretary general. But it
also takes a deeper look at the roots of the ethnic conflict in Rwanda,
beginning with 60 years of colonial rule, first by Germany and then Belgium,
when ethnic divisions were exacerbated if not manipulated.

It is also far harsher in its criticism of Security Council members, especially
France and the United States, saying France could have prevented the genocide
and the United States could have stopped it.

"Of course there would have been no genocide if certain Rwandans had not
organized and carried it out; there is no denying that fundamental truth," the
report said. "But it is equally true that throughout the past century external
forces have helped shape Rwanda's destiny and that of its neighbors." The report
does not absolve the current Tutsi-led government in Rwanda of sometimes failing
to meet challenges it inherited, despite the "resilience and vigor" shown by the
survivors now rebuilding the country and their lives.

Rwandans still confront human rights abuses under the Tutsi-led government
formed from the Rwanda Patriotic Front, which seized power in the summer of
1994. The country, struggling with refugee resettlement, is still at war in
Congo, where ethnic Hutu militias remain a menace, the Rwandan government says.

Those militias instigated the genocide in April 1994, after the president,
Juvenal Habyarimana, a Hutu, was killed in a plane crash in Kigali that was
possibly caused by a missile attack. The report characterizes the four-year
period leading up to the outbreak of violence as "the triumph of ethnic
radicalism" among the majority Hutu population that set the scene for the
nightmare that followed.

At this point, the report said, France had "unrivaled influence at the very
highest levels" of the Hutu-led government in Rwanda and chose not to exercise
it to derail well-laid plans for the genocide.

At a news conference today, Ambassador Stephen Lewis, a Canadian member of the
Organization of African Unity panel and a former deputy executive director of
Unicef, said that the new report chose to focus more heavily on the role of the
Security Council, especially France and the United States, than the report
prepared for Mr. Annan last year. Mr. Lewis said that French behavior was
particularly indefensible.

"We repudiate the position of the government of France, the position that
asserts they had no responsibility," he said. "They were closer in every way to
the Habyarimana regime than any other government. They could have stopped the
genocide before it began. They knew exactly what was happening."

Worse, he said, the French peacekeeping mission eventually sent to the region
allowed a huge number of Hutu attackers to flee the country to neighboring
Congo, then known as Zaire, "thereby ushering in the larger Great Lakes
catastrophe."

"There is almost no redemptive feature to the conduct of the government of
France," Mr. Lewis said.

As for the United States, which blocked the Security Council from sending
peacekeepers to Rwanda once the massacres had begun, Mr. Lewis said the American
role was "an almost incomprehensible scar of shame on American foreign policy."
Speaking personally, he said, "I don't know how Madeleine Albright lives with
it." Secretary of State Albright was then the United States representative at
the United Nations.

President Clinton, on a subsequent visit to Africa, apologized to Rwanda for the
lack of international response, as has Belgium, the former colonial power.
France has never expressed remorse or accepted blame.

The report was very critical of the Roman Catholic Church. "We were shocked by
the role of the church," Mr. Lewis said today. Although priests and lay
Catholics were among those who tried to save Tutsi, there were other church
officials who did not; some helped lure Tutsi to their deaths.

There were "leaders of the church who did not speak out strongly and take
stands," Mr. Lewis said. "Since Rwanda is a very Catholic country, we felt we
had to say something."

Anglican Church authorities have apologized for ignoring human rights abuses or
for acts that encouraged Hutu death squads. The Roman Catholic Church has not,
the report said.

In addition to Mr. Lewis, who introduced the report here today, the panel
consisted of Sir Ketumile Masire, a former president of Botswana and the panel
leader; Amadou Toumani Toure, former president of Mali; Lisbet Palme, a Swedish
child psychologist and expert on the United Nations Committee on the Rights of
the Child; Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf, former finance minister of Liberia; P. N.
Bhagwati, former chief justice of India's Supreme Court; and Hocine Djoudi, an
Algerian judge and diplomat.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA (94%); FRANCE (90%); BELGIUM
(90%); GERMANY (76%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH; ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY; UNITED NATIONS
UNITED NATIONS  (84%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (84%); AFRICAN UNION
(84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (84%);

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH; ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY; UNITED
NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (84%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (84%); AFRICAN
UNION (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA; FRANCE; BELGIUM;   RWANDA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA

 (94%); FRANCE (90%); BELGIUM (90%); GERMANY (76%);

SUBJECT: HUTU TRIBE; TUTSI TRIBE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
ANGLICAN CHURCHES; REPARATIONS  GENOCIDE (93%); RELIGION (93%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); PUBLIC DEBT (78%);
PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); POSTWAR
RECONSTRUCTION (76%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (76%); HISTORY (73%); HOLOCAUST
(73%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (72%); ANCIENT HISTORY (65%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  STEPHEN HENRY LEWIS (59%);

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             419 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Scores Reported Dead as Rebels and Militias Clash in Colombia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 538 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, July 21


Clashes between Marxist rebels and Colombia's main right-wing paramilitary force
have killed up to 100 people this week in two remote areas of the Andes
mountains, authorities said today.

The fighting, confirmed by a paramilitary warlord, Carlos Castano, were among
the most violent this year and included a battle for control of a region in
northern Bolivar Province long known as a stronghold of the Cuban-inspired Army
of National Liberation, or E.L.N..

"The idea is to force them out of the only sanctuary they have left," Mr.
Castano told a local television station.

He was referring to what military sources have described as intense combat since
Wednesday around the San Lucas mountain range, where commanders of the E.L.N.,
Colombia's second-largest guerrilla army, are thought to have their main base.

Col. Jaime Martinez, a regional chief of the National Police, told reporters
that as many as 60 guerrillas and 15 members of Mr. Castano's outlawed United
Self-Defense Forces, an umbrella organization of ultra-right militias, were
thought to have been killed in the fighting.

But he said the death toll was unofficial and based only on accounts from
peasants fleeing the area.

Mr. Castano, who spoke in a brief phone interview with R.C.N. television, did
not comment on the number of dead in the San Lucas fighting. But he rejected
rebel assertions that the paramilitary offensive there was backed by government
security forces, long accused of tacitly supporting militias in their war
against leftists and suspected rebel sympathizers.

The offensive started as several E.L.N. commanders, two of whom were released on
parole from a maximum security prison today, prepared to meet Colombian
business, civic and labor leaders in Geneva on Monday to prepare for
full-fledged peace talks with the government.

No firm date has been set for formal negotiations, which would take place more
than a year and a half after the government opened talks with the larger
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC.

Cuba has agreed to act as a "facilitator" and possible mediator in the talks,
together with the governments of France, Spain, Norway and Switzerland.

Colombia's internal conflict, which has intensified in recent years as rebels
built up their own sources of financing -- including widespread kidnapping and
involvement in the drug trade -- has killed more than 35,000 people since 1990.

The other battle this week also began on Wednesday, according to local
government officials, when FARC rebels raided one of Mr. Castano's strongholds
in a rugged mountain area of northwest Antioquia Province, killing at least 28
paramilitary gunmen.

The death toll was the highest reported this year involving gunmen from the
paramilitary group, which human rights groups blame for most of the peasant
massacres and other atrocities committed in Colombia's protracted civil
conflict.

"The information we have is that there are about 30 dead, including two
civilians," said Jaime Montoya, mayor of Ituango, where the fighting occurred.

Mr. Castano disputed the toll in his televised comments, however, saying no more
than 15 of his men had died, along with 6 guerrillas and 5 civilians.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); SPAIN (79%); FRANCE (77%);

STATE: ANDES (90%);

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (79%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%);

COMPANY: R C N (55%);   NATIONAL POLICE (57%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL POLICE (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA (96%); SWITZERLAND (92%); SPAIN (79%); FRANCE (77%);
ANDES (90%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (79%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (91%); ARMIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); MOUNTAINS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(88%); WAR & CONFLICT (79%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); POLICE FORCES (77%);
ARMED FORCES (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (76%); INTERVIEWS (75%); PAROLE

 (73%); LOCAL TELEVISION STATIONS (70%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (70%); FARM LABOR
(68%); PEACE PROCESS (65%); PRISONS (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (61%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%);   CORRECTIONS (63%);

PERSON: CARLOS CASTANO (94%);

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             421 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Reportedly Stripped of Immunity in Secret Court Vote

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 800 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Aug. 1


The Chilean Supreme Court voted in secret today to strip Gen. Augusto Pinochet
of his senatorial immunity, according to local radio and web site accounts. The
decision would remove the last legal obstacle to a full-scale criminal
investigation of the former dictator and would permit his trial on charges of
kidnapping, murder and torture.

The president of the court, Hernan Alvarez, said the justices would release
their opinion formally sometime next week. "We are not going to make any
statements," said Mr. Alvarez, after the 20 justices consulted for four hours
today. "The Supreme Court has instructed me merely to say an agreement was
reached."

But neither he nor any other court or government official disputed the reports,
all attributed to anonymous sources close to the Supreme Court and the
presidential palace, and all widely disseminated among Chileans.

The vote, reported as 11 to 9, had been expected after the court's 11-to-9
rejection last week of a defense motion to proceed with medical tests of the
former dictator before ruling on his immunity.

"I am very content," said Juan Bustos, a lawyer for human rights victims
involved in the case against General Pinochet. "The report surging through the
courthouse is that we have won and General Pinochet no longer has immunity from
prosecution." There were no public reactions from General Pinochet's lawyers or
family.

With the decision, the Supreme Court has apparently upheld a ruling made in May
by the Chilean Court of Appeals, which was also disclosed to many of the same
news organizations more than a week before it became official. Observers have
theorized that the courts and government are using the technique to try to
soften reactions and control the size of demonstrations supporting and opposing
General Pinochet.

Lawyers arguing the case against General Pinochet maintained that there was
enough evidence linking him to disappearances and other crimes that he should be
stripped of his senatorial immunity. Never elected to the Senate, General
Pinochet took his life-time seat in 1998 under a constitutional provision
written during his 17-year dictatorship.

The case against General Pinochet gathered momentum here after he was arrested
in London in 1998 on a Spanish warrant for many serious rights violations. He
was freed for health reasons four months ago and allowed to return to Chile, but
his standing in society and even among the military leaders and right-wing
parties has suffered.

During the proceedings, no evidence ever linked the general definitively to any
single crime. But prosecutors are hoping that his deteriorating legal status
will encourage several retired officers who are already imprisoned to testify
that the former dictator was aware of their crimes or helped cover them up.

"This is just the beginning of the legal process and there will need to be a
long investigation to gather proof," said Ricardo Israel, a political scientist
at the University of Chile. "For a conviction, some eyewitness or document has
to come forward, otherwise the evidence is all circumstantial."

Mr. Israel and many other experts say General Pinochet, who is 84 and suffers a
variety of health problems, will probably die before he can be convicted. But
for many critics of his government, the fact that he could face justice in
Chilean courts at all is a giant step toward a full civilian-based democracy.

Sebastian Brett, the Human Rights Watch representative in Chile, said the
court's stripping of General Pinochet's immunity would signify "the most
important decision in Chilean judicial history." He added, "It would show that
dictators are not above the law in their country."

Judge Juan Guzman, who is prosecuting the Pinochet case, is now expected to
force the general to answer a long series of questions meant to link him to a
case involving 19 people who disappeared soon after the 1973 coup that brought
him to power. The 19 are believed to have been executed on the orders of top
Pinochet aides.

The general's lawyers say he is not guilty in the executions and disappearances
of more than 3,000 people. But during the Supreme Court hearings last month they
argued that he was not healthy enough to stand trial because he was unable to
direct his lawyers adequately.

However, they said any tests of the former ruler for mental illness would be
unacceptable. That claim will probably set up the next legal test, since under
Chilean law all criminal defendants over 70 must receive a medical examination
before trial, and mental illness may prevent legal proceedings to go forward.

General Pinochet's legal maneuverings appear intended to broaden defendants'
due-process protections to include physical illnesses as well as mental health
problems.




http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: CHILEAN SUPREME COURT (80%);

ORGANIZATION: CHILEAN SUPREME COURT (80%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (94%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   SANTIAGO,
CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION; KIDNAPPING;
TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; LEGISLATURES AND PARLIAMENTS  IMMUNITY (91%);

 LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HEADS
OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (90%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%);
MURDER (77%); ARRESTS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); POLITICS (76%); APPEALS COURTS (73%); POLITICAL SCIENCE
(69%); MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (67%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS
SCREENING & TESTING (67%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (67%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET
(97%);

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             433 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 22, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
In Chile, the Balance Tips Toward the Victims

BYLINE: By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 851 words


Until the last few weeks, testimony about the horrors committed by the Chilean
military after Gen. Augusto Pinochet's coup in 1973 has virtually all come from
one side, the victims'. The military refused to cooperate with Chile's truth
commission, and provided very little information for the families of those who
disappeared.

The man who walked around Santiago's National Stadium with a television reporter
recently represented something new for Chileans. Roberto Saldias was a soldier
in 1973. He talked about the executions he witnessed in the stadium. He named
one perpetrator and promised to identify others in court.

The television appearance of Mr. Saldias is one more sign of Chile's
transformation. After nearly a year of discussion between military leaders and
human rights advocates, the armed forces pledged to help find the bodies of
victims if those with information could remain anonymous. And earlier this
month, the supreme court stripped General Pinochet of his legislative immunity,
providing the first real chance that he could stand trial.

The change in Chile is in part due to the passage of time, which has brought a
new generation of judges into office. But the catalyst for their new
assertiveness was the arrest of Mr. Pinochet in Britain on a Spanish warrant in
1998. That arrest caused reverberations elsewhere and led to the detention of
Chad's former dictator in Senegal, although the courts later released him. Other
arrests of tyrannical leaders could follow. But for now, Mr. Pinochet's capture
has left a deeper footprint in Chile, where it has changed the balance of power.

New democratic or reformist governments that lack power over the old guard can
do little to reckon with the past. This was true of Chile until recently, and of
most of Latin America's former military dictatorships. Typically, the generals
retain their guns and can at any moment point them at civilian heads. It is also
the case in most nations of the former Soviet Union, where top Communist
officials retain positions of influence and can block any moves to bring the old
regime's criminals to account.

Very few countries have given victims acknowledgment of their suffering or
families information about lost loved ones. Those that have done so possessed
the power to threaten the collaborators or murderers with exposure or trials if
they did not talk. Germany opened the files of the secret police, or Stasi, to
its victims. It had not anticipated that as a result, many ex-informers would
contact their victims to sit down and talk. Their motive is damage control --
they know they will be caught. But it has produced a healthy outpouring of
discussion about why people collaborated and allowed many Stasi victims to hear
personal confessions from their spies.

Another country that has given some psychological healing to victims is South
Africa. The unique feature of its truth commission -- those who confess to
crimes can get amnesty from prosecution -- has broadened South Africa's
reckoning with the past. Instead of trials in only a few high-profile cases,
which is all the country could very likely afford, dozens of victims got to hear
confessions and relatives of the murdered learned what happened to their loved
ones.

This could happen only because the government of Nelson Mandela could credibly
threaten the old apartheid killers with real jail time if they did not talk. If
Mr. Pinochet's successors in Chile had tried this, the military would simply
have laughed.

That changed with Mr. Pinochet's arrest. His detention tipped the balance of
power in Chile and unleashed desires for justice that people had buried for a
quarter-century. It also allowed Chile to press for testimony, offering the same
deal as South Africa's truth commission. The military men who signed agreements
in Chile to provide information on the 1,200 people still missing did so because
for the first time, they run a real risk of prosecution for the forced
disappearances. If Mr. Pinochet is tried in Chile, it will be under a new
interpretation of a general amnesty he decreed in 1978 -- mainly benefiting his
own forces. The courts now say that if the body in a case has not been found,
the case is ongoing and can be prosecuted. If a body is found, the case becomes
a murder -- and therefore covered by amnesty. So soldiers can escape trial for
disappearances by producing the bodies.

The world community could help achieve similar accountings in other countries if
the International Criminal Court were up and running. Established two years ago
in a treaty signed by 120 nations -- the United States not among them -- the
court will try those accused of genocide and other heinous crimes. It offers the
hope of international justice for those too powerful to be tried at home. But it
will also provide an outside threat of justice that could strengthen a nation's
own ability to try its criminals.  The International Criminal Court could help
solve a central problem of dealing with the past -- that nations most in need of
trials are least likely to be able to hold them.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); GERMANY (79%); SPAIN (79%); SENEGAL
(79%); CHAD (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (59%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (59%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; SPAIN;   CHILE (98%); LATIN AMERICA (79%); GERMANY (79%);
SPAIN (79%); SENEGAL (79%); CHAD (79%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; EXTRADITION  LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARRESTS (90%);
EXTRADITION (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (89%); ARMED FORCES (78%); STADIUMS & ARENAS (76%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (75%); IMMUNITY (73%); ARREST
WARRANTS (71%); SUPREME COURTS (70%); POLITICS (64%);   MILITARY RULE (78%);

PERSON: ROSENBERG, TINA; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (90%);



LOAD-DATE: August 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             438 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Mexican Environmentalist Is Found Guilty

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 218 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Aug. 28


In closing a case that has led to outrage among environmental groups around the
world, a district judge in the state of Guerrero sentenced Rudolfo Montiel
Flores today to almost seven years in prison for drugs and weapons crimes.

Environmental groups consider Mr. Montiel, 44, a political prisoner, saying his
only crime was to organize protests against loggers who were cutting forests
around his village north of Acapulco.

Last year, gunmen killed several members of rural ecological group led by Mr.
Montiel. In May 1999, Mr. Montiel said that he was detained and tortured by
soldiers who forced him to sign statements that confessed to marijuana
cultivation and possession of illegal arms.

This summer, the Mexican National Human Rights Commission said that his rights
had been violated, that evidence against him had been planted.

Mr. Montiel, a poor indigenous farmer, was arrested and convicted with a friend,
Teodoro Cabrera Garcia, who was sentenced today to 10 years in prison.

Lawyers for the men pledged to appeal the sentences and to help organize
protests to reignite interest in the case.

Leaders of Amnesty International in Mexico City said they would urge
President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada to dismiss the sentences against the two men
after he takes office in December.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (90%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO;   MEXICO (97%);   MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (90%);

SUBJECT: FORESTS AND FORESTRY; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); POLITICAL PRISONERS;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; FIREARMS  ENVIRONMENT &
NATURAL RESOURCES (92%); SENTENCING (91%); VERDICTS (90%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS
(90%); PRISONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (88%); ECOLOGY & ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (78%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (78%); LITIGATION (78%); JUDGES (78%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (78%);
ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(76%); TORTURE (76%); LAWYERS (75%); SHOOTINGS (75%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (72%);
ARRESTS (72%); CANNABIS (72%);   CORRECTIONS (90%); MARIJUANA FARMING (69%);

PERSON: MONTIEL FLORES, RUDOLFO  VICENTE FOX QUESADA (54%);

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             442 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 1, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Justice in East Timor

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 172 words



To the Editor:

Re "Indonesians Differ on Penalties for the Past" (news article, Aug. 27):
Forceful prosecutions of those who committed rights abuses in Indonesia and East
Timor are necessary if Indonesia is to build a democratic future. Elements of
the Indonesian military continue to create mischief -- for example, by backing
militias that harass East Timor and block the return of refugees.

An international tribunal should be set up to deal with crimes against the East
Timorese since 1975, when Indonesia illegally invaded its neighbor. Last
January, a United Nations investigation recommended a tribunal for military and
militia violence during last year's independence plebiscite. Creating a tribunal
is especially urgent now that Indonesia's consultative assembly has amended the
Constitution to let the abusers off the hook, crippling its own prosecutors'
ability to try past injustices.

JOHN M. MILLER
Brooklyn, Aug. 27, 2000

The writer is media coordinator for the East Timor Action Network.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (94%); UNITED STATES (53%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (53%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (53%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA; EAST TIMOR;   TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (94%); UNITED
STATES (53%);   NEW YORK, USA (53%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (53%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (87%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (87%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (87%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (86%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); REFUGEES (70%);

PERSON: MILLER, JOHN M

LOAD-DATE: September 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             443 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Appeal for Unity

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 96 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Sept. 4


Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 84, facing a possible trial for human rights abuses
during his 17-year dictatorship, urged Chileans today to put the past behind
them and focus on the future.

He released a letter to the Chilean people saying, "I hold in my heart the hope
that our divisions and yesterday's pain are overcome and that we will look to
the future in benefit of new generations."

It was read by his granddaughter, Maria Jose Martinez, at his residence in
Santiago. Gen. Pinochet did not speak. In August, the Supreme Court stripped him
of his immunity from prosecution.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (94%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION  HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); SUPREME COURTS
(86%); IMMUNITY (86%); GRANDCHILDREN (52%);

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (93%); MARIA JOSE
MARTINEZ (55%);

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             444 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Journalists Under Siege

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 482 words


The editors of two opposition newspapers in Congo are facing the death penalty.
Emile-Aime Kakekese Vinalu's crime was writing two articles that analyzed a tiff
between high-level officials, complained of disunity in the opposition and said
that those who speak their minds get arrested for crimes against state security.
The government of Laurent Kabila then proved him right. Then Jean-Pierre Ekanga
Mukuna was arrested, apparently for refusing to give authorities Mr. Vinalu's
home address. Both men are charged with high treason.

The beleaguered editors in Congo have plenty of company. A Serbian journalist,
Miroslav Filipovic, is now serving a seven-year sentence for espionage and
disseminating false information after he reported on the Yugoslav Army's war
crimes in Kosovo. As parliamentary elections approach in Azerbaijan, authorities
have arrested the editor of an opposition newspaper on trumped-up charges that
he participated in a hijacking attempt. In Paraguay a reporter was run over by a
car driven by the security chief of the nation's former comptroller, who is
accused of corruption.

The world is seeing an epidemic of government attempts to silence independent
journalists, less through murders than through legal harassment and physical
threats. Paradoxically, the new repression is in some ways a sign of progress.
Azerbaijan was not persecuting independent journalists 10 years ago, because it
had none. Most nations now attacking journalists are quasi-democracies and so
must put up with at least some independent media. But their leaders use libel
suits and threats to stop reporters from investigating corruption, and often
jail journalists and shut media down for tax offenses or other pretexts during
political campaigns.

Ultimately, respect for a free press comes with democratic development and
economic growth, in part because only a robust private sector can provide enough
advertising to give the media independence. But a free press is also an integral
part of both kinds of progress and needs more help from the outside today.
Several international groups provide lawyers for accused journalists, and
independent media in places such as Serbia get a big percentage of their budgets
from Western governments and nongovernmental groups. But these donors tend to
concentrate on high-profile nations.

Another strategy is to try to discourage attacks by exposing them. Turkey, whose
bid to join the European Union depends on its civil rights record, has responded
to visits from the Committee to Protect Journalists by releasing some jailed
writers and reporters. But exposure only works when governments take press
freedom seriously. Liberia recently arrested a British TV crew investigating
reports of diamond smuggling by President Charles Taylor. When African leaders,
including Nelson Mandela, complained, Mr. Taylor released the four men.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (93%); AZERBAIJAN (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); KOSOVO
(79%); LIBERIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); PARAGUAY (79%); AFRICA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (70%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA (93%); AZERBAIJAN (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); KOSOVO
(79%); LIBERIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); PARAGUAY (79%); AFRICA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (70%);

SUBJECT: NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA; EDITORIALS; FREEDOM OF THE PRESS; FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); ARRESTS (90%); WRITERS (90%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); JOURNALISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%);
FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); SENTENCING (78%); TREASON (78%);
CORRUPTION (78%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); HIJACKING (78%); LIBEL & SLANDER (78%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); CRIMINAL
OFFENSES (78%); ELECTIONS (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); ESPIONAGE (75%);
LAWYERS (74%); SMUGGLING (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (71%); ARMIES (71%); CIVIL RIGHTS (64%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
(64%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (64%); EUROPEAN UNION (63%);
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT (63%); DIAMOND MARKETS (50%);

PERSON: EMILE-AIME KAKEKESE VINALU (74%); CHARLES TAYLOR (71%);   NELSON MANDELA

 (79%);

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             445 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Pursuit of Democracies

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 147 words



To the Editor:

The criticism of Australia by the United Nations Committee for the Elimination
of Racial Discrimination (news article, Aug. 31) should serve as a reminder.

There is a movement in the liberal democracies to yield sovereignty to agencies
that purport to monitor human rights abuses. Amnesty International, for one, has
trained its sights on the United States. Let us not deceive ourselves. Most of
the United Nations member countries despise Western democracies, with the United
States topping the list.

The targets of the United Nations' zeal will be the democracies, not the rogues
and despots of the world. The Western circles who are pressing for an
International Criminal Court, for instance, will not see Sierra Leone's
machete-wielding criminals in the docket, but American soldiers.

EDWARD J. PRENNER
Forest Hills, Queens, Aug. 31, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SIERRA LEONE (66%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (58%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT

 (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (58%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRALIA;   UNITED STATES (94%); SIERRA LEONE (66%);   NEW YORK,
USA (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS &
COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (88%); DISCRIMINATION (88%); LIBERALISM (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (73%); RACE & RACISM (72%);
RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (88%);

PERSON: PRENNER, EDWARD J

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             447 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 8, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

AN AVENGER'S PATH: A special report.;
Lawyer in Holocaust Case Faces Litany of Complaints

BYLINE: By BARRY MEIER;  This article was prepared under a joint reporting
agreement between The New York Times and ABC News. A report on Edward Fagan will
be televised tonight on the ABC program "20/20."

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 3604 words


Less than four years ago, a little-known personal-injury lawyer named Edward D.
Fagan stood next to an Auschwitz survivor at a news conference in New York and
announced an audacious lawsuit, accusing Swiss banks of stealing money 50 years
ago from those who died in the Holocaust.

Today, Mr. Fagan has a new and glamorous career and is likely soon to earn
millions of dollars in legal fees. He has since filed lawsuits against banks,
insurers and other companies in Austria, Germany and elsewhere, charging that
they too profited from Nazi ties or exploited victims. Settlements of actions
against Swiss banks and German industry worth over $6.2 billion were recently
approved.

Dozens of lawyers got involved in the Holocaust claims. But the 47-year-old Mr.
Fagan cast himself a part as a media-savvy street fighter who became the public
point man in the cases. This July, he hopscotched in a few days from Berlin to
Vienna to Warsaw on behalf of tens of thousands of people whom he and lawyers
associated with him represent.

They have also opened a second front, charging Japanese companies in lawsuits
with using thousands of Asians and others as forced labor during World War II.

"It's like a posse," the tall, curly-haired and engaging Mr. Fagan said. "There
are all these bad guys all over the world, and we have to track them down."

His mission, he said, is to reach back into history and force a reckoning with
those who profited from evil. But an investigation by The New York Times and the
ABC News program "20/20" has found that Mr. Fagan is facing his own reckoning.

As he recast himself as a "human rights" lawyer, Mr. Fagan left neglected
personal-injury clients in his wake, abandoning their claims or not returning
their phone calls for years, according to court papers and interviews. One
former client recently won a malpractice judgment against Mr. Fagan and ethics
officials in New Jersey filed a misconduct complaint against him last month on
behalf of another client.

Mr. Fagan, so at ease with using the emotional force of the Holocaust as a
weapon, also ignored for months scores of calls and letters from aging Nazi-era
survivors anxious about whether their claims had been received, said a paralegal
who worked last year for him and his partner at the time. That paralegal, Jane
Warshaw, was so distressed by what she saw that she wrote in January to the
judge handling the Swiss banks case to complain.

"I never expected to witness what I have seen at this office," she wrote. "What
is happening to these poor, old, injured and neglected people is heartbreaking."

For his part, Mr. Fagan conceded he may have failed some clients by taking on
too much work. But he insisted that he did his best to represent his
personal-injury clients and that he labored ceaselessly in the Holocaust cases
without financial guarantees, winning results few would have imagined.

"It was remarkable to be a lawyer and to be able to use your profession to do
good," he said. "To change history. To stand up for people's human rights is
incredible, and that's what we did."

Mr. Fagan's conduct does not appear to have jeopardized the financial claims of
his Holocaust clients. In any settlement, they would be eligible for the same
compensation as clients of more attentive lawyers. But several survivors he
represented say that his failure to return calls for months, even years, took a
wrenching emotional toll. Legal-ethics experts say lawyers are obligated to
answer client queries within a reasonable period, even in a huge class-action
suit.

Mr. Fagan is a frenetic man who appears inseparable from his cell phone. He had
hoped to be a rabbi, failed at business and ran a struggling legal practice
before he stumbled into the Holocaust litigation and a potential gold mine in
legal fees. In the Swiss banks suit alone, he seeks $4 million, the most for any
lawyer in the case.

There is little question that Mr. Fagan played a leading role in promoting the
Holocaust claims, cases whose moral charge made them a public cause. He
specialized in shaming companies and governments, orchestrating demonstrations
and prayer vigils. Some Holocaust survivors and advocates view him as their
champion.

"He is a master in public relations," said Hannah Lessing, an official of a
state-financed group in Austria for Holocaust victims. "Behind all the facade of
yelling and screaming, there is a man who cares for survivors."

But he also made it his business, while other lawyers were painstakingly
developing legal claims, to be first at the courthouse, gaining leverage with a
hasty filing. A news conference with an aged survivor would follow, drawing in a
flood of clients.

Mr. Fagan represents far more Holocaust claimants than most other lawyers,
giving him a powerful role in negotiations. The actual number of clients is
apparently a matter of some confusion. In one interview, Mr. Fagan put the
figure at 82,000, but his own lawyer cited a different one -- 52,000 -- in a
March response to a client complaint.

Other lawyers in the Holocaust cases say Mr. Fagan's ambitions vastly
outstripped his resources to deal with the huge numbers of clients he took on
and added that he was often absent for the legal fight. Burt Neuborne, who had
worked with Mr. Fagan before breaking with him, said Mr. Fagan's filing in the
Swiss banks case was so inadequate that a judge asked him to rewrite it.

"This was an ordinary man who got swept up in issues that were bigger than he
was," said Mr. Neuborne, a law professor at New York University. "He didn't
understand and eventually didn't really know how to behave and just got swept
away in the current of his own ego and his own ambition."

'Here Are Defendants'

Mr. Fagan has said that two pieces of information led him to the Swiss banks
case. The first was a 1996 article in The New York Times about Nazi gold and
Swiss banks. The other came from a longtime client, Gizella Weisshaus, an
Auschwitz survivor who told him of her family's Swiss account.

He recalled: "I thought, 'Oh, my goodness, I'm a lawyer, here are defendants. I
don't know who the plaintiffs are, I don't know who the plaintiffs are going to
be, but someone is going to pay.' "

The Swiss banks case would also apparently be the way to satisfy his gnawing
hunger for acclaim.

Born in Harlingen, Tex., Mr. Fagan grew up in San Antonio with two brothers and
a sister, all from his mother's first marriage. Mr. Fagan's father abandoned the
family, said Wayne Fagan, the lawyer's oldest brother. His other brother,
Avraham, embraced Orthodox Judaism and Mr. Fagan followed him to Israel.

"I wanted to be a rabbi," he said.

His religious ardor waned, and Mr. Fagan returned to this country and enrolled
in Cardozo Law School in New York, a part of Yeshiva University, graduating in
1980.

He spent several years with a large law firm that represented corporate
defendants. But in the late 1980's, Mr. Fagan, searching for something with more
panache, tried to start an exploration club for the wealthy. Travelers would
sail by yacht to exotic locales, accompanied by ocean scientists and
environmentalists. In 1991 he set up the Odyssoe Foundation, a nonprofit arm of
the business, to support environmental research. But the whole venture fizzled.

In 1994, soon after returning to law, he rented the entire 21st floor of the
former Standard Oil building in lower Manhattan, complete with the original,
opulent board room. He tried to support his tiny firm, Fagan & Associates, by
subletting space to other lawyers and advertising for personal-injury clients in
the yellow pages.

He was eager, however, for the spotlight, trying to interest a tabloid in one
case. In 1994, he asserted in a fax to the Star magazine that the actor
Sylvester Stallone had tried to defraud a client of his who owned three
paintings by Mr. Stallone.

"There has never been been an article of this nature with a celebrity (of this
stature) involving fraud and his artwork," Mr. Fagan wrote, according to papers
in a libel suit that Mr. Stallone filed against him in 1994.

The magazine never published the article, and Mr. Stallone withdrew his libel
action.

In another case, Mr. Fagan got on television representing a 6-year-old Queens
girl who had been stabbed with a hypodermic needle by a homeless man on the
subway.

But at the same time, his finances and his business ties were unraveling, public
records show. He began to owe large amounts of federal income taxes, a debt he
said he has mostly paid off. In 1996, the yellow pages unit of the former Nynex
Corporation filed a $228,000 lawsuit against Odyssoe in a New Jersey court for
unpaid services like advertisements for his legal practice.

Mr. Fagan said he ordered the advertisements through the nonprofit organization,
rather than his law firm, because it was also the billing address of some phone
lines at his firm. He said he believed the matter was resolved, but a
spokeswoman for Verizon, the successor to Nynex, said the bill was still
outstanding.

Faced with an eviction proceeding for unpaid rent, he was forced in 1997 to
leave his lavish offices and rent space from a law firm in the World Trade
Center.

The acrimony of his professional life spilled over into his closest relations.
In the mid 1990's, Mr. Fagan severed ties with his three siblings, said his
brother Wayne, a lawyer in San Antonio.

Wayne Fagan said: "Eddie was a warm, jovial person who was like a pied piper.
But something happened and Eddie just changed."

The Cases Left Behind

With Mr. Fagan's claim against the Swiss banks on behalf of Mrs. Weisshaus and
others in late 1996, he embraced a new mission. But the claims of some of his
personal-injury clients were apparently abandoned or forgotten.

One was Hector Ortiz. In 1992, Mr. Ortiz, a 49-year-old truck driver, smashed
into the back of a slow-moving crane, shattering bones and sustaining head
injuries.

In 1994, Mr. Fagan filed a $35 million lawsuit on his behalf in federal court in
Brooklyn and brought a similar action in State Supreme Court there. He
aggressively pursued the federal claim until late 1996, court papers and
interviews indicate.

In 1998, however, Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. of Federal District Court dismissed
Mr. Ortiz's federal lawsuit. In doing so, he also noted that Mr. Fagan had
"failed to prosecute" it for three years and had ignored court orders. Mr.
Ortiz's claim in Brooklyn state court has lain dormant for three years.

Mr. Fagan said that he had told Mr. Ortiz about a year ago that his federal
claim was dead but that he had not yet informed him that the state case also
appeared at an end.

Mr. Ortiz, who has not worked since the accident, disputed that account, saying
in a phone interview that he had not seen or spoken with Mr. Fagan for more than
two and a half years. "I was waiting in vain," he said. "I didn't know something
like this could happen. Right now I'm confused. I don't know what to do."

Another client, Tomas Giron, was struck and severely injured in 1992 by a car
reported stolen. Mr. Fagan said that he had made a claim for Mr. Giron to a New
York state fund that compensates victims of uninsured motorists but that it had
been denied.

Jeffrey Rubinton, the fund's president, though, said in an interview that its
records showed that such an action had not been pursued and that the statute of
limitations on making one had long expired.

In January, a former client, Offer Salmoni, won a $167,000 malpractice judgment
against Mr. Fagan, which the lawyer did not contest. Mr. Fagan had filed a
lawsuit on Mr. Salmoni's behalf in 1993 to contest an eviction. Mr. Salmoni
charged in a 1998 lawsuit that Mr. Fagan had allowed that claim to be thrown out
by repeatedly failing to make court appearances and had let the statute of
limitations expire without refiling. Mr. Fagan, who is licensed to practice in
New York and New Jersey, said he planned to settle with Mr. Salmoni.

Last month, New Jersey ethics officials, after a preliminary inquiry, filed a
misconduct complaint before a grievance committee against Mr. Fagan on behalf of
another former client, Diane Gibbons. Ms. Gibbons had complained to the ethics
board that Mr. Fagan's failure to file required papers in her personal-injury
action led to its dismissal. Mr. Fagan said he could not comment on the matter
because it was pending.

Stephen Gillers, a legal-ethics expert at New York University who is not
involved in the Holocaust litigation, said lawyers faced sanctions if they
ignored existing claims when the prospects of bigger awards beckoned. "Your
loyalty to your original client is undiluted," Mr. Gillers said.

Some personal-injury clients, whose names were provided to The Times by Mr.
Fagan, said that he fought difficult cases for them, and that they would use him
again. But Mr. Fagan acknowledged that he failed to withdraw -- as lawyers are
required to -- from suits that he did not pursue.

"I was in over my head a lot of the time," he said. "But now I'm digging out,
for me and for them."

Unanswered Calls, New Inquiries

By late 1999, with the Holocaust cases on the way to settlement, Mr. Fagan had
established his place on the world stage. When Jane Warshaw, a paralegal, was
sent by a temporary-help agency to work that fall for him and his then-partner
at the World Trade Center, she was thrilled.

"I thought they were doing God's work," Ms. Warshaw said.

Ms. Warshaw, 57, said that Mr. Fagan's partner at the time, Carey R. D'Avino,
asked her to check the office's telephone answering system. On it, she found
more than 100 unanswered messages from Holocaust survivors as well as
personal-injury clients, including Mr. Ortiz. It sounded like many had been
desperately calling for a year or more.

Stacks of unopened letters from Holocaust survivors or their heirs were
scattered around or stuffed in a drawer, she said. "They must have gotten their
hopes up and then, there again, they were told that they just didn't matter,"
she said.

Ms. Warshaw said she suggested to Mr. D'Avino that she prepare a newsletter to
keep clients updated, an accepted practice in class-action suits. The lawyer
said he told her that their clients were already getting periodic newsletters.
He described her as "well-meaning" but "out of the loop."

In January, troubled by what she viewed as client neglect, Ms. Warshaw sent a
recording of those calls to Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal District Court in
Brooklyn, who is overseeing the Swiss banks case. She also provided materials to
The Times and ABC News.

The picture emerging from the documents and tapes is chaotic. New York
disciplinary officials were investigating complaints by three of Mr. Fagan's
clients. Calls from Holocaust claimants were bounced from one answering machine
to another.

One caller, Bella Ross, said her parents, concentration camp survivors, were
ecstatic when Mr. Fagan took their case in 1998. "They thought, you know, they
had this savior," Ms. Ross said in an interview. "I mean, this is the man. You
saw him on TV. You heard about him on the radio. You see him in print. He is
everywhere. It was like finally they were blessed."

By last year, however, the family was so concerned about Mr. Fagan's lack of
response to dozens of messages and faxes that she filed a complaint with New
York disciplinary officials. "To date," Ms. Ross wrote in December, "Mr. Fagan
has done nothing to update my parents on the status of their case and is
literally unreachable."

Hal R. Lieberman, a lawyer representing Mr. Fagan in the matter, told
investigators in a March letter responding to Ms. Ross's complaint that Mr.
Fagan could not possibly deal with each of his tens of thousands of clients.
Both Mr. D'Avino and Mr. Fagan said in interviews that they had met their
ethical obligations to their clients; to date, there have been no findings
against them.

Other Holocaust lawyers, though, were devoting more extensive resources to
client communication. While some used paralegals to handle calls, Mr. Neubourne,
the New York University professor, said he set aside four hours a week to deal
directly with survivors, including many of Mr. Fagan's clients who called him
out of frustration.

"These are people who lived with these memories for so long," Mr. Neubourne
said. "The memories were then opened up, somebody told them something was going
to happen. And then they just got cut off."

Some clients said Mr. Fagan returned phone calls promptly and others involved in
Holocaust-related issues said they also had had far happier experiences with
him. They described him as a passionate advocate who took up a fight that
traditional Jewish groups had allowed to languish.

"Ed was the only true source of light," said Dr. Thomas Weiss, an
ophthalmologist in Miami Beach active in Nazi-era claims against insurers. "He
saw himself as picked by Providence to lead this charge."

For his part, Mr. Fagan described Ms. Warshaw as a "disgruntled former
employee," though he conceded that some of her concerns were legitimate.

He said he spent much of his time in recent years traveling and that only a few
clients had complained. "The truth of the matter is that some people are going
to be unhappy," he said.

Ms. Warshaw's complaint was referred to court officials, and Mr. D'Avino said
that an investigator contacted him. Mr. Fagan said an assistant was hired in
June to answer calls, resolving the matter.

A court official said the existence of an inquiry would not be confirmed or
denied until a judge issued a ruling.

Haggling at the Top

In July, Mr. Fagan arrived in Berlin as part of a victory lap in two of the most
significant cases. To settle slave-labor claims against German industry, the
government and companies there had approved a $5 billion fund to compensate
Nazi-era survivors. Not long after, Judge Korman in Brooklyn approved the $1.25
billion settlement of the Swiss banks case.

Mr. Fagan savored the moment, joining government officials, industry leaders and
the heads of Jewish groups at the signing of the German agreement. "I know for a
fact that the majority of these cases wouldn't have happened without me," he
said. "That's not bravado, it's just a fact."

During the signing, though, Mr. Fagan dickered by cell phone with Stuart E.
Eizenstat, the United States deputy treasury secretary, about lawyers' fees and
other issues.

Under the German plan, two arbitrators are to decide how to award legal fees.
Mr. Fagan argued with Mr. Eizenstat, who led negotiations in the case for the
American government, that he understood that the arbitrators had up to $75
million to award, not the $62.5 million to which some other plaintiffs' lawyers
had agreed.

After the call, Mr. Fagan telephoned a partner and said, "I got the legal fees
up." But his excitement was premature; documents show that the lower figure was
used.

Mr. Eizenstat said Mr. Fagan, after failing to get higher fees, then asked for a
letter testifying about his efforts in the German case because he feared that
lawyers critical of his conduct would seek to reduce his payout. Mr. Eizenstat
said he agreed to write such a letter because he felt Mr. Fagan had played a
constructive role.

Mr. Fagan's fears are well-founded. He is seeking $4 million in the Swiss banks
case, twice as much as any other lawyer. In class actions, a judge or
court-appointed expert determines fees, and lawyers argue that they deserve
sizeable fees because they took great risks and helped resolve the case.

But Mr. Neuborne and others said they would argue for a far lower sum for Mr.
Fagan in the Swiss banks case, contending that his contribution was minimal.

"His only gift was for publicity," said Martin Mendelsohn, a lawyer in
Washington who worked on the Holocaust claims. "But this was a lawsuit. It was
not theater."

New Clients to Pursue

Late last year, Mr. Fagan and lawyers associated with him set their sights on
Japan. They fanned out to Australia, Hong Kong, South Korea, New Zealand and the
Philippines in a bid to sign up thousands of people who claimed they had been
used as forced laborers, including former American and Allied prisoners of war.

Gil Hair, director of a group in Miami that represents American civilians
interned by the Japanese, said that Mr. Fagan called him in December and
characterized himself as the "hero of the Holocaust" cases before he began his
sales pitch. Mr. Hair, who already had a lawyer, declined.

In December, Mr. Fagan flew to Tokyo to make client contacts at a conference
held by groups representing victims of Japanese wartime aggression, said several
people who attended the meeting.

Public demonstrations soon followed. This summer, hundreds of old men and women
passed into a park in Seoul, South Korea, under a banner that, roughly
translated, read, "For the first time in 55 years we have brought action by
human rights lawyers from the United States against the Japanese."

At the rally's end, a Korean folk band playing drums and cymbals led the crowd
down a Seoul street as a man chanted through a loudspeaker "The Japanese
government should repent and compensate for their atrocities of World War II.
Repent. Repent. Repent."

Mr. Fagan said he planned to move forward, addressing more World War II wrongs
and other human rights causes. But some, like Ms. Warshaw, can only see the
trail of broken promises and failed hopes he has already left behind.

"I don't see how you can ignore someone, especially when you've said, 'I'm here
to help you, I'm going to help you,' " she said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (91%); SWITZERLAND (79%); JAPAN (79%);
AUSTRIA (77%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); NEW JERSEY, USA (79%);

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (91%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (57%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN BROADCASTING COS INC  (66%); AMERICAN BROADCASTING COS INC
(66%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SWITZERLAND;   UNITED STATES (92%); GERMANY (91%); SWITZERLAND
(79%); JAPAN (79%); AUSTRIA (77%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);
NEW JERSEY, USA (79%);   BERLIN, GERMANY (91%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (57%);

SUBJECT: NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION;
TELEVISION; SUITS AND LITIGATION; ETHICS; SLAVE LABOR  LAWYERS (91%); LITIGATION

 (91%); HOLOCAUST (91%); PRESS CONFERENCES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); GENOCIDE

 (89%); PARALEGALS (89%); ETHICS (89%); PERSONAL INJURY (89%); WORLD WAR II
(78%); MISCONDUCT (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); PROFESSIONAL NEGLIGENCE (72%);
INTERVIEWS (69%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (69%); APPROVALS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS
(69%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (68%);   FORCED LABOR (71%);

PERSON: FAGAN, EDWARD; MEIER, BARRY; WARSHAW, JANE  EDWARD D FAGAN (96%);

LOAD-DATE: September 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Edward Fagan, a lawyer transformed by his Holocaust case. (Fred
R. Conrad/The New York Times)(pg. A1); When Edward Fagan filed a class-action
lawsuit on behalf of Gizella Weisshaus, a survivor of Auschwitz, in 1996,
against Swiss banks that acquired assets of Nazi victims during World War II,
few would have believed the outcome: a $1.25 billion settlement. (Associated
Press); Jane Warshaw, a paralegal, complained about the treatment of Holocaust
clients. (Fred R. Conrad/The New York Times); At a July settlement in Berlin,
Mr. Fagan handed a phone to Otto Graf Lambsdorff, the chief German negotiator.
Stuart Eizenstat, at center, represented the United States. (Associated
Press)(pg. A24)


TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             452 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

              September 27, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Peru's Spy Chief in Exile

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 401 words


Vladimiro Montesinos, Peru's Rasputin, is now in Panama City awaiting a decision
on whether he will get political asylum there. Mr. Montesinos, the intelligence
chief and all-around fixer for Peru's president, Alberto Fujimori, fled the
country after a videotape was televised that showed him apparently bribing a
congressman. His departure on Sunday from Peru was, perhaps, the only way to
break his hold on power there. But Mr. Montesinos must ultimately be brought to
justice. He is accused of serious human rights abuses, and granting him asylum
would be an insult to genuine victims.

Panama should hold him with the goal of returning him to Peru for trial when
that becomes possible. If that date seems too far away, then Panama should open
an investigation to prosecute him for torture -- which any nation may do.

Mr. Montesinos, who ran the intelligence police, was so powerful that many
Peruvians believed the president worked for him. He has been credibly accused of
crimes ranging from running death squads to election fraud, and the United
States finally acknowledged that he has had a long relationship with American
intelligence services.

The tape of Mr. Montesinos apparently bribing a legislator to switch parties
surfaced two weeks ago, and Mr. Fujimori promptly announced that he would hold
new elections and not be a candidate, and that he had dissolved the intelligence
police. Mr. Montesinos dropped out of sight, and there were rumors that his
military allies were exploring the possibility of a coup. On Sunday he flew to
Panama.

Panama has long been a haven for unwanted despots, including the shah of Iran
and former leaders of Guatemala and Haiti. But it did not want Mr. Montesinos,
initially refusing to take him when Peru asked. But after pressure from
Washington, the Organization of American States and several of Peru's neighbors,
Panama agreed to let him in on a tourist visa while it considers his request.

The best course would have been for Peru to arrest Mr. Montesinos. As this was
unlikely, his exile will at least allow Peruvians to begin to erase some of his
malevolent influence on their government. But Washington should stop pressing to
get him asylum. The only guarantee Mr. Montesinos should receive from Panama is
that he will face justice, either in Panama on charges of torture, or in Peru
once it has elected a government that can try him.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); HAITI

 (79%);

CITY: PANAMA CITY, PANAMA (73%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; PANAMA;   PERU (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); HAITI (79%);   PANAMA CITY, PANAMA (73%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; PERU-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US; PANAMA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; PANAMA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-PERU; ASYLUM (POLITICAL); TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  POLITICAL
ASYLUM (91%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); TORTURE (90%);
ESPIONAGE (90%); ELECTIONS (78%); ELECTION FRAUD (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(78%); POLITICS (78%); POLITICAL CORRUPTION (78%); COUPS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(75%); INVESTIGATIONS (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); PASSPORTS & VISAS
(62%);

PERSON: MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K (PRES)  ALBERTO FUJIMORI
(73%);

LOAD-DATE: September 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             453 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Report Says Global Accounting Firm Overlooks Factory Abuses

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 960 words


In a rare inside look at the auditing firms that inspect overseas factories to
see whether they are sweatshops, an M.I.T. professor contends that the world's
largest factory-monitoring firm does a shoddy job and overlooks many safety and
wage violations.

The professor, Dara O'Rourke, said in a report to be issued today that
inspectors from the firm, PricewaterhouseCoopers, had a pro-management bias, did
not uncover the use of carcinogenic chemicals and failed to recognize that some
employees were forced to work 80-hour weeks.

He also said the firm overlooked other basic problems, including timecards that
were falsified and machines that were missing safety guards to protect workers'
fingers.

"PwC's monitoring efforts are significantly flawed," said Dr. O'Rourke, a
professor of environmental and labor policy at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. "PwC's audit reports glossed over problems of freedom of association
and collective bargaining, overlooked serious violations of health and safety
standards, and failed to report common problems in wages and hours."

Pricewaterhouse officials defended their monitoring, saying their inspectors
often uncover violations of minimum wage, overtime and safety laws. But these
officials acknowledged that the firm's inspectors occasionally missed things
that an expert on industrial hygiene, like Professor O'Rourke, would uncover.

"I think we do very good work in this field, and we're contributing to improving
conditions on behalf of our clients," said Randy Rankin, the partner in charge
of Pricewaterhouse's global contractor compliance practice.

Many apparel companies and universities have hired factory-monitoring firms in
recent years to reassure consumers who want to know that the clothes they buy
were not made in sweatshops. Pricewaterhouse, which performs more than 6,000
factory inspections a year, is the world's leader in doing inspections for
companies, like Nike, that want monitors to check on conditions in the factories
they use.

Professor O'Rourke accompanied Pricewaterhouse inspectors and officials with
Business for Social Responsibility, a nonprofit group in San Francisco, to
factories in China and Korea after Harvard, Notre Dame and three other
universities asked them and several other groups to review conditions at more
than a dozen plants that make apparel with the universities' logos. That broader
monitoring report was presented to the universities last week but is not
scheduled to be released until early October.

Professor O'Rourke's report comes during a fierce debate in which many student
groups, labor unions and human rights groups are criticizing corporations and
universities that rely on auditing firms to inspect their factories. These
groups assert that the auditing firms often have a pro-corporate tilt, do not do
thorough inspections and should work with nongovernmental organizations, like
human rights groups, to gain a fuller picture of factory conditions overseas.

Professor O'Rourke, who has inspected more than 100 Asian factories for the
World Bank and various United Nations organizations, called on universities and
companies to demand more rigorous monitoring efforts. He criticized
Pricewaterhouse inspectors for failing to identify that workers in a garment
factory in Seoul, South Korea, used a spot remover containing benzene, a
carcinogen. When he visited a factory outside Jakarta, Indonesia, he found that
the firm's inspectors had overlooked the same problem during an earlier
inspection.

He also faulted the firm's monitors for not noting that the labor union at a
Shanghai garment factory was, like most Chinese unions, controlled by
management. And he criticized the inspectors for failing to note that little
information was given on chemicals used in the factory and that some workers did
not wear proper gloves, masks or shoes while doing dangerous tasks or handling
dangerous materials.

In addition, his report said Pricewaterhouse monitors received most of their
information from managers, not workers, and did perfunctory interviews with
workers inside the factory instead of in-depth interviews outside, where workers
would probably talk more openly.

His report questioned why Pricewaterhouse monitors found that the Shanghai
employees worked 50 to 60 hours a week, while his inspection of time cards found
that one employee worked 316.5 hours in a month, or 75 hours a week, and 20
consecutive days.

Pharis Harvey, executive director of the International Labor Rights Fund, a
nonprofit group based in Washington, said, "The lesson to be drawn is that
Pricewaterhouse has to learn how to monitor before it can claim it's doing a
serious job."

Defending Pricewaterhouse, Mr. Rankin said his firm received information not
just from managers, but by observing factories, examining their records and
interviewing their workers. He accused Professor O'Rourke of bias and of failing
to appreciate that his firm found many overtime and safety violations.

"The allegation that we rely on management at the expense of all other things,
that's absolutely wrong," Mr. Rankin said.

He said the firm's inspectors might not have found some of the timecard problems
that Professor O'Rourke found because they looked at only a sampling of
timecards. And he acknowledged that his firm's inspectors might not have
recognized that the spot remover was a benzene derivative because they were not
trained industrial hygienists.

Allan Ryan, university attorney at Harvard, said he was not in a position to
judge whether Professor O'Rourke's criticisms were valid. "We know monitoring
has shortcomings," he said. "What Dara O'Rourke is saying is that it might have
more shortcomings than we thought."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (64%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS541211 OFFICES OF CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANTS (92%); SIC8721
ACCOUNTING, AUDITING, & BOOKKEEPING SERVICES (92%); NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR
MANUFACTURING (64%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS' & INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL
MANUFACTURING (64%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING
(64%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (64%); SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS
FOOTWEAR (64%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS' OUTERWEAR, NEC (64%);
SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (64%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%); CHINA (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (53%);

COMPANY: PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS (92%); NIKE INC (64%);   MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE
OF TECHNOLOGY (90%);

ORGANIZATION: MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%); CHINA (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (53%);



SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ACCOUNTING (90%); WAGES & SALARIES
(90%); ACCOUNTING & AUDITING FIRMS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); AUDITS (90%); WAGE
VIOLATIONS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); WORKPLACE HEALTH & SAFETY (90%);
INSPECTIONS (89%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (89%); FACTORY WORKERS (78%);

 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY (78%); APPAREL MFG (78%); OVERTIME (77%);
MINIMUM WAGE (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH &
SAFETY AGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); LABOR UNIONS (76%); WORK WEEK (75%);
EMPLOYEE TIMEKEEPING (75%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%); NONGOVERNMENTAL
ORGANIZATIONS (72%); CARCINOGENS (71%); EXTRA CURRICULAR ACTIVITIES (69%);
REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (68%); COLLECTIVE BARGAINING (67%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY &
ASSOCIATION (67%); CIVIC & SOCIAL ORGANIZATIONS (67%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE
(64%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (92%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%);

PERSON: DARA O'ROURKE (91%);

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             455 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 1, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

FOLLOWING UP;
Still Seeking Justice In a Brother's Death

BYLINE: By EDWARD WONG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 33; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front

LENGTH: 268 words


Dolly Filartiga's days of medical training are long behind her. She was studying
to be a doctor in Paraguay in 1976 when her brother Joelito, 17, was tortured
and killed because their father opposed the repressive government. Ms. Filartiga
dropped her studies to seek reprisal. Today, living in Forest Hills, Queens, she
said full justice continued to elude her.

In 1984, a federal judge in Brooklyn ruled that the family was entitled to $10.4
million in damages from Americo Norberto Pena-Irala, the inspector general who
ran the police force in Asuncion, Paraguay, in 1976. When the Filartigas filed
their civil lawsuit, Mr. Pena-Irala was living in Brooklyn, but he soon returned
to Paraguay.

"We were a fantastic family until this man came and killed my brother," Ms.
Filartiga, 45, said Friday in an interview.

The 1984 ruling has been cited as a precedent in more than 100 civil lawsuits on
human rights. But in all the lawsuits, including Ms. Filartiga's, no money has
been collected because the defendants live abroad.

For years, the Paraguayan government has refused demands by Ms. Filartiga and
her lawyers to pay the damages. Two weeks ago, the Filartigas appealed to the
lower house of Parliament, which is expected to issue a decision in about a
month.

If Paraguay continues to refuse to pay, Ms. Filartiga said, her family will ask
the Inter-American Court of Human Rights in Costa Rica to enforce the Brooklyn
federal court's decision. "We people who were persecuted, we are not ordinary
people," she said. "We have been fighting since they killed my brother."
EDWARD WONG


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PARAGUAY (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); COSTA RICA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%);   ASUNCION, PARAGUAY (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PARAGUAY (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); COSTA RICA (79%);   NEW YORK,
USA (93%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (93%);   ASUNCION, PARAGUAY (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LITIGATION (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); TORTURE (90%); MEDICAL EDUCATION (78%); DAMAGES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (76%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (76%); LAWYERS (73%); INTERVIEWS (73%);
POLICE FORCES (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(71%); JUDGES (71%);

PERSON: DOLLY FILARTIGA (94%);

LOAD-DATE: October 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             456 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 4, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS;
Britain's Legal Barriers Start to Fall

BYLINE: By SUZANNE KAPNER

SECTION: Section W; Page 1; Column 3; Business/Financial Desk

LENGTH: 1179 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Oct. 3


Isabelle Terrillon has sued her former employer, Nomura International, asserting
that her superiors at the bank instructed her to wear short, tight skirts to
work. Once, the lawsuit attests, they ordered her to strip to her underwear and
give a man a massage during a business meeting.

In a suit filed against Credit Suisse First Boston, a former employee, Philip
Karam, who was born in Pakistan, says that Asian employees were referred to as
"curry." In an interview, Mr. Karam said that his bosses threatened to set fire
to his apartment if he reported the comments to the personnel department.

Nomura and Credit Suisse deny wrongdoing and are fighting the lawsuits. Ms.
Terrillon, through her lawyer, declined to comment.

Sounds like the latest round of Wall Street mudslinging, right? Not exactly.
Such discrimination suits, filed by employees working in the London offices of
foreign and local companies, are part of a growing British penchant to litigate.

The number of sexual and racial discrimination lawsuits filed with Employment
Tribunals in England and Wales for the year ended in June was 76 percent higher
than the number filed five years earlier. Some of the more high-profile cases
have been filed against firms in the City of London -- British for Wall Street
-- the buttoned-down home of the pinstriped suit, and they are helping to
reshape one of the last bastions of the white boys' club.

Discrimination based on gender and race was outlawed in Britain 25 years ago.
But it has been only in the last few years -- thanks, in part, to the cultural
influence of America, where no problem is too small for the courts -- that
Britons have begun suing with fervor. And anti-discrimination policies are
likely to gain more teeth not just in Britain but throughout Continental Europe
as a result of goading by two European bodies.

The 15-country European Union ratified measures this summer, under Article 13 of
the Treaty of Amsterdam, that for the first time will provide a uniform legal
basis to combat discrimination on the grounds of race, sex, religion, age or
disability.

Then there is the European Convention on Human Rights, drafted by the Council of
Europe, a group founded to protect individual freedoms. All 41 member countries
are required to sign it into law. The legislation is especially significant for
Britain, which has no written constitution, because it will replace common law
rights dating to the Magna Carta with a written bill. Legal experts are hailing
the edict, which took effect in England on Monday, as the largest change to
British law in three centuries.

To Americans who have seen powerful companies of all stripes humbled by the
class-action suit, Britain's legal coming of age may seem like small potatoes.
But considering that many of these issues fly in the face of British tradition,
which has more often been about duties than about rights, the changes are a huge
cultural shift in Britain.

"Before, if your boss harassed you, you had to accept it," said Martin McElwee,
deputy editor at the Center for Policy Studies in London. "Today, people realize
they don't have to put up with that kind of behavior."

Some call it the Ally McBeal effect, and attribute the current overall rise in
the number of lawsuits filed to an American culture that glorifies lawyers.
American banks, which bought or built their way into the London markets during
the liberalization effort of the 1980's, had some influence, too.

"Given the emphasis in the U.S. on diversity issues, these topics were imported
into the City in a way they never would've been" without the United States
presence, said Alexander Campbell, head of human resources for the London
operations of UBS Warburg.

His company and others have begun to take note. Five years ago, when Mr.
Campbell joined the company, the investment banking arm of UBS A.G. of
Switzerland, topics of race and gender were hardly discussed, he said. Today,
the firm has created a new position, global head of diversity, to ensure that
these issues are not brushed aside.

"The costs of litigation if you get some of this stuff wrong is escalating
significantly in the U.K.," Mr. Campbell said. "Culturally we tend to follow the
U.S. with a 5-to-10-year lag. We are becoming a more litigious society."

Much of the changes, however, would be mere lip service if they were not girded
by the Convention on Human Rights and Article 13.

Chris Myant, a spokesman for the Commission for Racial Equality here, expects
the Human Rights Convention to reshape legal ideology. "'The thinking of the
courts will shift from 'How can we be a barrier to people achieving their
rights?' to 'How can we be a springboard?' " he said.

Article 13, meanwhile, will usher in more specific changes, such as shifting the
burden of proof from claimants to defendants and allowing third parties, like
the British Equal Opportunity Commission, to sue on behalf of individuals.
Currently, such groups can offer legal aid to claimants but cannot file suit
directly on their behalf.

But cowboy litigation American-style is unlikely to run wild in Britain anytime
soon. The Employment Tribunals operate under rules that prohibit class-action
suits, and the tribunals, which are similar to the American arbitration system,
are where discrimination cases in England are tried. Moreover, remuneration is
based largely on a claimant's lost wages. This means that the awards usually
fall short of the million-dollar judgments common in the United States, where a
combination of compensatory and punitive damages is often granted. And people
bringing cases before the tribunals are required to bear the cost of their legal
fees, which in many cases exceeds the settlement, employment lawyers said.

Some barriers are slowly falling. Remuneration caps were removed in 1994, at
which time the maximum compensation for discrimination cases was £11,000
($15,800). As women and minorities earn higher wages, the potential for greater
compensation increases. Another part of the settlement, called injury to
feelings, which is meant to redress psychological damage, has also increased
from an average of £5,000 five years ago to as much as £30,000 ($43,710) today.

And so cases like Kay Swinburne's are becoming more common. Ms. Swinburne was
earning £300,000 ($432,000) a year as an investment banker at Deutsche Bank's
London office until the sexist comments by her boss -- among other things, he
accused her of sleeping with a client -- caused her to resign. She won her
discrimination case before a tribunal. Her subsequent out-of-court settlement in
March was £1 million ($1.44 million), according to newspaper reports. Deutsche
Bank declined to comment.

Despite such results, some people, including Mr. Karam, who says he will never
be able to get another job in the City after suing Credit Suisse, remain
skeptical about the larger impact of discrimination suits. "It's great to have
all these things on paper," Mr. Karam said. "But to see them filter through to
real life is another matter."


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: CSGN (SWX) (58%); CS (NYSE) (58%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (58%); NAICS524126
DIRECT PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE CARRIERS (58%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT (58%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (97%); EUROPE (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); WALES (92%);
PAKISTAN (92%); ENGLAND (91%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS
(79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%);

COMPANY: CREDIT SUISSE GROUP AG (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREAT BRITAIN; LONDON (ENG);   UNITED KINGDOM (97%); EUROPE (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); WALES (92%); PAKISTAN (92%); ENGLAND (91%); EUROPEAN UNION
MEMBER STATES (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (90%);   LONDON, ENGLAND

 (91%); AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: LABOR; DISCRIMINATION; WOMEN; SUITS AND LITIGATION  SUITS & CLAIMS
(94%); LITIGATION (91%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (78%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%);
RACE & RACISM (76%); LAWYERS (75%); HUMAN RESOURCES (73%); CLASS ACTIONS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); EUROPEAN UNION (69%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (68%); LEGISLATION
(67%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%); EUROPEAN UNION LAW (67%); RELIGION (50%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (73%);

PERSON: KAPNER, SUZANNE  ALEXANDER CAMPBELL (60%); PHILIP KARAM (56%); ISABELLE
TERRILLON (56%);

LOAD-DATE: October 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Workers going to jobs in the City of London, Britain's version
of Wall Street. New laws threaten to shake up the City's culture. (Jonathan
Player for The New York Times)

Chart: "Bias Suits"
The number of sex and race descrimination lawsuits filed with Employment
Tribunals in England and Wales.

Graph shows figures from 1994-2000. (Source: British Dept. of Trade and
Industry)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             458 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Justice for Women

SECTION: Section 4; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 153 words



To the Editor:

Re "Working for Women's Sexual Rights" (news article, Oct. 2): Women's human
rights violations are not news to the world, but not enough has been done to
improve the actual condition of women.

There are still societies in which women are murdered for not bringing enough
dowry, or treated cruelly for not giving birth to a male child. Some are stoned
to death for getting an abortion, losing their virginity before marriage or even
for marrying a person out of their religion; others are smuggled across borders
like commodities for prostitution.

In our own country, some radical forces are trying hard to deprive women of
their basic human right to have an abortion.

Improving this situation is going to take lot more effort on the part of
progressive men and women everywhere, not just words of recognition from the
United Nations.

DOBBIE SANGHA
Hayward, Calif., Oct. 2, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (50%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (50%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (50%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (50%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY
AREA, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FEMINISM
& WOMEN'S RIGHTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS

 (88%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); ABORTION
(69%); SMUGGLING (53%); PROSTITUTION (53%); RELIGION (53%);

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             460 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 11, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Sudan, at U.N., Fails to Win Council Seat

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 456 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 10


A Sudanese bid to win a two-year term on the Security Council was defeated today
after four rounds of voting. The contested African seat finally went to the
Indian Ocean island nation of Mauritius.

Colombia, Ireland, Norway and Singapore also won seats on the 15-member Council
for 2001-2002. Five of the 10 nonpermanent seats are rotated every year.

The United States, led by Ambassador Richard C. Holbrooke and Secretary of State
Madeleine K. Albright, had lobbied vigorously with foreign governments against
the candidacy of Sudan, which the Clinton administration has accused of
sponsoring terrorism.

Human rights groups also campaigned against the Arab-led Islamic Sudanese
government, accusing it of genocide because of its brutal repression of black
African Sudanese southerners, who are Christians or followers of traditional
religions.

In an interview after the vote, Mr. Holbrooke called his lobbying effort "the
A.B.S. strategy -- Anybody but Sudan."

"What a disaster it would have been for the United Nations if Sudan had gotten
on the Security Council!" he exclaimed. "This is a big win for the United
Nations and for Africa and for Mauritius."

Mauritius gained strong support from several dozen other small island nations,
as well as the southern African countries and Uganda, none of which accepted the
Organization of African Unity's decision to back Sudan.

A number of Latin American nations, protesting abuses against Sudanese
Christians, also decided to back Mauritius. Most Europeans followed suit,
diplomats said. And India, with ethnic ties to Mauritius, lobbied for it.

Mauritius has always resented being portrayed as the "American candidate." Anund
P. Neewoor, Mauritius's ambassador to the United Nations, said in an interview
last week that his government had been at least two months ahead of Sudan in
deciding to run for the seat being vacated by Namibia.

Mali and Tunisia also hold African seats among the five places set aside for
African and Asian nations in an antiquated division of the world. Their two-year
terms expire at the end of 2001.

"Mauritius did not decide to be a candidate at the behest of the United States,"
Mr. Neewoor said. "But if the U.S. opposition to Sudan by implication means that
they campaign for Mauritius, then there is not much we can do about that."

In the only other contested council race, Ireland and Norway defeated Italy to
take two seats assigned to the Western Europe and Others Group.

The terms of three other nonpermanent members besides Mali and Tunisia will
expire at the end of next year: Bangladesh, Jamaica and Ukraine. The five
permanent members, all of whom have veto power, are Britain, China, France,
Russia and the United States.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MAURITIUS (98%); UNITED STATES (95%); SUDAN (95%); NORWAY (94%); AFRICA

 (93%); EUROPE (92%); SINGAPORE (92%); MALI (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
UGANDA (79%); CHINA (79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); NAMIBIA (79%); ASIA (79%);
SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%); LATIN AMERICA (78%); FRANCE (65%); UKRAINE (57%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%);

CITY: PORT LOUIS, MAURITIUS (89%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL (UN)  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (93%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (54%); AFRICAN UNION (54%);
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL (UN)  UNITED NATIONS  (93%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (54%); AFRICAN UNION
(54%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SUDAN; NORWAY; COLOMBIA; IRELAND; MAURITIUS;   MAURITIUS (98%);
UNITED STATES (95%); SUDAN (95%); NORWAY (94%); AFRICA (93%); EUROPE (92%);
SINGAPORE (92%); MALI (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); UGANDA (79%); CHINA
(79%); WESTERN EUROPE (79%); NAMIBIA (79%); ASIA (79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%);
LATIN AMERICA (78%); FRANCE (65%); UKRAINE (57%);   INDIAN OCEAN (90%);   PORT
LOUIS, MAURITIUS (89%);

SUBJECT: UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); RELIGION (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); LOBBYING (89%);
CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); GENOCIDE (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (73%);
VETO (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (70%); TERRORISM (55%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  RICHARD HOLBROOKE (70%);

LOAD-DATE: October 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             462 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 13, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

The Bias the Candidates Deplore

BYLINE: By Julian Bond and Wade Henderson;  Julian Bond is chairman of the
N.A.A.C.P. Wade Henderson is executive director of the Leadership Conference on
Civil Rights.

SECTION: Section A; Page 33; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 856 words


In Wednesday night's debate at Wake Forest University, both presidential
candidates spoke out firmly against racial profiling, the police practice of
stopping cars because of the race of their drivers. "I can't imagine what it's
like to be singled out because of race and stopped and harassed," George W. Bush
said. "That's flat wrong." Asked by the moderator, Jim Lehrer, if he would
support a federal law to stop racial profiling, Mr. Bush said yes.

Al Gore was more specific. Not only would he issue an executive order to stop
racial profiling in federal law enforcement, he said, but if he were to win the
presidency, a federal ban on racial profiling would be "the first civil rights
act of the 21st century."

These statements -- echoing, at least in sentiment, the equally vehement
denunciations by the vice presidential candidates, Dick Cheney and Joseph
Lieberman, in their debate last week -- will only have meaning if they translate
into real action when the campaign is over. So far, the national record on
unequal treatment of minorities in the criminal justice system is discouraging,
to say the least -- and not just where driving is concerned.

Last month the United States submitted its first report to the United Nations
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. In that document, our
government made a historic acknowledgment that racism remains an obstinate
American problem. The report describes the pervasiveness of racial bias in
housing, education and other areas of American life, and we applaud the effort
behind it. We note with dismay, however, that racial disparities in one crucial
area -- the criminal justice system -- are far more widespread and profound than
the report admits.

In particular, it does nothing to outline remedies for racial profiling, racial
disparities in sentencing and incarceration, or the racist application of the
death penalty. It places undue reliance on the false defense of federalism,
claiming the Constitution precludes federal action against state and local
governments when they violate the rights of minorities.

The United States ratified the International Convention on the Elimination of
All Forms of Racial Discrimination in 1994, and under that agreement this
country has a responsibility to remedy discrimination, both intentional and
unintentional, that disproportionately affects minorities.

Earlier this year, in anticipation of the report to the United Nations, 47
Americans, including civil and human rights leaders, urged the United Nations to
appeal to the United States to honor its obligations under the Race Convention
when the racial discrimination committee considers the American report early
next year. By acting as a check on government behavior in the United States, the
international community can play a constructive role in pressing this country to
address these festering problems.

Recent reports show that from 1995 to 1997, 70 percent of the drivers stopped by
Maryland State Police on Interstate Route 95 were black, even though only 17.5
percent of all drivers were black. Nationally, although there are five times as
many white drug users as black drug users, blacks make up 62.7 percent of drug
offenders sent to state prison. Other minorities, too, are imprisoned at rates
above their proportion in the population, and the rates are growing. Among all
prisoners, Hispanics are the fastest-growing ethnic group, and the percentage of
Asian-Americans in the federal prisons increased by a factor of four from 1980
to 1999.

Sadly, African-American and Hispanic children are 2.5 times as likely as white
children who engage in comparable behavior to be tried as adults, and 8.3 times
as likely to be incarcerated.

American rhetoric is strong in favor of racial justice at home, as the
presidential and vice presidential debates once again showed. And
internationally, the United States is a leader in calling for human rights. The
two go together, and our actions must match our ideals. As President Clinton
said in his State of the Union address in 1997, "Our world leadership grows out
of the power of our example here at home." Efforts to urge other nations to
adhere to the rule of law will be undermined by the conspicuous American failure
to achieve elemental fairness in the administration of its own laws.

It is not enough for national leaders to throw up their hands and say that since
criminal law is mostly state law, only the states can end the disparity in
justice. We call on the federal government, no matter who is elected in
November, to expand civil rights laws to outlaw racial profiling; to mandate
federal standards and training for state and local law enforcement agencies that
will help improve treatment of minorities; and to reform sentencing laws that
have transferred sentencing discretion from judges to prosecutors, with
disastrous consequences for minorities. Federal officials can press for
suspension of capital punishment in the United States.

We need national leaders committed to designing and acting on a substantive
strategy for the achievement of justice that is truly just.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%);

COMPANY: WAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY  (84%); WAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY (84%); UNITED
NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

ORGANIZATION: WAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY  (84%); WAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY (84%);
UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%);   MARYLAND, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: POLICE; ELECTION ISSUES; PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000; DEBATING;
BLACKS; DISCRIMINATION; CRIME AND CRIMINALS; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT; MINORITIES (US); FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; ROADS AND TRAFFIC  RACE &
RACISM (94%); RACIAL PROFILING (92%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (91%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%);

 US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); CRIMINAL
LAW (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(87%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (87%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (86%); ELECTIONS
(78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (78%); PLATFORMS &
ISSUES (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); POLICE FORCES (78%); SENTENCING (76%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (70%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (65%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (90%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(90%);

PERSON: BOND, JULIAN; HENDERSON, WADE; GORE, AL (VICE PRES); BUSH, GEORGE W
(GOV); LIEBERMAN, JOSEPH I (SEN); CHENEY, DICK  GEORGE W BUSH (79%); DICK CHENEY

 (73%); AL GORE (73%); JOE LIEBERMAN (73%);

LOAD-DATE: October 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             464 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Salvadoran Admits Abuses In Trial Tied to Nuns' Deaths

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1073 words

DATELINE: WEST PALM BEACH, Fla., Oct. 18


Almost 20 years after Salvadoran soldiers beat, raped and shot four American
churchwomen to death, the country's former defense minister testified in court
for the first time today, saying that while men in his forces "could have"
committed abuses, such crimes were in no way emblematic of the military as a
whole.

"I have accepted that there were abuses committed in the forces, but not to
point a finger at the institution making it responsible for everything that is
going on," said former Gen. Jose Guillermo Garcia, who was El Salvador's defense
minister at the time of the killings.

In his daylong testimony in Federal Court here, Mr. Garcia also asserted that
whenever his office investigated press and diplomatic reports of killings and
torture against unarmed civilians, the conclusion his subordinates brought him
was always the same: the events were military operations.

And he repeatedly refused to acknowledge the occurrence of massacres by the
Salvadoran military, even though the killings were later classified as such by
an international Truth Commission that investigated the 12-year civil war, which
claimed the lives of some 75,000 people.

Relatives of the churchwomen are seeking punitive and compensatory damages from
the general and his co-defendant, former Gen. Carlos Eugenio Vides Casanova. who
was director of El Salvador's National Guard. Mr. Garcia's testimony came in
response to attempts by the plaintiffs' lawyers to set the historical context
for their lawsuit.

The case has been brought in Florida, where the two men have lived in retirement
for about 10 years, under the 1992 Torture Victim Protection Act. The law allows
victims or their surviving relatives to sue individuals who may have known of
crimes or the probability of their occurring but took no action to stop them.

While about a dozen such cases have been brought since the statute was enacted,
this is one of the few where the defendants have appeared in court.

The day's testimony centered on Mr. Garcia's knowledge of illegal acts by the
military and the actions he took to address them, a central part of the
plaintiffs' case.

The four women who were killed -- Ita Ford and Maura Clarke, Maryknoll sisters;
Dorothy Kazel, an Ursuline sister; and Jean Donovan, a lay missionary -- were
abducted, raped and shot to death while driving from the airport near San
Salvador on Dec. 2, 1980.

Five Salvadoran national guardsmen were convicted of the crime in 1984, but
Salvadoran authorities did not press charges against the military's leaders.
Three of the guardsmen were later released after serving part of their 30-year
sentences.

Members of the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights traveled to El Salvador in
1998 to interview four of the five convicted guardsmen, who said then that they
had acted on orders from superiors.

Speaking briefly after his testimony, Mr. Garcia said he wanted to prove he had
nothing to do with the murders of the churchwomen.

"I came here to demonstrate my innocence in participating in the crime against
the nuns," he said. "But that was the least of what was discussed today."

When asked during his testimony about the 1981 massacre at El Mozote, where the
elite Atlacatl Battalion killed 600 men, women and children, Mr. Garcia said he
could not remember what information he had or what conversations he held with
American diplomats at the time. One declassified cable projected on a screen
behind Mr. Garcia said he had told the American ambassador, Deane Hinton, that
the account of the killings was "a soap opera."

"I am a very honest man and I do not recall having used those words," Mr. Garcia
said.

He later said: "I do not remember. I never denied there had been operations.
What I say is, as it is referred to, a massacre, we were not able to accept it
as such at the time."

When asked what inquiries he made, he said: "Yes, something was done. The
corresponding level did an investigation. But the response was always the same,
military action.

"It is easy in a time of peace to establish what really happened," he said. "But
I agree, there were abuses that should not have been committed and which brought
with them the consequences the result of which you talk about."

Mr. Garcia was repeatedly asked about a newspaper advertisement in which the
military published a list of "traitors to the Fatherland," which included the
names of priests, political opponents and others accused of "discrediting" the
country.

Despite being shown a newspaper article in which the military explained its
decision to publish the list, which a plaintiff's lawyer called "a death list,"
Mr. Garcia said that it was never authorized by the military commanders but that
an inquiryhe ordered into its origin failed. At the same time, he stunned
onlookers when he said the publication of the list proved "that there was
freedom of expression" in El Salvador.

The killings of the churchwomen came at the beginning of an escalation in El
Salvador's civil war, which also claimed the lives of Archbishop Oscar Romero
and six Jesuits slain at the University of Central America. The church, along
with proponents of liberation theology and its social interpretation of
religious teachings, had been an advocate for the poor and a target of its
military.

The deaths of the Jesuits in 1989 caused outrage around the world and helped to
galvanize international opposition to the Salvadoran regime.

The relatives of the slain women said that both officers had planned the attack
and its subsequent cover-up. Although the two men denied knowing anything about
the murders beforehand, a report by the United Nations after the conflict ended
said that Mr. Garcia had failed to seriously investigate them.

In his testimony today, Mr. Garcia said that he had requested that the killings
be investigated and that he had not obstructed anything.

He said that he had been restricted in investigating reported abuses and that
the violence of the time resulted in claims of abuses being made by both sides.
A later report by the Truth Commission, however, attributed some 85 percent of
the abuses to the military and its allies in paramilitary death squads.

"Garcia must be the only human being in El Salvador who did not know about the
murdered, mutilated bodies of victims strewn on every road," said Bill Ford, the
brother of Ita and the lead plaintiff in the case.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EL SALVADOR (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%);

CITY: SAN SALVADOR, EL SALVADOR (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EL SALVADOR;   EL SALVADOR (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);   FLORIDA,
USA (92%);   SAN SALVADOR, EL SALVADOR (58%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; SUITS AND LITIGATION  TESTIMONY
(91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (89%); TORTURE (89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); LAWYERS (78%);
MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (78%); MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); PUNITIVE DAMAGES (73%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (73%); DAMAGES
(71%); HISTORY (66%);

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; GARCIA, JOSE GUILLERMO; VIDES CASANOVA, CARLOS EUGENIO;
FORD, ITA; CLARKE, MAURA; KAZEL, DOROTHY; DONOVAN, JEAN  JOSE GUILLERMO GARCIA
(94%);

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             465 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 24, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Chief Agrees to Release Documents on Chile

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 258 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 23


George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, has agreed to release
several hundred documents related to United States covert operations in Chile in
the years around the 1973 military coup that ousted President Salvador Allende,
officials said today.

Mr. Tenet, who last summer tried to block the release of about 700 secret
documents from the Central Intelligence Agency and other government agencies,
has agreed to free up all but two dozen of them, although many of the papers may
be heavily censored, officials said.

The documents, which are scheduled to be released on Nov. 13, are part of a
declassification project ordered by President Clinton last year to shed light on
human rights abuses, terrorism and other acts of political violence in Chile
between 1968 and 1990. The C.I.A. promoted efforts to topple Dr. Allende, a
Socialist, and included leaders of the succeeding military government among its
informants.

Mr. Tenet in August overruled his own declassification experts and sought to
withhold about 450 C.I.A. documents and 250 documents from other government
agencies on the grounds that they would reveal too much about how the agency
conducts its business worldwide. But he then agreed to an additional review of
the papers by members of the White House and the State Department.

Bill Leary, the White House official who led that review, today announced that
Mr. Tenet and the national security adviser, Samuel R. Berger, had agreed to
release "virtually all" of the documents in question.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (96%); UNITED STATES (94%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (93%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (93%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (93%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (96%); UNITED STATES (94%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT;
CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  COUPS (91%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); POLITICS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (71%); CENSORSHIP (70%); TERRORISM (69%);   MILITARY RULE (90%);
MARTIAL LAW (90%);

PERSON: TENET, GEORGE J (DIR); MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER; ALLENDE GOSSENS, SALVADOR
(1908-73)  BILL CLINTON (57%);

LOAD-DATE: October 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             467 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fujimori Orders Military To Arrest His Former Spy Chief

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 823 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, Oct. 25


President Alberto K. Fujimori ordered military units to hunt down his former
intelligence chief tonight, but after security forces searched five locations,
they could not find him.

Mr. Fujimori led the operation to locate the former spy chief, Vladimiro
Montesinos, who returned to Peru on Monday from a monthlong exile in Panama, and
in doing so, threw Peru into a state of agitation.

Opposition leaders celebrated the decision to isolate Mr. Montesinos, and
quickly concluded a deal with the government on the date for new elections, in
which Mr. Fujimori has pledged not to run.

As a condition for clearing the way for the elections, the government had been
insisting on a sweeping amnesty for members of the security forces. But tonight
the government suddenly dropped that condition, and the negotiators agreed to an
election date of April 8.

Speaking to the nation late tonight, Mr. Fujimori called for calm, but suggested
that elements of the security forces had probably helped Mr. Montesinos escape.
"We hope this operation will have the total support of the complete armed forces
and police," President Fujimori said.

In ordering the operation, Mr. Fujimori told all military units to remain in
their barracks. He said he took personal command of the operation, which
included elite units of all the armed forces.

Mr. Montesinos, who had been Mr. Fujimori's closest aide since 1990, is
suspected of involvement in a variety of crimes ranging from corrupt acts to
human rights violations, including torture.

It was not clear exactly what Mr. Fujimori hoped to gain from the operation.
Curiously, he told the nation, "there is no order to detain him, only to find
him." But he added, "This operation will continue day and night until he is
found."

Mr. Fujimori said once Mr. Montesinos was found, he would be handed over to
judicial authorities.

Since Monday, Mr. Fujimori has been touring military installations, apparently
to rally support, and he quietly transferred several of Mr. Montesinos's allies
out of security positions in the presidential palace.

Mr. Montesinos was forced to leave the country four weeks ago after a videotape
was broadcast on a cable television station showing him handing over $15,000 to
a newly elected opposition congressman in exchange for his change of parties.
The video also forced Mr. Fujimori to call for new presidential elections in
which he will not run.

Since Mr. Montesinos's return, the first vice president, Francisco Tudela,
resigned and the government's forces in the Congress have divided.

Mr. Montesinos continued to play a role in Peru even while in exile, directing
members of the military high command that he handpicked last year to put
pressure on Mr. Fujimori to issue the amnesty.

Since his private jet arrived at an air force base in the southern port of Pisco
on Monday, Mr. Montesinos's whereabouts has not been made public.

Senior American officials monitoring developments said they thought that Mr.
Fujimori had reinforced his control over the armed forces in recent days. "I
really do not think there is any danger of a coup," a senior Clinton
administration official said.

"Fujimori is removing people from positions who were more loyal to Montesinos
than to him."

The talks with the opposition broke down over the weekend over the proposed
amnesty for the security forces. But when the government relented tonight, the
opposition, in turn, agreed that the presidential term would be reduced to four
years, from five.

"Today began the national reconciliation" said an opposition congressman,
Fernando Olivera. "I want to congratulate the president and the armed forces."

Mr. Montesinos has acted with increasing independence of Mr. Fujimori since the
presidential campaign earlier this year in which he manipulated much of the
media, judges and the election apparatus, which came under heavy criticism from
the Organization of American States. Where his power ended and the president's
began became more and more difficult to decipher.

Much of his power apparently came from intelligence files and videotapes peering
into the lives of military officers, government officials and opposition
leaders.

The former spy chief was long an associate of the Central Intelligence Agency,
according to government officials of Peru and the United States.

He directed an antinarcotics agency with C.I.A. help within the National
Intelligence Service. United States officials said he was the only official who
could coordinate the operations of various security forces, and he served as a
conduit for intelligence.

His relationship to the United States goes back to the 1970's. Finally the
Clinton administration broke with Mr. Montesinos two months ago when evidence
emerged that he may have known of the selling of Russian assault rifles to a
Marxist guerrilla group in Colombia, or even been involved in it, American
officials said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (73%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU;   PERU (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);   LIMA, PERU (73%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  ARMED FORCES (91%);
ELECTIONS (90%); ESPIONAGE (90%); POLITICS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%);
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (79%); AIR FORCES (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%);
INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (78%); AMNESTY (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%);
CORRUPTION (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (69%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (65%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(79%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K (PRES); MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO
ALBERTO K FUJIMORI (96%); VLADIMIRO MONTESINOS (95%);

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Alberto K. Fujimori with security forces searching a
village north of Lima yesterday for his former intelligence chief, Vladimiro
Montesinos, once Mr. Fujimori's closest aide. The search was unsuccessful.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             470 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Links Cited on Peru Arms Deal That Backfired

BYLINE: By TIM GOLDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1535 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Nov. 5


Late in 1998, Jordanian officials went to the chief of the Central Intelligence
Agency's station in Amman with a routine question. Would the United States mind
if they sold 50,000 surplus AK-47 assault rifles to the Peruvian military?

The C.I.A. official did some checking and got right back. "Our answer was, 'No,
we can live with that,' " an American intelligence official recalled.

What seemed a modest arms deal, however, turned out to be anything but. Last
spring, C.I.A. officials told the Clinton administration that they had
discovered that thousands of the rifles had gone not to Peru but to leftist
guerrillas in Colombia, perhaps the most baneful of Washington's enemies in
Latin America.

Peru's longtime intelligence chief, Vladimiro Montesinos, a crucial C.I.A. ally
in the region, then stepped forward to take credit for dismantling an
international ring that he said had smuggled the guns. But his account was
immediately challenged by officials in Jordan and Colombia, who suggested that
the Peruvian government was more deeply involved than it cared to admit.

Now, since his ouster in September, Mr. Montesinos has himself been implicated
in the arms deal by two of the men who organized it. Peruvian officials are
moving to prosecute him in connection with a large personal fortune he
apparently hid in Swiss banks, and State Department officials are complaining
privately that the C.I.A. was slow to inform them fully about what had gone on.

American officials say the evidence of Mr. Montesinos's possible role in the gun
running remains unclear. But they say the C.I.A.'s handling of the case has
raised new questions about the agency's ties to Mr. Montesinos, deepening a rift
in the Clinton administration over how closely it should dealing with an
official who has been linked to human rights abuses and other crimes.

"We don't know for sure that he was involved, but there's a lot of smoke coming
from his direction," an administration official said. "We do know that we should
have had a lot of the information a lot earlier than we got it."

Intelligence officials, who like others would discuss the matter only on
condition of anonymity, defended the C.I.A.'s actions. They said that while the
agency may have been slow to uncover what had happened, it informed
administration officials promptly this year after the guns had been traced back
to Jordan.

While the C.I.A. had worked closely with Mr. Montesinos and depended on him to
support covert anti-terrorism and drug-interdiction programs the United States
has operated in Peru since the late 1980's, they said, the agency has also
reported in detail on his purported misdeeds.

Mr. Montesinos has not been heard from. He fled to Panama on Sept. 24, after the
disclosure of a videotape that showed him bribing an opposition legislator. When
Panamanian officials refused private pleas from the United States and the
Organization of American States to grant Mr. Montesinos political asylum, he
flew back to Peru on Oct. 23 and went into hiding.

On Friday, after Switzerland's discovery of five bank accounts holding some $50
million, Peruvian officials announced that they would try to prosecute him for
illegally enriching himself during his decade-long tenure as President Alberto
K. Fujimori's most powerful adviser.

If Mr. Montesinos was in fact earning money from arms trading, that apparently
never crossed the minds of the American intelligence officers in Amman.

Intelligence officials said there was nothing unusual about Jordanian military
or intelligence officials running a proposed arms sale past the C.I.A., even
though they were under no formal obligation to do so.

"They said, 'Would it upset our relationship with you if we sold these weapons
to the Peruvian government?" one of the officials said. "It's not unreasonable
that the Peruvian government might want weapons of this type. The Jordanians
aren't required to ask us."

Although the United States had closely watched weapons purchases by Peru since
its longstanding border dispute with Ecuador erupted in open warfare in 1995,
C.I.A. officials did only a cursory check of the deal, several American
officials said.

Agency officers in Amman informed senior diplomats and defense attaches at the
American Embassy, officials said, but no one cabled word of proposal to the
State Department.

The C.I.A. officers did notify their headquarters in Langley, Va., where it was
then passed along to the agency station in Lima. Nonetheless, intelligence
officers there never raised the matter with Peruvian security officials because,
an intelligence official said, "it was told to us in confidence by the
Jordanians."

Several administration officials argued that this amounted to far less than
adequate notification by the C.I.A., regardless of the outcome.  "This was not
an appropriate thing to have happen," a senior official said. "This was an issue
that should have been put before policy makers."

The arms broker who arranged the sale, Sarkis Soghanalian, said in an interview
that he, too, had been told the guns were going to the Peruvian military, and
that he had demanded and received end-user certificates validating that claim.

But Mr. Soghanalian, who is awaiting trial in Los Angeles on unrelated money
laundering and bank fraud charges, also said the Peruvians sought from the start
to establish a discreet relationship they might use to buy more sophisticated
weapons. And after agreeing in December 1998 to sell the 50,000 Jordanian rifles
for just under $500,000, Mr. Soghanalian said he flew to Lima to discuss Peru's
other weapons needs.

The arms dealer, a Lebanese citizen who has sold vast amounts of weapons
worldwide, said he had met in Lima with several senior military officials and
had lunch at a private Lima yacht club with Mr. Montesinos, who was introduced
to him as "the boss."

He said, 'We need someone like you,' " Mr. Soghanalian recalled.

Peruvian officials presented Mr. Soghanalian with a shopping list of more than
$70 million worth of hardware that he thought could have been meant only for a
regular army: antiaircraft weapons, communications gear and equipment to upgrade
tanks.

The broker said there were some strange aspects to the arrangement: The
Peruvians asked to pay for the future purchases in cash and offered him $22
million as a down payment. They insisted on air-dropping the AK-47's to their
troops. The first of the cargoes was also turned back in the Amazon basin for
reasons that were never clear, and the shipments were finally aborted in August
1999 after 9,540 of the rifles had been sent.

But Mr. Soghanalian said he did not think much of the fact that the Peruvians
also wanted to buy a large quantity of Russian SA-7 Strella missiles, a
shoulder-fired weapon that would immediately change the balance of power in
Colombia if obtained by the insurgents.

Many military analysts have speculated that it is only a matter of time before
the guerrillas try to obtain such weapons in response to a $1.3 billion package
of American aid that includes almost $400 million for new helicopters for the
Colombian security forces. The retired Peruvian Army lieutenant who arranged for
the Jordanian shipment with Mr. Soghanalian, Jose Luis Aybar, has also
identified Mr. Montesinos as the official who oversaw the arms deal. But Mr.
Aybar said he was unaware that the Jordanian cargo consisted of assault rifles,
a claim that Mr. Soghanalian and others contradicted.

American officials remain divided about Mr. Montesinos's possible role in the
affair.

Several officials said C.I.A. reporting on the matter had been notably thin,
despite the agency's extensive contacts in the Peruvian security forces. They
said senior State Department officials, including the under secretary, Thomas R.
Pickering, had been deeply dissatisfied with the flow of information from the
agency, both about the its own early role in the case and about the possible
involvement of Peruvian officials.

"Every time you asked a question, it would take a few days to get an answer," an
official said. "And every time, their story would change a little. It was like
pulling teeth."

But an intelligence official noted that after the Colombian military seized some
of the AK-47's in mid-1999, the C.I.A. helped trace them, confirming in April
that they had come from the Jordanian shipment. That discovery was promptly
reported to White House, State Department and Defense officials.

The agency also informed Peru, apparently prompting the news conference on Aug.
21 at which Mr. Fujimori and Mr. Montesinos claimed to have broken up a ring of
international smugglers who had sought to pass themselves off as Peruvian
officials.

The intelligence official also said that despite the claims of Mr. Soghanalian
and Mr. Aybar, the C.I.A. still had no credible information that the fugitive
Peruvian intelligence chief had been involved in sending guns to the Colombian
rebels.

"We don't have any illusions about his background," the official said of Mr.
Montesinos. "But we do not have intelligence information -- other than the
statements of a couple of individuals -- that ties him to it."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); JORDAN (94%); COLOMBIA (94%); LATIN
AMERICA (72%);

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (73%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (95%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (95%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (95%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU; JORDAN; COLOMBIA;   PERU (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); JORDAN
(94%); COLOMBIA (94%); LATIN AMERICA (72%);   AMMAN, JORDAN (73%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PERU;
PERU-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; JORDAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PERU;
JORDAN-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (92%); FIREARMS (91%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); CIVIL
WAR (77%); SMUGGLING (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); LIBERALISM (74%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); DRUG INTERDICTION
(67%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%); TERRORISM (50%);

PERSON: MONTESINOS, VLADIMIRO; GOLDEN, TIM; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON
(71%);

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Alberto Fujimori, right, held a news conference in
August to announce the capture of arms destined for Colombia rebels. With him
were, from left, Vladimiro Montesinos, the spy chief since implicated in the gun
running; Interior Minister Walter Chacon; and Defense Minister Carlos Bergamino.
(Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             475 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

MEXICO PRESIDENT INSTALLED, VOWING TO SHARE POWER

BYLINE: By GINGER THOMPSON

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1200 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Dec. 1


Vicente Fox Quesada, a son of ranchers who became a business executive, was
inaugurated as president of Mexico today, promising that in the dawn of Mexico's
first real democracy, he would share power long monopolized by one party.

After swearing before Congress to uphold the Constitution, Mr. Fox, 58, accepted
a satiny red, white and green presidential sash from the outgoing chief
executive, Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, who by law could not seek re-election.
In that brief moment, Mr. Fox became the first opposition politician in 71 years
to take the presidency away from the Institutional Revolutionary Party. Before
the rise of the PRI, as that party is known, all of Mexico's rulers had come to
power by force or political imposition.

In an inaugural address before Congress, Mr. Fox spoke liltingly at times about
the occasion, which he described as a "triumph for all."

He invoked the names of Mexico's most beloved reformers, many of them
assassinated at the peak of their crusades, and promised that his government
would live up to their ideals. Then he laid out plans for a new kind of Mexican
government: one in which the voice of opponents would not be snuffed out or
ignored; one that would serve the interests of the poor before those of the
rich; and one that would fight discrimination, corruption and human rights
abuses.

Although he will lack a majority in Congress, Mr. Fox said he would press ahead
with his campaign promise to establish a kind of truth commission to investigate
unsolved corruption scandals and political assassinations. He received rapturous
applause from members of Congress when he pledged that his government would not
push to privatize electricity plants or sell the national oil company, Pemex,
considered a pillar of Mexican sovereignty.

Mr. Fox said he would try to be the president Mexico has never had, one who
accepts and even enjoys having his power balanced by a divided Congress, strong
state governors and grass-roots organizations that directly represent the
people.

"I differ radically from the old view that power is not to be shared," he said.
"I will share the power, and also the responsibilities. I am the guardian of
power, not its owner.

"I will not be a do-all president," he said. "Ending with us is the age in which
the president was omnipresent on the national stage. It is no longer one person,
or one government that is responsible for the destiny of the nation. All of us,
in the trenches of our daily lives, have a role to play in the great struggle
for a better Mexico."

Mr. Fox's most forceful overtures were aimed at Mexico's Indian people, who make
up about 10 percent of the population but who have almost no political and
economic influence.  In his inaugural address, Mr. Fox lamented that most
indigenous people continue to suffer "intolerable injustice, marginalization and
inequality." Their communities struggle against levels of illiteracy, hunger and
poverty that dwarf the national averages.

The new president said he would assume direct responsibility for creating more
opportunities for indigenous people to take part in government activities, and
for guaranteeing their political rights.

He also used the speech to send a message of peace to the conflict-ravaged state
of Chiapas, where rag-tag groups of indigenous guerrillas took up arms against
the government six years ago to protest against generations of injustice and
other abuses. Mr. Fox said he would immediately seek the legislature's approval
of reforms that had been proposed four years ago by a group of congressional
mediators. The reforms reflected many of the rebels' demands, but were blocked
by the Zedillo administration.

Mr. Fox has said many times since he was elected in July to a six-year term that
he was ready to meet with the Zapatista guerrillas and accept some of their most
important demands -- including removing a number of government troops from the
region. But the Zapatistas never replied.

Then, 48 hours before Mr. Fox's inauguration, the best-known Zapatista leader,
who calls himself Subcommander Marcos, ended the rebels' silence by issuing a
scathing farewell to President Zedillo, calling his six years in office "a
nightmare." And Subcommander Marcos also said he would hold a news conference on
Saturday, in the Chiapas jungle, to talk about the Fox administration. As if in
response, Mr. Fox today ordered troops to withdraw from some positions
encircling the Zapatista rebels, his national security adviser, Adolfo Aguilar
Zinser, told Reuters.

Having risen to power on the wave of a national desire for a shift to democracy,
Mr. Fox, the father of four adopted children, started his presidency with an
inauguration day filled with activities aimed at setting him apart from his
predecessors.

Just after sunrise, he went to pray at the Basilica de Guadalupe, the shrine to
Mexico's patron saint. A Catholic, he was the first modern president ever to
publicly receive a blessing by a priest before taking office.

It was an unusual religious display by a head of state in a country that has had
a bloody tradition of enforcing the separation of church and state. Later, in
the middle of his speech at the national auditorium, his youngest daughter,
Paulina, a teenager, ran up to the podium to give him a gift of a crucifix.

Mr. Fox also had breakfast with hundreds of homeless children, mental health
patients and street vendors in the outcast community of Tepito.

In another break with tradition, he gave two speeches during the day rather than
one. He started his formal inaugural address with a tender "hello" to each of
his children. And afterward, he delivered a funny and humble speech to an
auditorium filled with supporters.

Rather than bestowing power privately upon his new cabinet, he inaugurated them
on live television. He read aloud government ethics rules, which prohibit
members of the cabinet from taking money from any sources that would compromise
their integrity. And then he made them swear to uphold those rules.

At dusk, he stood out on the balcony of the National Palace and led tens of
thousands of Mexicans in a patriotic rally at the Zocalo, the plaza at the
center of the capital. But after delivering another speech, the president took
off his ceremonial sash, his suit jacket, tie and cuff links, and waded into the
crowded plaza, where he sat on a stage among the people. Later, he held an
elegant dinner for visiting dignitaries at the 18th century castle in
Chapultepec Park.

It was a whirlwind day, and as Mr. Fox rushed from one event to the next, it
became clear that even though he was now president, he would continue to keep
the pace of a candidate. His staff said he felt most comfortable among ordinary
people. And during his speeches, the new president, whose preferred style of
dress includes jeans, cowboy boots and wide-brimmed hats, reminded Mexico that
"I have my boots well set on the ground."

But because Mr. Fox's National Action Party will not have the majority in
Congress, the new president is expected to continue to campaign in order to
harness public support for the deep and contentious reforms he aims to carry
out.


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS325110 PETROCHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (65%); NAICS324110 PETROLEUM
REFINERIES (65%); NAICS211111 CRUDE PETROLEUM & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (65%);

COUNTRY: MEXICO (99%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (93%);

COMPANY: PETROLEOS MEXICANOS (PEMEX) (65%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO;   MEXICO (99%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   MEXICO
CITY, MEXICO (93%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; DISCRIMINATION;
ETHICS  EXECUTIVES (90%); POLITICS (90%); CORRUPTION (86%); ASSASSINATION (78%);

 ELECTIONS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIVATIZATION (77%); CAMPAIGNS &
ELECTIONS (77%); GOVERNORS (76%); ETHICS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (72%); POWER PLANTS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%);
INVESTIGATIONS (70%); DISCRIMINATION (70%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (67%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (65%); SCANDALS (65%); CRUDE OIL & NATURAL GAS EXTRACTION (63%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);

PERSON: THOMPSON, GINGER; FOX QUESADA, VICENTE (PRES)  VICENTE FOX QUESADA
(94%);

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: President Vicente Fox, wearing the official sash, at his
inauguration in Mexico City yesterday. (Associated Press)(pg. A1); Vicente Fox,
standing in the car, waved to the crowd in Mexico City after he was inaugurated
yesterday. (Associated Press)(pg. A6)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             478 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rebel's Death Laid To Guatemala Army

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 255 words

DATELINE: MEXICO CITY, Dec. 6


An international tribunal ruled today that the Guatemalan Army was guilty of
murder, torture and other crimes in the case of a left-wing guerrilla who
disappeared in 1992, a lawyer in the case said today.

The Inter-American Court of Human Rights, a branch of the Organization of
American States, found that the Guatemalan military had killed Efrain Bamaca
Velasquez, a captured Mayan rebel leader, and obstructed justice after the
killing, said Denise Gilman, a human rights lawyer in Washington. Ms. Gilman
represents Mr. Bamaca's widow, Jennifer K. Harbury, an American lawyer who went
on hunger strikes in Guatemala City and in Washington to press for classified
information on her husband's case. The court sits in San Jose, Costa Rica.

A White House panel found in 1996 that the Central Intelligence Agency knowingly
hired as paid informers a number of Guatemalan military officers suspected of
political assassinations, extrajudicial killings, kidnapping and torture. One
Guatemalan Army officer on the C.I.A. payroll, the panel said, "ordered and
planned assassinations of political opponents," a second took part in
"assassinations or assassination attempts," and a third "participated in
assassination, extrajudicial killing and kidnapping."

The White House panel said that one of those C.I.A. agents, a Guatemalan colonel
named Julio Roberto Alpirez, took part in the interrogation and torture of Mr.
Bamaca. The international tribunal's ruling today firmly fixed responsibility on
the Guatemalan military.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); COSTA RICA (79%); MEXICO (79%);

CITY: SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA (54%);   GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (83%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (83%);
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  (58%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (58%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (83%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(83%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  (58%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   GUATEMALA (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); COSTA RICA (79%);
MEXICO (79%);   SAN JOSE, COSTA RICA (54%);   GUATEMALA CITY, GUATEMALA (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

 ASSASSINATION (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); LAWYERS (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); MURDER (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); KIDNAPPING
& ABDUCTION (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (74%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (70%);

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PATTERSON, ANNE (AMB); PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)  EFRAIN
BAMACA VELASQUEZ (90%); DENISE GILMAN (76%);

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             483 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 21, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 926 words



ASIA

AFGHANISTAN: TALIBAN ACTS OVER SANCTIONS -- The ruling Taliban responded to
tough new United Nations sanctions by pulling out of United Nations-mediated
talks on ending Afghanistan's civil war and refusing any handover to the United
States of the terrorism suspect Osama bin Laden. The Taliban also ordered an
immediate boycott of products from the United States and Russia.  (AP)


INDIA: POLITICIAN FACES LEGAL ACTION -- The western state of Maharashtra said it
would pursue legal action against a hard-line Hindu politician, Bal Thackeray,
who advocated that India's 120 million Muslims be deprived of the right to vote.
Chief Minister Vilasrao Deshmukh said his remarks were contrary to the
Constitution and "hurt the feelings of Muslims."
 Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

EUROPE

TURKEY: PRISON SIEGE CONTINUES -- Soldiers smashed through the walls of two
prisons to battle inmates reportedly armed with guns and makeshift
flame-throwers as the fight for control of 20 prisons entered its second day. At
least 19 people were dead, and the European Commission warned that tactics used
by Turkey were again calling into question its human rights record. Prime
Minister Bulent Ecevit said raids on 18 other prisons had ended a two-month
hunger strike.
 (AP)

DENMARK: FOREIGN AIDE QUITS -- Foreign Minister Niels Helveg Petersen resigned,
saying he could no longer support Denmark's ambivalence in committing to the
European Union. Mr. Petersen, 61, an influential member of the Radical Left
Party, which shares power with the Social Democrats, said he was deeply
disappointed by a Sept. 28 referendum in which Danes rejected the euro. He said
his departure was not a protest directed at Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen,
a leading euro advocate.
 (Agence France-Presse)

ITALY: CATHEDRAL BOMB THEORY -- The police investigating an unexploded bomb
found in Milan's cathedral suspect it may be linked to a Spanish anarchist
group, Italian news agencies reported. A group called International Solidarity
claimed responsibility in a message to the Roman daily Il Messaggero, saying it
opposed conditions at top security prisons in Italy and Spain. The message also
attacked the Roman Catholic Church and its Holy Year.  Alessandra Stanley (NYT)

GERMANY: EMBRYO RESEARCH CONDEMNED -- Officials criticized British plans to
permit research on human embryos, with Hubert Huppe, deputy chairman of
Parliament's ethics committee, calling the technology "cannibalism." He said the
move to allow stem cells to be used in developing new medical treatments
breached fundamental human rights. And Chancellor Gerhard Schroder, in an
article in Die Woche, said the case for using human embryos in research was not
proven.
 Victor Homola (NYT)

SPAIN: E.T.A. TIED TO POLICE SHOOTING -- A Barcelona policeman was shot dead by
two unidentified people believed to be members of the Basque separatist group
E.T.A. They fled the scene, leaving a car loaded with more than 28 pounds of
explosives, according to the police, who said the two may have planned an attack
in the city, site of two recent E.T.A. killings.
 Emma Daly (NYT)

SPAIN: EDITORS' PLEA ON GUSINSKY -- Senior editors from Vladimir Gusinsky's
Russian media empire have written to Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar asking that
Madrid deny Moscow's request to extradite the businessman on a fraud charge.
They accused Russian prosecutors of falsifying documents in order to "blackmail"
Mr. Gusinsky, in a Spanish prison pending the extradition hearing, into selling
his companies, which have long been critical of the Kremlin.
 Emma Daly (NYT)

AFRICA

RWANDA: COOPERATION ON DOWNED JET -- The government said for the first time that
it would cooperate with an inquiry into the downing of a presidential jet that
set off the killing of more than 500,000 minority Tutsi and moderate Hutu in
1994. President Juvenal Habyarimana died in the plane attack. The Tutsi-led
government said it would back an investigation by prosecutors for the
International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, who are considering whether to
include the April 6, 1994, plane crash in their genocide review.
 (AP)

THE AMERICAS

COLOMBIA: BRITONS FREED -- Two Britons kidnapped in the Darien Gap rain forest
on Colombia's Panamanian border were freed after nine months, the British
Embassy said. Paul Winder and Tom Hartdyke were abducted in the same region
where three American missionaries disappeared in 1993. The Darien Gap is a
roadless swatch of jungle and rivers where left-wing rebels and right-wing death
squads battle.  Juan Forero (NYT)

CANADA: CHINESE SUE OVER OLD TAX -- Three Chinese- Canadians have filed a class
action suit seeking $15 million in damages for a head tax that was levied on
80,000 Chinese entering Canada between 1885 and 1923. Levied solely on Chinese
immigrants, the tax reached $500 in 1923, when it was replaced by the Exclusion
Act, which barred Chinese immigration until abolished in 1947.  James Brooke
(NYT)

TRINIDAD: FINAL ELECTION RESULTS -- Final election results showing that Trinidad
and Tobago's governing party won a majority in Parliament were delivered to
President Arthur Robinson, a key step toward installing a new government. The
final results, nine days after the election, showed Prime Minister Basdeo
Panday, left, and his United National Congress winning 19 seats, to 16 for the
opposition People's National Movement and one for the National Alliance for
Reconstruction.  (Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (53%);

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SPAIN (93%);
EUROPE (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); ASIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES

 (92%); DENMARK (92%); ITALY (92%); GERMANY (79%);   TURKEY (79%);

STATE: WEST INDIA (79%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (79%);

CITY: BARCELONA, SPAIN (79%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (53%);   UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS
(93%); EUROPEAN COMMISSION  (55%); EUROPEAN COMMISSION (55%); EUROPEAN UNION
(54%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); EUROPEAN COMMISSION
(55%); EUROPEAN COMMISSION (55%); EUROPEAN UNION  (54%); EUROPEAN UNION (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN (94%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SPAIN (93%);
EUROPE (93%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); ASIA (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES

 (92%); DENMARK (92%); ITALY (92%); GERMANY (79%);   TURKEY (79%);   WEST INDIA
(79%); MAHARASHTRA, INDIA (79%);   BARCELONA, SPAIN (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TALIBAN (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LITIGATION (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); RELIGION (89%); SHOOTINGS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); PRISONS

 (88%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (87%); BIOETHICS (87%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); BOYCOTTS (78%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%);
TERRORISM (77%); CIVIL RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); UNEXPLODED ORDNANCE (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (76%); POLITICS (76%); ETHICS (76%); POLITICAL PARTIES (74%);
REFERENDUMS (74%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (71%);
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (71%); EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (71%);
POLICE MISCONDUCT (70%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (62%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(50%);   MEDICAL TREATMENTS & PROCEDURES (50%);   CORRECTIONS (88%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%); GERHARD SCHRODER (50%);

LOAD-DATE: December 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             487 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 29, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Germany Shuts East German Crime Bureau

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 171 words

DATELINE: BERLIN, Dec. 28


Germany's top crime-fighting agency for offenses committed under the former East
Germany closed its doors today after nine years' work.

The Central Investigations Body for Government and Unification Crime said it had
wrapped up its operations, which since its founding on Sept. 1, 1991, included
more than 20,000 cases.

More than 16,000 of its cases involved charges against the East German
government, including what were later deemed human rights violations, like
orders to shoot to kill people crossing what was then the border with West
Germany and the state-run program of using barred drugs to increase athletic
performance.

The investigations body helped to bring accusations against dozens of former
East German border guards.

Most of them received light sentences in the German courts after they argued
that they had been following the orders of superiors.

The office looked into cases of drugging involving about 9,000 former East
German athletes -- many of whom suffered lasting health problems.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GERMANY (93%);

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);

COMPANY: EAST GERMAN INVESTMENT TRUST PLC (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GERMANY;   GERMANY (93%);   BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);

SUBJECT: CRIME AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); SENTENCING (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (69%); BORDER CONTROL (68%);

LOAD-DATE: December 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             491 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 29, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC LIVES;
Making Her Case Against Foreign Leaders

BYLINE: By JOYCE WADLER

SECTION: Section B; Page 2; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 858 words


A JURY in Manhattan came down hard on Radovan Karadzic this week, ordering the
former Bosnian Serb wartime leader to pay $4.5 billion in damages to victims of
rape, torture and genocide.

The case is one of a series of suits brought against foreign leaders by the
Center for Constitutional Rights in recent years, all of which have had a
similar outcome: a huge money judgment that everyone agrees will be impossible
to collect.

Everyone, that is, except Jennifer Green, one of the lawyers who argued the
Karadzic case in federal court in Manhattan.

"It's going to be hard," Ms. Green says -- an understatement, with Dr. Karadzic
at large. And of the other cases, she says, "No money has been collected yet."

You never say never, do you?

"That's my attitude," Ms. Green, 38, says firmly. "Look at the Holocaust cases
that 50 years later are getting settled. The clients don't get involved because
they expect to see a judgment tomorrow, they do it to hold the person
accountable. And the judgment can have other effects besides the transfer of
money. The case we had against Gramajo" -- the former Guatemalan defense
minister Hector Gramajo, sued for damages regarding murder and torture -- "he
was being groomed for the presidency of Guatemala, and he's no longer a
candidate."

A pleasing memory, which makes the lawyer grin.

"He was sued on his graduation day from the Harvard School of Public Policy, in
'91. It was my graduation day, too -- I went to Harvard Law. There was a great
picture of him being served in The Boston Globe. I showed it to my mother and
said, 'This is what I'm going to do.' "

There are human rights types who are deadly serious. Then there is Jennifer
Green. She is serious about her work, all right: there are 12-hour days, an
office crowded with files, and of course the nightmare she had after the
Karadzic trial ended. An interesting look into the soul of the lawyer, that
nightmare.

But she also laughs a lot, particularly at herself, little self-deprecating
contrapuntals of, "Yeah, right, Jen," or remonstrations for her Midwestern
accent: "God, I sound like Fargo, and they were two states away."

Home was the college town of Madison, Wis., where her father was an electrical
engineer and her mother a teacher who was involved in social services. Ms.
Green's mother may have pointed her toward activism -- looking out for an elder
brother who was born with a heart defect and a learning disability made Ms.
Green protective -- but it was Marlon Brando who took her concerns global.

He blows into Wisconsin on behalf of the Menominee Indians, and before you know
it Ms. Green is on the Amnesty International mailing list.


AS for the Karadzic case, with which she has been involved since 1993, Ms. Green
can tell you the stories of the 13 plaintiffs who testified, all of whom were
Bosnian Muslims who suffered at the hands of Serb soldiers. Sometimes doing
this, she uses the tag "John" or "Jane," used in court to protect identities.
Sometimes she skips a name, for there were many Johns and Janes who could not
face the ordeal of testifying.

"John One," Ms. Green begins, looking down, her arms folded protectively.
"Soldiers pulled his teeth out with pliers. He was forced to perform sexual acts
with other male prisoners. He also testified about people being decapitated,
then the soldiers forced them to play soccer with the people's heads. Yeah, they
could be real creative. John Two, he was so badly beaten he has trouble now
turning his head. John Three, he's a man named Dr. Emil Kapetanovic: he was
forced to stand naked against the wall, also to play Russian roulette. They
tortured him with the door open so other people could hear."

She turns, when that accounting is over, to the women.

"Jane One, she was 16 years old at the Trnopolje concentration camp, taken out
of a line where she was waiting for water and gang-raped. Jane Two and Three
withdrew."

Moving on.

"Jane Seven was waiting for a bus in Sarajevo with her husband -- we showed
footage of the bombing in Sarajevo at the trial. The last thing she remembered
was looking at her watch, then looking at her husband, who had been blown in
half."

She talks about the pain involved in eliciting that testimony.

"In terms of our clients, we were constantly on the alert for whether we were
retraumatizing them in some way. Some questions you don't ask. There were issues
about people having trouble sleeping."

How was it for the lawyers?

"A couple of the others said they were having troubles with nightmares. I was
O.K. until the trial ended; then it hit me."

Ms. Green's nightmare, the telling of which requires prompting:

"Someone was being chased, I couldn't stop something from happening." A prompt.
"Someone was going to get killed, it was a kid, it was in the woods, which some
of our clients had been describing. I came up and saw this thing happening." A
prompt. "No, it wasn't a gun. It looked like a knife. Then I woke up."

The nightmare recurred later the same night. The second time, though, Ms. Green
was able to change the ending.

What happened the second time?

"I got the kid and ran."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(92%); GUATEMALA (90%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%); WISCONSIN, USA (91%); MIDWEST USA (66%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MADISON, WI, USA (74%);

COMPANY: BOSTON GLOBE (53%);   CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (58%); CENTER
FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS (58%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS  (58%); CENTER FOR CONSTITUTIONAL
RIGHTS (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA

 (92%); GUATEMALA (90%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%); WISCONSIN, USA (91%); MIDWEST
USA (66%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); MADISON, WI, USA (74%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   DAMAGES (90%); JURY TRIALS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); TORTURE
(89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); PUBLIC
POLICY (77%); HOLOCAUST (72%); LEARNING DISABILITIES (64%); DISABLED PERSONS
(50%);

PERSON: JENNIFER GREEN (94%); RADOVAN KARADZIC (81%);

NAME: Jennifer Green

LOAD-DATE: September 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jennifer Green helped win a $4 billion award against Radovan
Karadzic. (Philip Greenberg for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             502 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1259 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

Britain Says Health Makes Pinochet Unfit for Trial
Britain said medical tests showed that Gen. Augusto Pinochet was unfit to stand
trial in Spain on charges of crimes against humanity and that it was inclined to
drop the extradition case against him and let him return to Chile.   A1


Seeking Women's Help in Chile
Ricardo Lagos, the Socialist presidential candidate, is making an 11th-hour
effort to gain the women's vote in hopes of winning a runoff election against
Joaquin Lavin, a former aide to Gen. Augusto Pinochet and once considered a long
shot.   A10

U.S. Pledges Aid to Colombia
The Clinton administration announced a $1.3 billion, two-year emergency aid
package to fight narcotics in Colombia, deepening American involvement in that
country's long war against narcotics traffickers and rebels.   A4

Barak Breaks Silence on Talks
Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel, speaking in a television interview, said
the peace talks with Syria had reached a decisive stage in which both sides
would have to make difficult decisions.   A3

A Trial Over the Holocaust
The revisionist historian David Irving delivered his opening statement in the
libel case he brought against an American author and her British publisher. Mr.
Irving, who has said that Hitler did not approve the mass killing of Jews, says
his reputation was irrevocably damaged by the book's assertions that he is a
Holocaust denier who manipulates history to serve his own ends.   A7

China Is Pressed on Rights
The Clinton administration said China's human rights record had continued to
deteriorate and that the United States would again sponsor a United Nations
resolution criticizing Beijing for crackdowns on political dissent and religious
freedom.   A10

Russia Reviews Battle Plan
Russian officers provided accounts of the fighting in Shali that has alarmed
Moscow and prompted a close review of Russia's military strategy in Chechnya.
The rebel offensive has raised questions of whether Chechnya can ever be made
fully secure for Russian forces.   A3

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A12-21

Court Backs States' Rights In Age-Discrimination Case
The Supreme Court ruled, 5 to 4, that Congress lacked the authority to bind
state governments to a federal law that bars bias against older workers. It was
the first of five federalism rulings due this term.   A1

The justices heard arguments on the Violence Against Women Act.   A18

Expanding a National Monument
President Clinton declared more than 1,500 square miles along the Grand Canyon's
northern rim a national monument, doubling the size of federally protected land
there.   A12

Greater Tax Aid for the Poor
President Clinton plans to propose a $2 billion-a-year increase in the earned
income tax credit for 19 million families living below or just above the poverty
line.   A17

McCain's Plan for Taxes
Senator McCain proposed a tax cut half the size sought by Gov. George W. Bush
and pledged that as President he would seek a Congressional vote on a plan to
overhaul the Social Security system in his first year.   A20

Postage Rate Rise Proposed
The Postal Service's Board of Governors proposed raising the price of a
first-class stamp by 1 cent, to 34 cents, early next year.   A16

U.S. May Not Sell Its Nickel
The Energy Department is backing away from a plan to sell its stock of surplus
nickel, a metal used in stainless steel and other alloys, because of concern
that the material, left over from nuclear weapons manufacture, may be too
radioactive.   A17

Fatal Journey for Stowaways
Officials in Seattle said 3 of 18 stowaways died in cargo containers aboard a
ship from Hong Kong. Hong Kong authorities pledged a crackdown on such
trafficking in illegal immigrants, which is on the rise.   A1

I.N.S. Delays Repatriation
The I.N.S. said it would extend its Friday deadline for returning Elian Gonzalez
to Cuba. Although the decision came a day after a Florida judge granted
temporary custody to a relative of the boy's in Miami, the I.N.S. said it
retained jurisdiction.   A12

Students' Expulsions Stand
A federal judge upheld the expulsions of six students who brawled at a football
game in Decatur, Ill.   A12

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Economic Boom Would Fuel Pataki's Spending Plans
Governor Pataki proposed a $76.8 billion budget that relies heavily on the
state's prosperity to finance higher spending for schools, environmental
projects and prison construction and an array of tax cuts.   B1

An Emphasis on Technology
Governor Whitman, in her sixth annual address to the New Jersey Legislature,
proposed $100 million in new spending to help researchers convert their
scientific advances into thriving businesses, and to help train "the high-tech
work force of tomorrow."   B5

New Hudson Bridge Urged
The Tappan Zee Bridge has become so dilapidated and is so congested that it
should be torn down and replaced with a new eight-lane bridge with commuter rail
tracks at a cost of $4 billion, a state panel said.   B1

Judges Hear Museum Case
Three federal appellate judges questioned City Hall's rationale for cutting
funds for the Brooklyn Museum of Art over an exhibition of art that many people
found sacrilegious.   B3

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

OBITUARIES   B10-11

EDUCATION   B12

Challenge to School Board
Mayor Giuliani called on the Board of Education to turn over some troubled
schools to private companies to "see who does a better job."   B7

ARTS   E1-12

SPORTS   D1-8

Bid for Jets Accepted
Robert Wood Johnson IV, an heir to the Johnson & Johnson fortune, agreed to pay
$635 million to buy the Jets from the Leon Hess estate.   A1

New Faces in Cooperstown
Catcher Carlton Fisk and first baseman Tony Perez were elected to baseball's
Hall of Fame.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-24

The Merger and Microsoft
Antitrust experts said the America Online-Time Warner merger could figure into
the calculations that a federal judge makes on sanctions against Microsoft, if
it loses its antitrust case, or in settlement talks.   A1

America Online is hoping to use Time Warner's extensive cable television systems
to deliver torrents of digital data to consumers.   C1

CBS News Using Virtual Logos
CBS News has used digital technology to insert its logos into various scenes,
making it appear that the logos are attached to real objects. The insertion of
digital images, often done in sports and entertainment shows, has generally been
considered out of line on news shows. CBS officials said their use of the
technology did not raise ethical concerns.   A1

Bank's Credit Card Problems
Bank One issued a profit warning, its third in five months, saying earnings
could decline about 19 percent this year largely because of continuing troubles
in its credit card division.   C1

Bonds Drag Stocks Down
Stock prices fell sharply in heavy, volatile trading, as rising long-term
interest rates helped to persuade investors to sell equities.   C13

Business Digest   C1

DINING   F1-12

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: George Pataki, centrist; round one at Shepherdstown; another loss on
states' rights.
Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   E10

TV Listings   E11

Public Lives   B2

Weather   C24


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); COLOMBIA
(92%); CHINA (92%); SPAIN (92%); ISRAEL (79%); SYRIA (79%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (69%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (74%);

COMPANY: I N S (65%);

ORGANIZATION: I N S (65%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); COLOMBIA

 (92%); CHINA (92%); SPAIN (92%); ISRAEL (79%); SYRIA (79%);   NORTH CENTRAL
CHINA (69%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (74%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  GENOCIDE (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
HOLOCAUST (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); EXTRADITION

 (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); WOMEN (89%);

 WAR & CONFLICT (88%); MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AGE
DISCRIMINATION (77%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (77%); ELECTIONS (76%);
POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (76%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (76%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (76%); DISCRIMINATION (76%); REGIONAL &
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (75%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); HISTORY (73%); FAMILY (73%); JEWS & JUDAISM (72%); RUNOFF
ELECTIONS (71%); LIBEL & SLANDER (71%); VOTERS & VOTING (71%); WRITERS (70%);
PRIME MINISTERS (70%); TAXES & TAXATION (70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (69%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (73%); TAX LAW (65%); PUBLISHING (65%); AGE DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (65%); RELIGION (65%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (64%); NATIONAL PARKS
(63%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (63%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (60%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); OLDER WORKERS (60%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (56%);
PEACE PROCESS (54%); INCOME TAX (50%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING

 (78%); TAX CREDITS (60%);   MEDICAL DIAGNOSTICS SCREENING & TESTING (78%);
HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (76%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); EHUD BARAK (67%);

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             503 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Try Pinochet Anyway

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 78 words



To the Editor:

Re "Pinochet Is Ruled Unfit for a Trial and May Be Freed" (front page, Jan. 12):

Under the dictatorship of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in Chile, ill health did not
excuse a person from being tortured.

Why should it now excuse General Pinochet from being tried for those crimes
against humanity?

TRACY FITZSIMMONS
Redlands, Calif., Jan. 12, 2000

The writer is a professor of Latin American politics at the University of
Redlands.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (92%); UNITED STATES (91%); LATIN AMERICA (70%); UNITED KINGDOM
(70%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (91%);

COMPANY: UNIVERSITY OF REDLANDS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNIVERSITY OF REDLANDS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; SPAIN;   CHILE (92%); UNITED STATES (91%);
LATIN AMERICA (70%); UNITED KINGDOM (70%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (91%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; EXTRADITION  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); WRITERS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); TORTURE
(86%); EXTRADITION (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS (84%); POLITICAL SCIENCE (84%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (82%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: FITZSIMMONS, TRACY (PROF); PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO
PINOCHET (97%);

LOAD-DATE: January 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             504 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

New Twist in the Pinochet Case

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 485 words


Britain's declaration that Gen. Augusto Pinochet is medically unfit to stand
trial should not be the final word on this matter. More information is needed,
and it can be provided under a reasonable plan proposed yesterday by the Spanish
judge who is seeking to prosecute the former Chilean dictator for human rights
abuses.

Under the plan, outlined by Judge Baltasar Garzon, two doctors appointed by his
Madrid court would take part in a new examination of Mr. Pinochet, who has
suffered a series of minor strokes. The result of that exam, and an earlier one
performed solely by British physicians, would be made available to Judge Garzon.
He would then determine whether Mr. Pinochet should be spared a trial because of
mental impairment and an inability to understand the charges.

This case is too important to set aside without a second medical opinion, and
without giving the Spanish court access to the doctors' reports. The British
government has not shared the results of the first examination with the Spanish
court.

If Mr. Pinochet is found by the Spanish court to be unfit, even some of the most
fervent advocates for prosecution would have to agree that justice would not be
served by proceeding against an enfeebled man.

The case has already made a profound contribution to international law. It
established that even former heads of state do not enjoy impunity for crimes
against humanity, and may be tried outside the country where the crimes were
committed. It has also had a liberating effect on Chile. When General Pinochet
was arrested in London in October 1998, many feared that the charges would
destabilize Chile's transition to democracy. As Chileans prepare to vote for a
new president this weekend, it appears the opposite has occurred.

Between 1973 and 1990 General Pinochet presided over the murder or disappearance
of more than 3,000 Chileans and the torture of thousands more.  His intimidation
was so complete that he and his associates escaped prosecution for a decade
after he stepped down. But since his arrest, emboldened Chilean courts have
issued rulings that have shaken the military's immunity. More than two dozen of
his former officers have been arrested for murder and kidnapping. Former
political prisoners are preparing to file the first criminal complaint accusing
General Pinochet and some of his former officers of torture.

None of this has disturbed Chile's fledgling democracy. On the contrary,
Chileans have experienced the first presidential campaign since his coup in 1973
that was not distorted by the polarizing legacies of General Pinochet. The
candidates -- Ricardo Lagos, a Socialist, and Joaquin Lavin, a former official
in General Pinochet's government -- have stressed everyday problems like health
care, crime and unemployment. It suggests that those who feared the
destabilizing power of justice underestimated its healing effect.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE (98%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MURDER

 (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); TORTURE (89%); ARRESTS (88%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
REGULATORY COMPLIANCE (76%); DISABLED PERSONS (75%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(72%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (70%); STROKES (70%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(68%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (70%);

PERSON: AUGUSTO PINOCHET (97%); BALTASAR GARZON (57%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             505 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Doubting Pinochet Is Unfit, Spaniard Calls for 2d Opinion

BYLINE: By AL GOODMAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 580 words

DATELINE: MADRID, Jan. 14


The Spanish judge behind efforts to try Gen. Augusto Pinochet for human rights
abuses asked Britain today for a second medical examination of the former
Chilean dictator to determine if earlier tests erred in ruling him unfit to
stand trial.

The judge, Baltasar Garzon, in a written opinion, appealed to Home Secretary
Jack Straw, who announced on Tuesday that he was inclined to release General
Pinochet, 84, after nearly 15 months of house arrest in Britain, because four
British doctors recently deemed him unfit for trial.

The results of that examination, conducted on Jan. 5, were released only to the
British government and general's defense lawyers.

Judge Garzon said that two forensic doctors appointed by his Madrid court should
take part in the new examination and that his court should get the results of
both tests. Under Spanish law, General Pinochet could be excused from trial only
if he were mentally impaired and could not understand the charges.

"It constitutes a universal negative precedent," the judge warned the British
government, "to avoid a criminal proceeding for unknown medical reasons."

Mr. Straw has set a deadline of next Tuesday to receive comments from Spain and
other parties to the case. But in a fresh sign of the political overtones of the
proceedings, the Spanish government said it might not send Judge Garzon's
petition through diplomatic channels to London if it does not contain new
elements for the case.

Foreign Minister Abel Matutes said today that the judge's document had arrived
at his ministry, but he promised only that it would be studied over the weekend.

Spain's conservative government has publicly maintained neutrality in the case,
which has put relations with Chile under strain. But many advocates of putting
General Pinochet on trial for rights abuses during his 1973-90 military rule
charge that Madrid has been working behind the scenes to undercut Judge Garzon's
effort.

Joan Garces, a Spanish lawyer representing victims of repression in Chile,
expressed confidence that Judge Garzon's petition would reach London by next
week's deadline.

The Chilean government has readied a military jet to whisk General Pinochet home
to Chile if Mr. Straw sets him free.

Judge Garzon wrote that physical impairment and old age would not be sufficient
grounds for exclusion from trial. He cited the cases of Klaus Barbie, a Gestapo
official in occupied France, and the French Nazi collaborator Maurice Papon, who
were tried and convicted of war crimes despite their advanced ages and physical
ailments.

England's highest court, the Law Lords of the House of Lords, has ruled that
General Pinochet is not immune from prosecution for acts committed while he was
a head of state.

Judge Garzon indicted General Pinochet in December 1998, after his arrest on
Oct. 16, 1988, on charges of genocide, terrorism and torture in connection with
the killing or disappearance of more than 3,000 people. But Britain's highest
court later limited the charges to 35 counts of torture and conspiracy to
torture alleged to have occurred after 1988.

Judge Garzon's petition said it was "repugnant" to consider the release of
General Pinochet on humanitarian grounds without knowing his medical condition.

But the judge acknowledged the power of the Home Office to make what he termed a
"political decision" to end the extradition proceeding. "This seems to be the
last step of this troubled extradition process," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); SPAIN (93%); ENGLAND (79%); FRANCE
(78%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: MADRID, SPAIN (93%); LONDON, ENGLAND (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE (95%); UNITED KINGDOM (94%); SPAIN (93%); ENGLAND (79%);
FRANCE (78%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   MADRID, SPAIN (93%); LONDON,
ENGLAND (92%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   JUDGES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); LAWYERS (78%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); HOUSE
ARREST (78%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); TORTURE (78%);

 CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); CRIMINAL LAW (77%); APPEALS (77%); ARRESTS (76%);
PETITIONS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); IMMUNITY (73%); FORENSICS (72%); CONSERVATISM
(70%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (70%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (70%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT
(69%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (67%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(64%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (63%); TERRORISM (61%);   MILITARY RULE (78%);

PERSON: JACK STRAW (76%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             509 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Gentle Negotiations Said to Soften Taliban's Rules for Women

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 842 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 21


Three years after the Taliban took control of most of Afghanistan and introduced
a harsh and unforgiving Islamic piety that all but obliterated women from public
life, relief and development experts say that months of quiet negotiation with
Taliban leaders are beginning to dent the prohibitions.

Erick de Mul, coordinator of United Nations relief programs in Afghanistan, said
in an interview this week that it might be time to begin adjusting the picture
of Afghanistan under the Taliban, which he said had brought peace to much of a
country battered by civil war -- but then had no program to rebuild it.

"It's not as black and white as it's often depicted," said Mr. de Mul, who was
in New York for consultations.

As Mr. de Mul, who is Dutch, talks about the small advances that the United
Nations and a host of relief agencies are making in Afghanistan, the new picture
that emerges is of a strongly absolutist movement hitting the wall of daily
reality.

"There is mounting pressure from the population itself," said Mr. de Mul, who
accepts that the Taliban were first welcomed by Afghans, who had had enough of
corrupt and violent rule by the mujahedeen, the Muslim warriors who drove out
Soviet troops in the 1980's. "People are expecting more than peace and security.
'We want to have a better future for our children,' they say. 'We want to have
possibilities to work.' "

Aid workers and the Taliban have together learned a valuable lesson in recent
years, Mr. de Mul said. When talks break down, he said, "we go to this point and
say, O.K., let's leave it for a while and discuss it later on."

"It's all very slow, and many, many times inconclusive, but the important thing
is that there is a dialogue, and increasingly it is possible to call a spade a
spade -- to go more directly to the issue," he said.

Schools for girls are opening, some officially and many others privately in
homes, Mr. de Mul said. In recent months, he added, Taliban authorities have not
enforced an edict prohibiting foreign Muslim women from going out in public
without a close male relative. Aid experts have tried to assign Muslims from
other countries to work with Afghans because of their sensitivity to the tenets
of Islam and because they offer an alternative model of Islamic womanhood, most
immediately to the Afghan co-workers. But foreigners know that pushing too hard
is counterproductive.

"Demanding changes in law is not working yet," he said. "So the other thing is
to create realities that become so strong that eventually the reality will
determine the legal framework." It is not a policy supported by most human
rights groups or the Clinton administration, which has imposed sanctions on
Afghanistan because of its support for terrorism and its violations of women's
rights. The United States does not allow Americans to be assigned there by the
United Nations.

The United Nations World Food Program -- headed by an American woman, Catherine
Bertini, who is based in Rome -- has made large strides in bringing women into
the work force in Afghanistan, Mr. de Mul said. "W.F.P. is pushing the right
agenda in an intelligent way -- with a lot of results," he said.

In Jalalabad, an eastern Afghan city near Pakistan, the closing of smugglers'
routes that brought in subsidized Pakistani wheat created a food crisis
recently. The World Food Program, with access to donated wheat, decided to open
bakeries.

"In order for us to do that, we said, O.K., we have to send people out to make a
survey of households," Mr. de Mul said. "We said we want to have 50 percent male
and 50 percent female surveyors, otherwise there is not going to be a bakery
project. This took about two weeks of them saying, 'No, it can be done by men;
there is no need for women.' In two weeks they came around and said, 'That's
fine.' "

Mr. de Mul said that even in Kandahar, a bastion of orthodoxy and the
headquarters of the Taliban's leader, Emir Muhammad Omar, changes are
noticeable, in part because of a good provincial governor, Mullah Hassan, who is
both a devout Muslim and an administrator in tune with popular opinion.

In Kandahar province, the United Nations and private agencies are training
health workers, opening schools for girls and boys and helping local councils
known as shuras.

"Six months ago, there was a meeting of a number of the shuras of the southern
region in Kandahar," Mr. de Mul said. "It was a three-day event where
representatives of all these community organizations came together. The Taliban
authorities were invited. The governor of Kandahar opened it." The meeting ended
with a statement of priorities.

"The first priority was education, and education for girls and boys," Mr. de Mul
said. "Second, they wanted to have more and better trained traditional birth
assistants, midwives. Third, they wanted to have increased possibilities for
women to be gainfully employed, especially widows.

"So you take the three priorities, and almost all refer to women. But all the
representatives at the meeting were men."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);
KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   TALIBAN (92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION
(89%); WOMEN (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); FINES & PENALTIES (78%);
CHILDREN (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); CIVIL WAR (75%); EMBARGOES &
SANCTIONS (72%); INTERVIEWS (71%); ARMED FORCES (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%);

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (50%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (50%);

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Afghan women, clad in the all-enveloping burqa, begging in
Kabul. Many widows have no source of income other than begging because of the
Taliban's prohibition on women working. Relief agencies, however, are gradually
negotiating changes so that women may enter the work force. (Kathy
Gannon/Associated Press); Erick de Mul, coordinator of United Nations relief in
Afghanistan. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             511 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Burmese Troops Overrun Base of Rebels Who Took Hostages

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 643 words

DATELINE: BANGKOK, Thailand, Jan. 27


The small jungle base of God's Army, the Burmese rebel band that took hundreds
of people hostage at a Thai hospital this week, was overrun by the army of
Myanmar today, Thai officials said.

Dissidents living outside Myanmar, the former Burma, said the base was captured
early this morning. They said that 50 people had been captured but that the fate
of the twin 12-year-old boys said to lead the group, Johnny and Luther Htoo, was
not immediately known.

Ten gunmen from the group, which is made up of ethnic Karen separatist fighters,
were killed on Tuesday after taking hundreds of people hostage for 22 hours in a
hospital in the Thai border town of Ratchaburi.

Thai human rights groups are demanding an investigation into reports that the
gunmen were summarily executed by security forces who raided the hospital.

Thai newspapers quoted unidentified commandos as acknowledging that they had
shot some of the gunmen in the head even though they were not acting
aggressively. They said they had done this in the heat of the fast-moving
pre-dawn raid, to protect their own lives.

God's Army, a fundamentalist Christian band of no more than 200 fighters, had
been under intense attack at their hideout inside Myanmar for the last two
weeks.

The gunmen who took over the hospital had sought to stop Thailand's artillery
attacks on the rebels, which the Thais said were intended to prevent them from
fleeing across the border into Thailand.

A Thai intelligence officer told The Associated Press that about 100 fighters
fled their camp today, with the twins leading one of two groups.

God's Army is a splinter group from the main Karen separatist group, the Karen
National Union, which is one of several ethnic insurgencies that continue to
battle the government despite a series of peace agreements during the 1990's.

The Karen National Union issued a statement today saying its longtime leader, Bo
Mya, 73, had been removed from command. They said the decision had been made at
a scheduled leadership meeting and had nothing to do with the actions of the
God's Army group.

The larger insurgency claims to have 12,000 fighters along the 1,000-mile border
between Thailand and Myanmar. Independent estimates put the number closer to
3,000.

In the wake of the takeover, the police in Ratchaburi said unidentified callers
had made bomb threats against another local hospital, a school and a department
store. Residents said schoolchidren and shoppers had gone out into the streets
as the buildings were searched.

If the Htoo twins are still alive, it is not clear what their ragtag insurgency
might have the strength to do next. It has little support among other
insurgencies or Burmese dissidents, who depend on Thailand for sanctuary. The
Karen National Union joined a virtually unanimous condemnation by Burmese
dissident groups of the takeover.

Even the larger insurgencies have been on the defensive for several years. In
the early 1990's the Karen fighters lost all their main bases.

After the hospital takeover, Thai public sentiment has turned strongly against
the rebels and the 100,000 Burmese refugees taking shelter in camps just inside
Thailand.

                             --------------------

U.S. Weighs Refugee Need

By The New York Times

WASHINGTON, Jan. 27 -- Thailand has yet to ask the United States to accept 1,500
new Burmese student refugees, but a State Department official said today that
the United States "would be willing to consider taking more refugees if there is
a need."

The United States has agreed to resettle 600 student refugees from Thailand this
year. The students fled Burma after the military coup in 1988 and have been
refugees in Thailand for more than a decade. The official said they had no
connection to the Burmese guerrilla group that stormed a Thai hospital this
week.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: THAILAND (95%);

CITY: BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%);

COMPANY: GOD'S ARMY (BURMESE REBEL GROUP)  ASSOCIATED PRESS (54%);   GOD'S ARMY
(81%);

ORGANIZATION: GOD'S ARMY (BURMESE REBEL GROUP)  GOD'S ARMY (81%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MYANMAR; THAILAND;   THAILAND (95%);   BANGKOK, THAILAND (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; HOSTAGES  HOSTAGE TAKING (92%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); SHOOTINGS (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); ARMED FORCES (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
POLICE FORCES (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); TWINS & MULTIPLE BIRTHS (76%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (75%); HOSPITALS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (68%); RETAILERS (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (50%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; HTOO, LUTHER; HTOO, JOHNNY

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             515 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 889 words



EUROPE

BRITAIN: TORIES EXPEL ARCHER -- Jeffrey Archer, a flamboyant member of the House
of Lords and best-selling novelist, was expelled from the Conservative Party for
five years for having concealed damaging details of a 1986 scandal involving a
prostitute that forced him to give up his candidacy in November for the first
elected mayor of London. The party's ethics and integrity committee said his
behavior was "reprehensible." He called the punishment "grossly unfair."
Warren Hoge


BOSNIA: SREBRENICA COMPLAINT -- A group of survivors of the 1995 massacre of up
to 8,000 Bosnian Muslims in Srebrenica tried to file a complaint at the
international war crimes tribunal in The Hague, charging Secretary General Kofi
Annan and other officials with partial responsibility for failing to protect the
town. Fred Eckhard, Mr. Annan's spokesman, said the tribunal does not allow
individuals to bring cases, saying that right rests solely with its chief
prosecutor, Carla del Ponte.   Barbara Crossette

UKRAINE: PARLIAMENT PROTEST -- Left-wing legislators holed up in Parliament
resumed a protest session for a third day. The lawmakers have said they fear
that opponents may storm the building and turn it over to a pro-government
majority that walked out last month and has been holding rival sessions in an
exhibition hall. Parliament split on Jan. 20, when some 250 deputies left in
protest at the refusal of the leftist speaker, Olexander Tkachenko, to put to a
vote a motion calling for his dismissal.   (Reuters)

GREECE: APRIL 9 VOTE -- Prime Minister Costas Simitis called for early elections
in an attempt to win a fresh mandate to negotiate Greece's entry to the European
Monetary Union this year. The announcement of the April 9 vote, five months
earlier than scheduled, puts an end to speculation and nervous trading on the
Athens stock market.   Anthee Carassava

THE AMERICAS

MEXICO: DEATH THREATS -- The Miguel Agustin Pro Juarez Human Rights group, one
of whose lawyers was tied up and interrogated by masked men in October, has
received new death threats. After the Inter-American Rights Court ordered the
government to protect Miguel Pro workers last fall, the threats ceased. But a
recent message left at the group's offices said: "We let you rest, but what's
coming will be the fun part. Now let's see if your foreign accomplices help
you."   Sam Dillon

ASIA

JAPAN: ILLEGAL SHOES -- It is now illegal to wear platform shoes while driving
in Osaka, Japan's second largest city. The Osaka police said thick soled shoes,
which have become the latest fashion among young Japanese women, are a safety
hazard. The crackdown comes after a young woman wearing six-inch platform boots
crashed into a pole, killing a friend riding in the passenger seat last
November.   Calvin Sims

JAPAN: SECT'S OFFICES INSPECTED -- More than 200 security officials held their
first inspections of Aum Shinrikyo centers under a new law aimed at controlling
the activities of the religious sect, which recently changed its name to Aleph.
The inspections, which civil libertarians have said are unconstitutional, do not
require a search warrant.   Calvin Sims

PAKISTAN: KASHMIR HOLIDAY -- On the eve of "Kashmiri Solidarity Day" in
Pakistan, the military ruler, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, made another strident
statement, vowing never to "allow Indian threats to intimidate us." The
government has declared a public holiday to focus national attention on the
Kashmir dispute.   Barry Bearak

EAST TIMOR: MASSACRE EVIDENCE -- United Nations forensic experts have uncovered
evidence of an organized massacre of East Timorese in Oceussi, a seaside enclave
surrounded by Indonesian West Timor. Twenty-six bodies and other partial remains
have been found, one with execution-style gunshot wounds and others with
injuries that appeared to have been caused by machetes.   Barbara Crossette

AFGHANISTAN: MEASLES EPIDEMIC -- A spreading measles epidemic in a remote part
of Afghanistan has killed at least 100 people, the United Nations said. The
outbreak began in the northern Samangan Province, an area where fighting between
the ruling Taliban and an opposition alliance was fierce last year. Many people
are displaced across terrain that can be reached only by donkey convoys.
Barbara Crossette

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: CARTOON ENRAGES CLERICS -- Thousands of clerics in the holy city of Qum
called for the execution of Culture Minister Ataollah Mohajerani, saying his
ministry's relaxed stance toward the news media allowed Ayatollah Mohammad Taqi
Mesbah Yazdi, a senior hard-line cleric, to be portrayed as a crocodile in a
newspaper cartoon. In Muslim cultures, crocodiles are associated with treachery.
"Death to Mohajerani!" some 4,000 clerics chanted during their protest.   (AP)

AFRICA

IVORY COAST: 'BLACK BOX' FOUND -- Divers brought up a "black box" of a Kenya
Airways jet that crashed into the Atlantic with 179 people aboard, leaving only
10 known survivors. The device was the flight data recorder, said a French
aviation official. The cockpit voice recorder remains submerged. Investigators
are hoping the black boxes will shed light on why the Airbus 310 plunged into
the Atlantic moments after takeoff on Sunday.   (AP)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GREECE (92%); JAPAN (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%);
UKRAINE (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); OSAKA, JAPAN (91%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);
ATHENS, GREECE (79%);

COMPANY: CONSERVATIVE PARTY (63%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);

ORGANIZATION: CONSERVATIVE PARTY (63%); UNITED NATIONS (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREECE (92%); JAPAN (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%);

 UKRAINE (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);   DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); OSAKA, JAPAN (91%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); BRITISH
PARLIAMENT (90%); LIBERALISM (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (87%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (78%); WRITERS (78%);
NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (78%); ELECTIONS (77%); MAYORS (77%); ETHICS (77%);
SCANDALS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); CITY GOVERNMENT (76%);
GENOCIDE (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(74%); SECURITIES TRADING (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%); DISMISSALS (64%); FASHION & APPAREL (60%);
RELIGION (55%); MONETARY UNIONS (50%);

PERSON: JEFFREY HOWARD ARCHER  (74%);

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             520 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

General Rejects Liability for Timor Abuses

BYLINE: Agence France-Presse

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 173 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Feb. 8


The former Indonesian military chief, General Wiranto, said in an interview
today that he would not accept personal or legal responsibility for any crimes
committed by his troops in East Timor, despite having been implicated in the
atrocities by a national human rights panel.

He broke a weeklong silence in an interview with The Straits Times of Singapore,
hitting back at the panel that was set up to investigate the violence that
flared in the former Indonesian terrority in September 1999. General Wiranto has
been resisting pressure from President Abdurrahman Wahid -- who is on an
overseas tour -- to resign as senior security minister.

In his defense, General Wiranto cited as an example the My Lai massacre of
villagers in Vietnam by American troops. "When one of the U.S. officers in
Vietnam during the Vietnam War killed a number of innocent villagers, the My Lai
incident, I don't think the commander in chief of U.S. troops in Vietnam, or the
Joint Chiefs of Staff, was asked to be legally responsible," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); VIET NAM
(90%);   SINGAPORE (92%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%);

COMPANY: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF  (55%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (55%);

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF  (55%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EAST TIMOR; INDONESIA;   INDONESIA (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (93%); UNITED
STATES (93%); VIET NAM (90%);   SINGAPORE (92%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (58%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND
SECESSION  ARMED FORCES (91%); VIETNAM WAR (91%); INTERVIEWS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(88%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (87%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%);
POLITICS (69%);

PERSON: WIRANTO (GEN)

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             524 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: INDONESIA'S PRESS;
The Victor Is a Victim In Liberty's Triumph

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1018 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia


IN the nearly two years since Indonesia's strongman, Suharto, stepped down in
May 1998, it is the press that has been the most free, and the most tumultuous,
of Indonesia's institutions. It has been the fundamental underpinning for the
continuing move toward a democratic society.

But in some ways today it is also a victim, not just a protagonist, in the
liberation -- and disorder -- it has helped unleash.

Its condition reveals a lot about the chaotic freedoms of the new Indonesia,
where the harsh hand of the dictator has often given way to the unpredictable
passions of the mob.

In many arenas the rules that governed, and often stifled, the nation have been
eased or removed or simply ignored. As a result -- as in many newly liberated
nations -- Indonesia's road from repression to democracy is wild and uncertain.

This week, the focus of change is on the military, with President Abdurrahman
Wahid returning Sunday from a foreign trip to confront his most prominent
general, Wiranto, who has so far refused the President's demand to resign.

The general, accused of human rights abuses, represents the old guard that,
under Mr. Suharto, saw itself as standard bearer and enforcer of a top-down
regime known for corruption, repression, and the silencing of dissent.

Since Suharto's fall, the military has been retreating under the pressure of a
popular demand for civilian rule. But its new weakness in the eyes of society
comes with a social cost: It has contributed to the uncertainties and
instabilities the nation faces.

"At the present moment," said Susanto Pudjosumatono, chief editor of the daily
Jakarta Post, "who cares about the law? Street justice is the order of the day.
Mobs deal with thieves and burglars. Police are caught red-handed as burglars.
Villagers loot estates. Communal conflicts are flaring. People resort to
violence to settle disputes."

This is the arena in which the press now operates.

Freed of the fear of arrest or the closure of their newspapers, editors no
longer censor themselves to please authorities. But self-censorship is alive
among editors of newspapers both big and small. It is the mob they fear.

When Christian churches were burned on the island of Lombok recently, one
newspaper, sidestepping the religious conflict, declined to identify them,
calling them blandly "houses of worship."

When mobs demonstrated in the eastern Indonesian city of Ujungpandang late last
year, local editors said they refrained from revealing the instigators for fear
that the mobs would turn on them as well.

In the central Javanese city of Solo, the most devastated city in the huge riots
of early 1998, armed thugs have threatened reporters in their newsroom. Even in
the capital, Jakarta, not long ago, a mob protested outside the offices of
Tempo, the nation's leading magazine, vandalizing vehicles.

Clear and professional reporting can be the most difficult in the places where
it is most needed, places like Ambon and Aceh where separatist or communal
conflicts threaten to touch off a nationwide backlash.

Bambang Harimukti, the editor of Tempo, said that to assure that his reports are
complete and unbiased he must consider sending in non-local staff members who
leave the area as soon as their reporting is done.

"It is not the authorities wielding their power who are the biggest threat
anymore," Mr. Susanto said. "Now the clear and present danger comes from the
people."

In this unstable arena, the press has played a crucial role in keeping the
country's political and social evolution more or less on course. As an
independent institution, its reforms came quickly, leading the way into a new
atmosphere of openness.

"With all the changes we've seen, the press is perhaps Indonesia's most
transformed institution," said Warief Djajanto, an executive at the Indonesian
news agency, Antara.

In the first 18 months after Mr. Suharto stepped down, 1,500 press licenses were
issued by the liberal-minded new minister of information, Yunus Yosfiah.

Then, under a new press law passed last fall, the requirement for licenses was
abolished. Nobody knows now how many newspapers and radio stations have joined
the babble around the nation, but they have contributed to a brand new sense
that anything goes.

The best of the newspapers offer serious political reporting and analysis,
investigations of corruption and military abuses, high-stakes policy debates and
fundamental explorations of new directions for Indonesia.

But with so many new outlets, the country suffers from a crippling shortage of
trained journalists and much of what is printed and aired lacks fundamental
elements of accuracy and fairness.

With so few resources, some small newspapers do not even pay their reporters.
They simply issue them press cards and leave them to seek whatever fees and
payoffs they can earn from their sources.

"When we organize training for young reporters, many lack professionalism both
in journalistic competence and in ethical competence," Mr. Susanto said.

Defense Minister Juwono Sudarsono, in a recent interview, complained of
widespread tabloid journalism.

"We have a vigorous press but it is often a vigorous and irresponsible press,"
he said. "A lot of hopes have been placed in the press but I don't think these
hopes have been fulfilled."

PERHAPS those hopes were too high at this early stage. Without the free press,
flawed as it is, Indonesia might have made far less progress than it has.

When Mr. Suharto was president, just about every institution in Indonesia had
one thing in common: from the courts to the bureaucracy to the military to the
press, they were tailored to serve his interests.

When he departed, he left intact a venal and self-serving legislature, a
power-hungry military and a thoroughgoing culture of corruption that, without
the pressure of an overwhelming popular will, might well have reverted to their
old ways.

They never had a chance. Suddenly, political talk shows filled the airwaves, an
unfiltered puree of wisdom and nonsense.

But at their heart was a powerful momentum for change.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA (94%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (88%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);
CENSORSHIP (89%); BURGLARY (85%); RELIGION (84%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(75%); CORRUPTION (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); RIOTS (71%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (67%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (66%); VANDALISM
(61%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (52%);

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A swarm of reporters swamps Defense Minister Juwono Sudiarsono
at his installation.; Readers browse through a panoply of magazines on offer
from a vendor. (Photographs by Anastasia Vrachnos for the New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             530 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Character Test

SECTION: Section 4; Page 12; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 151 words



To the Editor:

"The Next President's Duty to Intervene" (Op-Ed, Feb. 13), by Michael Ignatieff,
clearly conveys the tug-of-war between national interests and values. Americans
want a president with a strong moral character and a conviction to lead by our
values, not merely our national interests. But global stability has become both
a national interest and an American value, so a president must respond to the
threat of genocide or "ethnic cleansing" not only in Europe but also in Africa,
Asia and the Americas.

Human rights issues never win presidential campaigns, but character will surely
be important in this one. Let us keep prodding candidates to clarify their plan
of action or inaction in situations of genocide. Let them reveal their character
and convictions.

ANTHONY J. KOZLOWSKI
Minneapolis, Feb. 14, 2000

The writer is president of the American Refugee Committee.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (79%); EUROPE (77%); AFRICA (53%);

CITY: MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (54%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN REFUGEE COMMITTEE  (56%); AMERICAN REFUGEE COMMITTEE (56%);

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN REFUGEE COMMITTEE  (56%); AMERICAN REFUGEE COMMITTEE
(56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); ASIA (79%); EUROPE (77%); AFRICA (53%);
MINNEAPOLIS, MN, USA (54%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); REFUGEES
(72%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (67%);

PERSON: MICHAEL IGNATIEFF (60%); ANTHONY J KOZLOWSKI MINNEAPOLIS (55%);

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             533 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Russian War Crimes?

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 136 words



To the Editor:

Re "Chechens Tell of Torture in Russian Camp" (news article, Feb. 18): The
heinous acts of rape, murder and torture described as being committed by Russian
troops are certainly human rights violations. But there are broader
implications. If the stories are true and substantiated, these acts are war
crimes under international law. Further, if these practices are widespread or
systematic, they may rise to the level of crimes against humanity.

We should not shy from calling these acts by their rightful names. During the
last decade we waited too long to apply the appropriate name to events in
Bosnia, Rwanda and elsewhere. Let us not repeat this error.

ALAN DORSEY
Washington, Feb. 18, 2000

The writer is deputy director of the Crimes of War Project at American
University.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); RWANDA (79%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN UNIVERSITY IN CAIRO SCHOOL OF BUSINESS ECONOMICS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
RWANDA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; INDEPENDENCE MOVEMENTS AND SECESSION  WAR
CRIMES (92%); TORTURE (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (88%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (88%); CRIME RATES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); WRITERS (73%); SEX OFFENSES (72%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (71%);   LAW OF WAR
(87%);

PERSON: DORSEY, ALAN

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             553 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 13, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Pope Asks Forgiveness for Errors Of the Church Over 2,000 Years

BYLINE: By ALESSANDRA STANLEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1349 words

DATELINE: ROME, March 12


Saying "we humbly ask forgiveness," John Paul II today delivered the most
sweeping papal apology ever, repenting for the errors of his church over the
last 2,000 years.

"We cannot not recognize the betrayal of the Gospel committed by some of our
brothers, especially in the second millennium," the pope, dressed in purple
robes for Lent, said in his homily. "Recognizing the deviations of the past
serves to reawaken our consciences to the compromises of the present."

The public act of repentance, solemnly woven into the liturgy of Sunday Mass
inside St. Peter's Basilica, was an unprecedented moment in the history of the
Roman Catholic Church, one that the ailing 79-year-old pope pushed forward over
the doubts of even many of his own cardinals and bishops. He has said repeatedly
that the new evangelization he is calling for in the third millennium can take
place only after what he has described as a church-wide "purification of
memory."

To underline the apology's religious significance, seven cardinals and bishops
stood before the pope and cited some of the key Catholic lapses, past and
present, including religious intolerance and injustice toward Jews, women,
indigenous peoples, immigrants, the poor and the unborn.

The pope also mentioned the persecution of Catholics by other faiths. "As we ask
forgiveness for our sins, we also forgive the sins committed by others against
us," he said.

At the beginning of his pontificate, John Paul's boldest gestures were on the
political front, confronting Communism in the Soviet Union, Eastern Europe and
Latin America and also challenging human rights violations and the economic
injustices of capitalism. But the apology, issued in the twilight of his papacy,
is theologically more daring.

His effort to cleanse his church's conscience for the new millennium has already
drawn criticism, but it is almost certain to mark his legacy deeply.

"The apology does not just apply to individuals, but the church as a whole, and
that is very important," the Rev. Lorenzo Albacete, who teaches theology at St.
Joseph's Seminary in Yonkers. "Because it reflects this pope's desire to
reconcile with other Christians and other religions, people are tempted to view
it as a tactic, but its immense spiritual importance to this pope lies in the
fact that it did not come within a diplomatic or theological agreement, but in
the liturgy of the Mass during Lent and the Holy Year."

The pope, broadening a process of reconciliation that began in the 1960's during
the Second Vatican Council, has issued apologies before, notably regretting in a
1998 document the failure of many Catholics to help Jews during the Holocaust.
That document, "We Remember: A Reflection on the Shoah," disappointed many
leading Jewish groups, which complained that the pope did not go far enough in
apologizing for the silence of church leaders, including the wartime pope, Pius
XII.

Today, in the prayer dedicated to "confession of sins against the people of
Israel," John Paul did not mention the church's behavior during the Holocaust,
just as he did not elaborate on other sins of the church. He said, "We are
deeply saddened by the behavior of those who in the course of history have
caused these children of yours to suffer, and asking your forgiveness we commit
ourselves to genuine brotherhood with the people of the Covenant."

Rabbi Marvin Hier, dean of the Simon Wiesenthal Center, called today's apology a
"bold and important step forward," but added that he was disappointed that the
pope had not mentioned the Holocaust explicitly. "The church still wants to
steer clear of dealing with the role of the Vatican during World War II," he
said.

The pope also acknowledged that church followers had "violated the rights of
ethnic groups and peoples and shown contempt for their cultures and religious
traditions." He deplored divisions between Catholicism and other branches of
Christianity, and also discrimination against women. "Given the number of sins
committed in the course of 20 centuries," Bishop Piero Marini, who is in charge
of papal ceremonies, said before the Mass, "it must necessarily be rather
summary."

The need for Catholics to examine their collective conscience is something that
this pope has been thinking about for years, and he laid out his rationale for
it in a 1994 apostolic letter called "The Coming of the Third Millennium." He
also raised the subject privately in meetings with key cardinals, and his
proposal was sufficiently ground-breaking that they requested that the
theological and historical implications first be studied in depth.

The result was a dense 31-page treatise by the International Theological
Commission, which, with Vatican oversight, ground out the theological precedents
and also the limits to the apology.

Written by a committee and released earlier this month, the document addresses
concerns that the apology will be misunderstood or misused by those "hostile to
the church." It also reflects other worries of theologians, who had to grapple
with such complex issues as how a church that considers itself holy can admit
mistakes, and whether it is fair for today's church to condemn acts by previous
generations made in good if misguided faith.

The document explains that the church is holy, but is stained by the sins of its
children, and requires "constant purification." It implies but does not directly
address the delicate issue of whether past church leaders also erred.

"The document should have put it in bold print that 'children of the church'
includes popes, cardinals and clergy, and not just people in the pews," the Rev.
Thomas Reeves, editor of the Jesuit magazine America, commented. "The pope had a
great idea that some in the Vatican are obscuring with a fog machine."

The document also cautions against judging past generations by today's moral or
religious standards, and says today's believers cannot be held responsible for
sins committed by Catholics hundreds of years ago.

It nevertheless concedes that there is "an objective collective responsibility"
for past errors that modern Catholics should acknowledge and repent.

At a news conference last week, Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who heads the
Vatican's Congregation of the Doctrine of the Faith, the modern successor to the
Inquisition, addressed the issue of why the church feels ready to concede error
now, and not in earlier times.

Protestantism and the Enlightenment "created a new historiography of the church,
claiming that it was not just stained by sin but completely corrupt, so the
church had to build up a Catholic historiography to combat it," he explained. He
said the collapse of atheist, totalitarian systems had left the church "in a new
situation of freedom to return to our sins."

But the difficulty for theologians and church historians to determine what
exactly constituted knowable error during the Crusades, the Inquisition, holy
wars, the burning of heretics and the forced conversions of Indians and
Africans, led to a more elliptical reference to "sins committed in the service
of truth." Cardinal Ratzinger prayed that Catholics would recognize "that even
men of the church in the name of faith and morals, have sometimes used methods
not in keeping with the Gospel."

The pope said, "Christians have at times given in to intolerance and have not
been faithful to the great commandment of love, sullying in their way the face
of the church." But he did not note specific episodes in the church's history
like the Crusades or the Inquisition.

John Paul, who rode up the basilica aisle on a rolling platform, a
strength-saving device he has been using since Christmas, read his homily in a
clear, firm voice that belied the palsied trembling of his hands, a symptom of
Parkinson's disease.

The pope's act of repentance was so unusual that some Catholics predict that it
will take time for its full importance to sink in.

"This is an entirely new thing," said the Vatican spokesman, Joaquin
Navarro-Valls. "I think it will take years for the church to absorb it."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: HOLY SEE (93%); EUROPE (73%); ITALY (72%); LATIN AMERICA (54%); EASTERN
EUROPE (54%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (86%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (72%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH  SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL (56%);

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH  SECOND VATICAN COUNCIL (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: HOLY SEE (93%); EUROPE (73%); ITALY (72%); LATIN AMERICA (54%);
EASTERN EUROPE (54%);   NEW YORK, USA (86%);   ROME, ITALY (72%);

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; WOMEN; DISCRIMINATION; BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION; JEWS  RELIGION (95%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (94%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (93%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); GENOCIDE
(87%); HOLOCAUST (87%); EASTER SEASON (73%); REFUGEES (72%); IMMIGRATION (71%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%);

PERSON: POPE (JOHN PAUL II); STANLEY, ALESSANDRA  POPE JOHN PAUL II  (96%);

LOAD-DATE: March 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: John Paul II embracing the crucifix in St. Peter's Basilica
yesterday. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. A1); Pope John Paul II, second from right,
before the Day of Pardon Mass in St. Peter's Basilica yesterday. In the
background is Pieta by Michelangelo. (Associated Press)(pg. A10)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             558 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 997 words



EUROPE

NETHERLANDS: 3 APOLOGIES -- The government apologized to Jews, Gypsies and
Indonesians for a "chilly" official response in the past to their claims to
property seized during and after World War II. Prime Minister Wim Kok said the
government had to face up to "mistakes and shortcomings" made in the 1940's and
offered $180 million, in addition to past restitutions, to the Central Jewish
Congress. Gypsies received an extra $13 million. Indonesians who sided with the
Dutch during Indonesia's fight for independence in 1949 were offered $110
million.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

GERMANY: BERTELSMANN JOINS FUND -- Bertelsmann, the German media company that
owns Random House, said it would contribute to a $5 billion fund to compensate
Nazi-era slave and forced laborers, but declined to say how much. The company is
in the process of revising its corporate history in the light of evidence that
it did not, as it previously contended, oppose Hitler's regime. Contentious
talks on how the fund should be divided will resume here today.   Roger Cohen
(NYT)


NETHERLANDS: CROAT HANDED OVER -- A Bosnian Croat accused of war crimes was
handed over to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague, where he arrived with a
psychiatrist and other medical personnel. Mladen Naletelic, 54, a former
military commander, was indicted for persecution, torture and murder of Muslims
in Bosnia in 1993 and 1994. The new Croatian leadership, in contrast to past
governments, accepted tribunal doctors' findings that he was well enough to
stand trial.   Marlise Simons (NYT)

IRELAND: ORANGEMEN IN DUBLIN -- Northern Ireland's Orange Order, whose summer
parades of men in bowler hats and orange sashes regularly plunge the province
into turmoil, has been invited by Dublin officials to march there in May. "We
have the right of free assembly here," Lord Mayor Mary Freehill said. A Sinn
Fein spokesman compared Ms. Freehill's action to "the state governor inviting
the Ku Klux Klan to march in Alabama."   Warren Hoge (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CHILE: PINOCHET IN HOSPITAL -- Gen. Augusto Pinochet, 84, entered a clinic for
tests after fainting in his residence outside Santiago. The clinic would not
comment on the condition of the former dictator, who returned to Chile on March
3 after spending 16 months under house arrest outside London on a Spanish
warrant charging him with human rights violations.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

COLOMBIA: REBELS BLACK OUT CITIES -- Power was cut to a huge swath of central
and northeast Colombia, including the capital, Bogota, and at least six other
cities, after a wave of sabotage attacks by Marxist rebels opposed to a selloff
of the state power industry. At least eight of the country's 32 provinces,
including oil-producing regions of the northeast, were hit by the cuts. The
privatizations were ordered by the International Monetary Fund as part of a $2.7
billion loan deal.   (Reuters)

MONTSERRAT: VOLCANO IS NEW THREAT -- The newly active Soufriere Hills volcano
hurled glowing rocks high into the sky, setting off fiery avalanches and shot a
thundering ash cloud as high as 30,000 feet, scientists said. The explosion sent
a new coat of ash over parts of the island's northern "safe zone," where
residents have been living since the volcano began erupting in 1995. Since then,
7,000 of the 11,000 residents have left for other Caribbean islands and Britain.

   (AP)

ASIA

JAPAN: EX-AIDE ADMITS HARASSMENT -- The former Governor of Osaka, Japan's
second-largest city, admitted for the first time in court that he had groped a
21-year-old campaign worker last year. Until now, Isamu Yamada, a former
comedian who still uses his stage name, Knock Yokoyama, had denied accusations
of sexual harassment while agreeing to pay a large civil settlement. Mr.
Yokoyama resigned after his indictment for sexual molestation.   Calvin Sims
(NYT)

PHILIPPINES: WAR ON REBELS -- President Joseph Estrada said he had ordered "all
out" military action against Muslim separatist guerrillas in the south. He also
announced on a visit to Kauswagan that the mayor would go on leave after
accusations by residents that he fled when guerrillas of the Moro Islamic
Liberation Front occupied the Kauswagan town hall last week in fighting that
left at least 21 people dead.   (Agence France-Presse)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: ALBRIGHT REBUKED -- In its latest response to Washington's decision to
ease economic sanctions, the foreign ministry rebuked Secretary of State
Madeleine K. Albright and other officials for a "lack of honesty" and "ignorance
of the geography of the region." The statement appeared aimed less at the moves
announced by Dr. Albright than at remarks she made later in India that made note
of divisions over policy toward the United States between Iran's democratic
reform movement and a hard-line faction associated with the ruling clerics.
John F. Burns (NYT)

AFRICA

COMORO ISLANDS: COUP ATTEMPT FOILED -- The army foiled a coup attempt and a son
of a former president was in custody, officials said. Shots rang out in Moroni,
the capital, but no casualties were reported. Officials said they believed that
the action, the 19th coup or attempted coup since independence from France in
1975, was led by two sons of the islands' first president, Ahmed Abdallah, who
was assassinated in 1989. They said one son, a former agriculture minister, had
been arrested.   (Reuters)

ZIMBABWE: SQUATTERS STAY PUT -- White farmers whose properties were illegally
occupied by war veterans in a demand for land reform said there was no
indication that the police had acted to evict the squatters within 24 hours, as
ordered by the High Court on Friday. The court said that if the squatters
refused to leave, the police were to forcibly remove them after 72 hours, a
deadline that expired late Monday.   (Agence France-Presse)

 Compiled by Terence Neilan


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (84%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (84%);

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); CROATIA (93%); CHILE (92%);
COLOMBIA (92%); IRELAND (92%); EUROPE (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); GERMANY

 (91%); UNITED STATES (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);

STATE: ALABAMA, USA (79%);

CITY: DUBLIN, IRELAND (92%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); THE
HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (51%);

COMPANY: BERTELSMANN AG (84%);   BERTELSMANN SE & CO KGAA (84%);   UNITED
NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); CROATIA (93%); CHILE (92%);
COLOMBIA (92%); IRELAND (92%); EUROPE (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); GERMANY

 (91%); UNITED STATES (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);   ALABAMA, USA (79%);
DUBLIN, IRELAND (92%); SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (79%); BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (51%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  WORLD WAR II (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); WAR CRIMES
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); RELIGION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
ARRESTS (72%); INDICTMENTS (72%); ARREST WARRANTS (71%); TORTURE (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (70%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%);

 ELECTRIC POWER INDUSTRY (69%); SLAVERY (68%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (67%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (67%); HOUSE ARREST (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (66%); GOVERNORS
(61%);   FORCED LABOR (68%);

PERSON: WIM KOK (58%);

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             559 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1187 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-13

Pope Deplores Plight Of Displaced Palestinians
John Paul II described the plight of Arab refugees as "degrading" and "barely
tolerable" during a stop at Yasir Arafat's residence in Bethlehem. Israeli
officials pointed out that the statements did not go beyond established Vatican
positions.   A1

The pope, during a visit to a refugee camp, articulated a more empathetic
understanding of the hardships of refugee life than many Palestinians would have
heard for quite some time, had the remarks been translated from English into
Arabic.   A8


Hopes for Syria-Israel Talks
President Clinton's coming meeting with President Hafez al-Assad of Syria could
lay the groundwork for renewed talks between Syria and Israel, but no deal is
imminent, diplomats in the Middle East said.   A9

New View of Iraq's Bombs
A former high-ranking official in Iraq's secret nuclear weapons program says
that before the 1991 Persian Gulf war, Iraqi students in the United States
combed university libraries for bomb-building information and Iraqi agents and
scientists collected valuable data at American scientific conferences.   A10

An Appeal to India
President Clinton, in a speech to Parliament, asked India to renounce its
nuclear weapons. He reminded India's leaders that the United States and Russia
planned to sharply reduce their stockpiles.   A6

Taiwan Leader to Quit Party
President Lee Teng-hui has yieldied to demands that he step down as chairman of
the governing Nationalist Party, party officials said.   A3

No Deal on Khmer Rouge Trials
A team of United Nations negotiators left Cambodia after failing again to reach
agreement with the government on the ground rules for a trial of the surviving
leaders of the Khmer Rouge.   A3

Turkey Split on E.U. Entry
Turks are fervently debating whether their nation should make the profound
political changes, improve its human rights record, repeal laws that limit free
expression and give more cultural rights to Kurds, steps that are necessary for
membership in the European Union.   A5

World Briefing   A12

NATIONAL   A14-25

U.S. Agrees to Settlement In Sex Discrimination Case
The government agreed to pay $508 million to settle a lawsuit brought by 1,100
women who charged that they were denied jobs and promotions with the Voice of
America.   A1

Lawyers Spend to Fight Bush
Trial lawyers are spending huge amounts of money from the nationwide tobacco
settlement to keep George W. Bush and other Republicans from being elected.   A1


Still Making Moonshine
A state and federal task force has arrested three people on charges of illegally
distilling alcohol in a southern Appalachian region that has produced more
moonshine than any other in America. Government agents say the moonshining
operations are the work of big-time criminals.   A1

Defense in Deputy's Shooting
 J.L. Chestnut, the lawyer for Jamil Abdullah Al-Amin, left, formerly known as
H. Rap Brown, says his client, who is accused of shooting to death a sheriff's
deputy in Atlanta, has been framed by "the system."   A14

Vote on Retirement Benefits
The Senate voted unanimously to remove limits on how much money most Social
Security recipients can earn without losing part of their retirement benefit,
reflecting the potent combination of an aging population and a strong economy.
   A22

State Defends Boycott
Massachusetts went before the Supreme Court to defend its refusal to conduct
business with any company that does business in Myanmar, the former Burma,
saying it has an important interest in "disassociating state tax funds from a
brutal regime."   A20

EDUCATION

Court Rules on Student Fees
The Supreme Court ruled that public universities can collect student activity
fees even from students who object to particular activities, as long as the
groups given the money are chosen without regard to their views.   A1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

Giuliani's Remarks Puzzle His Fellow Republicans
The New York mayor's attacks on Patrick Dorismond, the unarmed black man shot
dead by the police, are bewildering members of his own party, who say they are
concerned about the tenor of his United States Senate campaign.   A1

Subway Killer Found Guilty
A jury rejected the insanity defense of Andrew Goldstein, the schizophrenic man
who threw a woman to her death in front of a subway train last year, finding him
guilty of second-degree murder.   A1

Workfare Contracts Rejected
The New York City comptroller rejected the largest of the contracts awarded to
16 companies by the Giuliani administration to manage its new welfare-to-work
program, accusing Mayor Giuliani of dishonesty in the procurement process.   B1

No Panic Over Rising Gas Prices
The economy of the New York region is not expected to suffer seriously if the
recent spike in gas prices proves brief, forecasters say. Most expect prices to
rise to as much as $2 a gallon by summer and then begin dropping by fall.   B1

Another City Hospital Is Fined
The state health commissioner, Antonia Novello, announced that investigators had
found 29 health violations at Maimonides Medical Center in Brooklyn, resulting
from a case in which a urologist removed the wrong kidney of a 79-year-old
cancer patient. The hospital was fined $58,000, and the case was recommended for
criminal investigation.   B1

SPORTS   D1-8

CIRCUITS   E1-12

ARTS   E1-10

John and Yoko Tapes Found
More than nine hours of videotape of John Lennon and Yoko Ono shot in February
1970 has come to light, and its owners say they want it to be the basis of a
documentary about that turbulent period of Lennon's career.   E5

BUSINESS DAY   C1-25

Auction House Looking Up
Phillips, the world's third-largest auction house, said its New York business
had exploded since the antitrust investigation of Sotheby's and Christie's.   C1


New Frontiers in Computing
A company called Molecular Electronics is trying to open a new era of digital
electronics by creating powerful computing circuits based on trillions of
individual building blocks, each no larger than a molecule.   C1

Start-Up Chiefs Doing Well
Executives at start-up companies are receiving both large salaries and
potentially enormous stock option packages, thanks to an infusion of venture
capital and a shortage of executives, pay experts say.   C1

S.& P. 500 Sets a Record
The S.& P. 500 rose above the 1,500 mark for the first time and the Nasdaq
advanced 153.07 points, or 3.25 percent, to 4,864.75. The Dow closed at
10,866.70, down 40.64 points.   C12

Business Digest   C1

OBITUARIES   C27

HOUSE & HOME   F1-18

EDITORIAL   A26-27

Editorials: Blunt talk in India; drug therapy for preschoolers; finding jobs for
welfare clients.

Columns: Bob Herbert, William Safire.

Bridge   E9
TV Listings   E10
Crossword   E9
Weather   B9
Public Lives   B2


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (93%); PALESTINIAN
TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); SYRIA (93%); TURKEY (92%); HOLY SEE (88%); RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%); GULF STATES (79%); CAMBODIA
(79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%);

COMPANY: NEW YORK (65%);

ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK (65%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL (94%); IRAQ (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); INDIA (93%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%); SYRIA (93%); TURKEY (92%); HOLY SEE
(88%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); EUROPE (79%); GULF STATES
(79%); CAMBODIA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  US PRESIDENTS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);
REFUGEES (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); LAWYERS (86%);
GENOCIDE (86%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (86%); DISTILLED LIQUORS (83%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (78%); REFUGEE & RELIEF
CAMPS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES

 (75%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (75%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (74%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); RELIGION (73%); SCIENCE NEWS (72%);

 SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (72%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (72%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
(71%); LITIGATION (69%); DESERT STORM (68%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (68%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (67%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); DISCRIMINATION (67%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (67%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (65%);
EUROPEAN UNION (62%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (61%); ARRESTS (60%);

 ACADEMIC LIBRARIES (52%); LIBRARIES (52%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (90%); GEORGE W BUSH (54%);

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             560 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Prosecuting Pinochet: Washington Should Help

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

If the prosecution efforts in Chile and Argentina are to succeed, the United
States must take a more active role (Editorial Observer, March 21). The Chilean
military is starting to use against the newly elected government the same
tactics of intimidation that it used against the Salvador Allende government. It
has announced that if Gen. Augusto Pinochet is brought to trial, there is a risk
of a civil war.

The United States should publicly support the efforts of the embattled Chilean
judiciary to prosecute General Pinochet and other human rights violators. The
F.B.I. has acknowledged that it worked in liaison with the Pinochet government;
the United States should provide the Chilean judge in charge of the prosecution
with documents related to these events.

CARLOS MORENO
New York, March 21, 2000

The writer is a lawyer for Chilean exiles in the United States.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (58%);

COUNTRY: CHILE (97%); UNITED STATES (97%); ARGENTINA (92%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (58%);   FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (57%);
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (57%);

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (57%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (97%); UNITED STATES (97%); ARGENTINA (92%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CIVIL WAR (88%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%);

PERSON: MORENO, CARLOS; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (90%);

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             562 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Understanding Kashmir

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 153 words



To the Editor:

Contrary to what Pankaj Mishra implies (Op-Ed, March 22), the Indian government
remains the best instrument for upholding human rights in the state of Kashmir.
The terrorists in Kashmir should be stopped, not appeased. Indian security
forces are repressing armed violence, not discontent.

Indian secularism views all of India, including Kashmir, as the common homeland
of all the Indian people. Many Kashmiri Muslims are dissatisfied with the
actions of Indian security forces, but that does not derogate the rights of
secular Muslims and non-Muslims in Kashmir to receive the protection of the
Indian Constitution.

Indian security forces have committed excesses in Kashmir, but the Indian
government has made persistent efforts to maintain their discipline while
conducting an extraordinarily difficult anti-terrorist operation.

SANJOY BANERJEE
Union City, Calif., March 22, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ASIA (99%); INDIA (95%); PAKISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (50%);

STATE: KASHMIR (99%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (50%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: SANJOY BANERJEE UNION (63%);

ORGANIZATION: SANJOY BANERJEE UNION (63%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDIA; KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA); PAKISTAN;   ASIA (99%); INDIA
(95%); PAKISTAN (79%); UNITED STATES (50%);   KASHMIR (99%); JAMMU & KASHMIR,
INDIA (94%); CALIFORNIA, USA (50%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  RELIGION (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%);

PERSON: MISHRA, PANKAJ; BANERJEE, SANJOY  PANKAJ MISHRA (68%);

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             565 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 31, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled By Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A;Page 6;Column 4;Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1316 words



MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: TALIBAN FOE FLEES -- Iran's official news agency said Ismail Khan, the
former governor of Herat Province in Afghanistan and a major figure in the
opposition to the ruling Taliban, had crossed into Iran and reached the city of
Meshed after escaping from a Taliban prison. Mr. Khan, a hero to many Afghans
for his fight against Soviet forces in the 1980's, was said to have reached Iran
with another anti-Taliban leader who escaped from prison with him, Hafiz Qadir.
Iran strongly opposes the Taliban.   John F. Burns (NYT)


IRAN: KHATAMI BROTHER IN COURT -- A hard-line court summoned Riza Khatami, left,
a brother of President Mohammad Khatami, on unspecified charges linked to his
outspoken pro-reform newspaper, Mosharekat, the official news agency reported.
It said the summons was apparently linked to libel charges against the daily.
Riza Khatami heads the main political faction backing the reformist president.
   (Reuters)

IRAQ: HUSSEIN SON'S DENIAL -- President Saddam Hussein's son Uday will not seek
the post of speaker in the newly elected National Assembly, his newspaper,
Babil, reported. An election victory by Uday Hussein reinforced speculation that
he would seek the post. But Babil quoted him as saying he wanted to be an
"ordinary" legislator.   (AP)

ASIA

INDONESIA: SUHARTO PROTEST -- The police fired tear gas to disperse protesters
near former President Suharto's Jakarta residence after he, citing medical
grounds, failed to show up for questioning in connection with a corruption
scandal. Scores of students were arrested after 200 demonstrators threw stones
at officers blocking streets leading to his house.   (AP)

THE AMERICAS

GUATEMALA, SPAIN: PLEA ON CASE -- Spanish state prosecutors asked a High Court
judge to drop his investigation into genocide allegations against former
Guatemalan dictators made by the Nobel Peace Prize winner Rigoberta Menchu. The
prosecutors said Spain had no jurisdiction in the cases, including a military
assault on Spain's embassy in Guatemala in 1980 in which 39 Spaniards died.
(Reuters)

EUROPE

BRITAIN: QUEEN HONORS NATO COMMANDER -- Gen. Wesley Clark of the United States,
NATO's supreme allied commander in Europe, is to be given an honorary knighthood
by Queen Elizabeth for his leadership in the bombing campaign against
Yugoslavia. A Buckingham Palace spokesman said he would be entitled to put
"K.B.E." -- for Knight of the British Empire -- after his name, but, because he
is not a Briton, not put "Sir" before it.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

BALKANS: INTERNATIONAL AID -- International donors meeting in Brussels pledged
$1.8 billion to pay for projects to help the economies of southeastern Europe
and help stabilize the Balkans. The European Union pledged $530 million through
its head office, the European Commission. The 15 European Union nations were
believed to have pledged a similar amount. The United States pledged $77.65
million.   (AP)

NORTHERN IRELAND: LIBEL AWARD -- Sean McPhilemy, a Northern Ireland filmmaker,
won a $230,000 libel judgment against The Sunday Times when a High Court jury
ruled that the newspaper failed to prove its claim that his 1993 program "The
Committee" was a hoax. The program said there was collusion between Royal Ulster
Constabulary officials and Protestant politicians in the killing of prominent
Catholics.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

FRANCE: KOSOVO OFFICER REASSIGNED -- A paramilitary police officer freed from
jail after being held for 48 hours on suspicion of leaking secret military
papers on Kosovo to the news media will be reassigned. Lt. Col. Jean-Michel
Mechain, 46, has denied giving journalists documents describing tensions between
French commanders and the United Nations administrator in Kosovo. He remains
under judicial investigation, however, and cannot leave France.   Suzanne Daley
(NYT)

SWITZERLAND: HOLOCAUST ACCOUNTING -- Banks have agreed to publish the names of
owners of 26,000 dormant accounts to see if they belong to Holocaust survivors,
a move recommended in December by the Volcker Commission. The delay has held up
payment from the $1.25 billion settlement reached with Swiss banks by Jewish
groups in 1998.   Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

POLAND: NO TAX ON NAZI-ERA PAYMENTS -- Payments by German companies to 400,000
Poles for forced labor during World War II will be exempt from income tax, Prime
Minister Jerzy Buzek announced. The poles will be eligible for payments of
between $2,500 and $7,500 each from a $5 billion fund.   Donald F. McNeil Jr.
(NYT)

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: NEO-NAZI BEGINS JAIL TERM -- Eugene Terre'Blanche, leader of South
Africa's neo-Nazi Afrikaner Resistance Movement, began a 12-month jail sentence
on an assault charge. Mr. Terre'Blanche, whose followers set off bombs that
killed 21 people on the eve of the first nonracial elections, in 1994, was
imprisoned for setting his dogs on a gas station attendant in 1996. He is
appealing another conviction, for the attempted murder of another black man.
Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

ALGERIA: RIGHTS INVITATIONS -- Rights groups welcomed a decision to invite them
to Algeria in May and June. The invitations -- to Amnesty International, Human
Rights Watch, Reporters Without Borders and the International Federation of
Human Rights -- were made through Algeria's diplomatic mission in Geneva. Since
fighting between guerrillas and the army began in Algeria in 1992, the country
has been closed to rights groups.   Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

Using lasers, the technology tries to identify chemical impurities that are
characteristic of diamonds from a particular country. Before it can work,
though, a huge database containing the fingerprints of the world's diamonds
would have to be gathered and a method of industrial testing would have to be
devised.

"Identifying them is going to take many years," said Andrew Bone, a De Beers
spokesman in London. "Most international experts believe that the techniques are
not yet sufficient to allow the tracing of individual stones. Nevertheless, we
are committed to helping in any way we can."

Buying Love Tokens

It appears likely, then, that a trickle of diamonds from the war zones of Africa
will continue to leak into jewelry stories, at least until technology,
international law or a heretofore unseen vigilance in the diamond industry finds
a way to stop it.

De Beers insists that the chances of buying such a diamond are infinitesimal.

"There is less than a one-in-a-hundred chance that any single stone will come
from conflict areas," said Mr. Bone, the De Beers spokesman.

Despite such assurances, the window remains open for African rebels. Smugglers
in Sierra Leone and Congo have ready access to the third of the world diamond
market that De Beers does not control. And Unita, although its diamond dealing
is down sharply from the mid-1990's, is still selling between $80 million and
$150 million worth of stones a year, according to the most conservative
estimates. To perk up sales, Unita held a sale last year, military experts said,
marking down rough-diamond prices by a third.

The perceived need to own a diamond appears, if anything, to be increasing.

On a recent Sunday afternoon, Tracy Scholl, of Suffolk County, Long Island,
stood with her fiance, Mike Sabatino, at an engagement ring counter on 47th
Street in the diamond district of Manhattan.

"When you get engaged, you get a diamond," Ms. Scholl said as Mr. Sabatino, an
electrician from Staten Island, warily eyed a one-carat ring that cost $5,500.
"It is what you are supposed to do."

And Africa? "I want to say that I would not want a diamond because of that stuff
in Africa, but I guess that's not really true," Ms. Scholl said. "Me not buying
a diamond is not going to stop what is going on over there."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); SPAIN (94%); EUROPE

 (94%); ANGOLA (94%); GUATEMALA (93%); AFRICA (93%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%); SOUTH
AFRICA (79%); CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE
(79%); ASIA (79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
INDONESIA (79%); INDIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); NAMIBIA (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE
(77%); BELGIUM (76%); EASTERN EUROPE (52%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: MASHHAD, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);
BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (76%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (69%);   LUANDA, ANGOLA (79%);

COMPANY: DE BEERS CONSOLIDATED MINES LTD  DE BEERS CONSOLIDATED MINES LTD (90%);

   AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY  (59%); AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY

 (59%);

ORGANIZATION: DE BEERS CONSOLIDATED MINES LTD  AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL
HISTORY  (59%); AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFRICA; SIERRA LEONE; CONGO (FORMERLY ZAIRE); ANGOLA; ;  AFGHANISTAN

 (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); SPAIN (94%); EUROPE (94%); ANGOLA
(94%); GUATEMALA (93%); AFRICA (93%); SIERRA LEONE (92%); UNITED STATES (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%);
CONGO, THE DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF THE (79%); SOUTHEASTERN EUROPE (79%); ASIA
(79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%); IRAQ (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); INDONESIA (79%);

 INDIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); NAMIBIA (79%); SOUTHERN EUROPE (77%); BELGIUM (76%);

 EASTERN EUROPE (52%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);   MASHHAD, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (91%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (76%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA
(69%);   LUANDA, ANGOLA (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMESDIAMONDS; SURVEYS AND SERIES; PRICES (FARES,
FEES AND RATES)  TALIBAN (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); REGIONAL &
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
AWARDS & PRIZES (85%); LIBEL & SLANDER (78%); POLITICAL SCANDALS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); CORRUPTION (74%); BOMBINGS (73%); JURISDICTION (73%); EUROPEAN UNION
(72%); MINING & EXTRACTION SECTOR PERFORMANCE (69%); ARRESTS (69%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (69%); RIOTS (69%); SCANDALS (69%); JUDGES (69%); NOBEL PRIZES
(67%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%); MILITARY
OPERATIONS (66%); BRITISH MONARCHS (65%); BRITISH NOBILITY & GENTRY (65%);
GENOCIDE (62%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (62%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (61%);
EUROPEAN UNION INSTITUTIONS (61%); GOVERNORS (58%);

PERSON: HARDEN, BLAINE  SADDAM HUSSEIN (79%); ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED
KINGDOM (63%);

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: April 17, 2000, Monday

CORRECTION:

A report in the World Briefing column on March 31 about invitations to human
rights groups to visit Algeria in May and June misstated the Algerians' position
on such visits. Several rights groups have been admitted since the guerrilla war
began, with varying freedom of access; the country has not been closed to them
since 1992.

A front-page article on April 6 about the role of diamonds in fueling wars in
Africa misstated the life expectancy in Botswana, the world's largest diamond
producer. The United Nations says that because of AIDS, the figure has fallen
sharply and is 41, no longer close to 70.

GRAPHIC: PhotosPhotos: Mati Balemo, who claws through Congolese stream beds for
diamonds, lost this $20 find to a soldier. (Radhika Chalasani/Sipa, for The New
York Times)(pg. A1); DIAMOND HUNTING -- Mati Balemo looking for diamonds in a
Congo stream. He found a small one, but a soldier took it away from him.
(Radhika Chalasani/Sipa, for The New York Times); FROM ANGOLA TO NEW YORK -- The
Catoca diamond mine in Angola, in top photo, is an island of modernity in a sea
of civil war and produces about $8 million worth of gems a month. In 1996, the
Luanda government took control of the mine from Unita rebels, led by Jonas
Savimbi, shown in bottom left photo. At right, a display of diamond rings, the
carefully cultivated symbol of eternal love, at a shop on 47th Street in
Manhattan. (Steve Berman/The New York Times)(pg. A10)

Map/Chart: "Africa's Precious Stones"
Diamonds were known to exist only in India and Brazil, and were regarded as the
rarest of gems, until they were accidentally discovered by a boy on the banks of
the Orange River in South Africa in 1866. Since then, Africa has dominated the
world market for large gem-quality diamonds. The finest stones come from
Namibia, Angola and Sierra Leone.

(Sources: The American Museum of Natural History, Reader's Digest Atlas of
Southern Africa)(pg. A11)

Map of Africa shows location of several mines. (pg. A11)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             568 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 1, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

The Price in Kosovo

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 156 words



To the Editor:

Re "Our Stake in Kosovo" (Op-Ed, March 28), by Secretary of State Madeleine K.
Albright: She is right in advocating sustained United States support for
reconstruction and reconciliation in Kosovo to "secure the peace."

But the United States did not prevail in the war, as Dr. Albright asserts. In
fact, according to the Pentagon's own evaluations, American bombing failed to
degrade Slobodan Milosevic's forces.

It is inaccurate to put the blame on Mr. Milosevic alone for driving hundreds of
thousands from their homes in Kosovo. Most fled after the bombing began, with
Serbian militias taking advantage of the absence of human rights monitors and
the international press to step up their "ethnic cleansing" campaign. In effect,
NATO's air war facilitated Mr. Milosevic's reign of terror.

FRIDA BERRIGAN
New York, March 28, 2000

The writer is a research associate at the World Policy Institute.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(93%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (72%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

 (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (96%); UNITED STATES (96%); KOSOVO

 (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (72%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%);

 MILITARY WEAPONS (87%); BOMBINGS (87%); HUMAN RIGHTS (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%);

PERSON: BERRIGAN, FRIDA; ALBRIGHT, MADELEINE K (SEC); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

 SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (92%);

LOAD-DATE: April 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             572 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Jailed Mexican Wins Environmental Prize

BYLINE: By SAM DILLON

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 611 words

DATELINE: IGUALA, Mexico, April 3


Humble Mexicans who stand in the way of depleting the country's natural
resources have often faced brutal treatment, but one such man has discovered in
recent days that he has international friends to help him fight his cause.

The man is Rodolfo Montiel, who organized peasants to block roads after loggers
began felling virgin forests near his village in the mountains north of
Acapulco. That peaceful 1988 protest slowed the logging, but it infuriated
wealthy landowners and the generals at a nearby garrison.

Gunmen have since killed several members of Mr. Montiel's rural ecological
organization, and last May soldiers seized and tortured Mr. Montiel, he said,
accusing him of drug and weapons crimes.

The charges were riddled with contradictions, but were enough to send him to a
penitentiary pending a felony trial. One of the human rights lawyers defending
him has been kidnapped, twice.

But last Friday, Amnesty International declared Mr. Montiel to be a prisoner of
conscience, provoking a flood of protest letters to the Mexican authorities. And
on Wednesday, a San Francisco foundation is to announce that it has awarded him
a $125,000 environmental prize.

"The only award I've gotten from the government is prison, so I don't know quite
what to think about this prize from foreigners," Mr. Montiel, a robust, nearly
toothless man of 44, said in an interview today in a federal prison in Iguala,
two hours' drive south of Mexico City. "Are you sure this doesn't involve some
hidden punishment?"

David Najera, a government spokesman, said Tuesday that President Ernesto
Zedillo was unaware of the details of Mr. Montiel's case. "But it worries us,
and we'll focus on it now," he said, adding that Mr. Zedillo's government has
emphasized respect for the environment.

The government showed only hostility to Mr. Montiel's complaints in 1995 after
local authorities began to promote logging in the mountains of Guerrero State,
signing timber contracts with Boise Cascade, the Idaho-based lumber company.

Mr. Montiel, who has only a first-grade education, sent letters to Mexico's
environment minister, to the governor of Guerrero and to a dozen other
authorities, reporting that laws were being trampled, local rivers were drying
up, and thousands of fish were dying.

"Our defense of the forest is a struggle for our way of life," Mr. Montiel wrote
in one letter. "The earth without trees becomes a desert, because the soul of
the water lives in the cool of the forest."

Only one authority ever responded: a Guerrero official accused Mr. Montiel of
belonging to "an ecological guerrilla organization."

Shortly after Mr. Montiel's group blocked roads to stop the timber trucks in
spring 1998, Boise Cascade pulled out of Mexico.

Doug Bartels, a spokesman, said Tuesday that Boise Cascade left because it could
not get enough logs to keep its 100-employee sawmill running. Referring to the
arrests of Mr. Montiel and a friend in May 1999, he said, "If these two
individuals have been wrongly arrested, that's regrettable."

Soldiers who detained the two men tied and beat them, held them for two days
partly submerged in a river, forced them to hold marijuana plants and rifles as
soldiers took photos, and later pressured them to sign a confession, Mr. Montiel
said. Mr. Montiel urinated blood for months after his torture, he said.

Under cross-examination by Mr. Montiel's lawyers last fall, army officers
contradicted themselves over details of his arrest. Days later, one of the
lawyers, Digna Ochoa, was kidnapped and beaten by assailants in Mexico City. In
October, intruders accosted Ms. Ochoa again for hours in her home.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (97%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: IDAHO, USA (79%);

CITY: MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  BOISE CASCADE SALES LTD (64%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (83%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (83%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO; ACAPULCO (MEXICO);   MEXICO (97%); UNITED STATES (79%);
IDAHO, USA (79%);   MEXICO CITY, MEXICO (79%);

SUBJECT: FORESTS AND FORESTRY; DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS; LOGGING INDUSTRY;
AWARDS, DECORATIONS AND HONORS  ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (90%); LOGGING
INDUSTRY (90%); NATURAL RESOURCES (90%); FORESTS & WOODLANDS (90%); FALSE
IMPRISONMENT (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); PRISONS (90%); FORESTRY &
ENVIRONMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); ECOLOGY
& ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENCE (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL DEPARTMENTS (78%); TORTURE (78%);
MOUNTAINS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (75%); FELONIES
(74%); FARM LABOR (72%); LAWYERS (71%); WILDERNESS (71%); ENVIRONMENTAL LAW
(71%); ARMED FORCES (70%); INTERVIEWS (70%); RIVERS (67%); RIOTS (67%); INDUSTRY
AWARDS (66%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: DILLON, SAM; MONTIEL, RODOLFO  RODOLFO MONTIEL (96%);

LOAD-DATE: April 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rodolfo Montiel, 44, who organized a protest by peasants against
logging in the mountains north of Acapulco, at the federal penitentiary at
Iguala where he being held pending trial on drug and weapons charges. (Sam
Dillon/The New York Times)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             574 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 6, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia's Lesson In a Perilous World

SECTION: Section A;  Page 26;  Column 6;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 163 words



To the Editor:

Re "Justice for the Khmer Rouge" (editorial, April 3): Justice in Cambodia will
not be served unless an independent prosecutor is allowed to pursue indictments
without having to consent to the wishes of Prime Minister Hun Sen. But the long
and arduous process of establishing another international criminal tribunal
shows the need for a permanent international criminal court.

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court would provide such an
institution. If ratified, this court would have jurisdiction over the crime of
genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and crimes of aggression.

Although an ad hoc tribunal on Cambodia would assist the cause of international
justice within that country, it does little to prevent future genocidal acts. A
permanent court would provide security for the future as it upholds justice not
in selective situations, but on a universal scale.

ERIC K. LEONARD
Bel Air, Md., April 4, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: MARYLAND, USA (79%);

COMPANY: BEL AIR MARKETS (56%);   INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (83%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (83%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);   MARYLAND, USA
(79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY
(72%); POLITICS (71%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%);

 JURISDICTION (70%);

PERSON: HUN SEN (PRIME MIN); LEONARD, ERIK K  HUN SEN (73%);

LOAD-DATE: April 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             583 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 21, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
A Rich Culture With Shallow Roots

BYLINE: By A. O. SCOTT

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Page 28; Column 1; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend
Desk

LENGTH: 580 words


The continued persecution of Gypsies -- or Roma, as they call themselves in
their own language -- has become a pressing human rights concern in
post-Communist Eastern Europe. Jasmine Dellal's new documentary confronts the
prejudice and misperception that the Roma face in this country. It may surprise
you to learn that the United States is home to one million Roma, who speak
variations of the Romani language and continue to live according to traditions
that remain mysterious to outsiders.

This is at least in part because a central aspect of Gypsy culture is the
limiting of contact with non-Gypsies, or Gadje. Early in "American Gypsy: A
Stranger in Everybody's Land," which opens today at Cinema Village, Ms. Dellal
recounts her difficulty in finding anyone willing to talk with her about the
experience of the Roma in North America. She was fortunate to find Jimmy Marks,
a used car salesman in Spokane, Wash., who, along with his wife, parents and
children, provides a fascinating window into the life of his people.

In 1986 Mr. Marks's home was raided by the police, who suspected the Marks
family of involvement in selling stolen goods. All charges were dropped, and the
city later admitted that the police had acted improperly. But because the search
had violated important taboos having to do with privacy and the separation of
the sexes, the family was declared unclean by the Roma community and ostracized.
Mr. Marks spent the next dozen years pursuing a lawsuit against the Spokane
authorities, a cause he also sees as a crusade for Gypsy civil rights.

Ms. Dellal's attention alternates between an account of Mr. Marks's struggle and
an inquiry into Gypsy history and culture. She makes use of the standard public
television documentary repertory: video clips from the local news, still
photographs from bygone days and talking-head interviews with her subjects and
with relevant experts. The commercial release of "American Gypsy" is welcome,
but given its video format and its conventional approach, the film's true home
is probably on the small screen.

The Roma in America are wedded to their ancient ways even as they are enticed by
the glittering modernity that surrounds them. In this, they resemble most other
immigrant groups. It's a bit risky to present an individual story as
representative of a larger history, but "American Gypsy" manages to respect the
particulars of Mr. Marks's ordeal, not to mention the quirks of his own
expansive, self-dramatizing character. It also presents a detailed chronicle of
rootlessness, slavery and genocide.

To hear Mr. Marks's children talk about their ambitions in marriage and work is
to hear sentiments that might come from their Korean or Indian peers, or from
the Jewish or Italian children of earlier generations. And to listen to Mr.
Marks's father, Grover, recount the hatred he encountered as a young man, or to
his son's paean to Las Vegas, is to hear a familiar story told in a new accent.

AMERICAN GYPSY

A Stranger in Everybody's Land

Directed by Jasmine Dellal; in English and Romani, with subtitles; photography
by Michele Zaccheo and Ms. Dellal; edited by Joseph De Francesco and Ms. Dellal;
produced by Ms. Dellal, Michal Conford, Herb Bennett and Herb Ferrette. At
Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, East Village. Running time: 79 minutes.
This film is not rated.

WITH: The families of Grover and Lippie Marks, Jimmy and Jane Marks, Ian Hancock
and William Duna.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); EASTERN EUROPE (92%); EUROPE (91%); NORTH AMERICA
(79%);

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (92%);

CITY: SPOKANE, WA, USA (87%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); EASTERN EUROPE (92%); EUROPE (91%); NORTH
AMERICA (79%);   WASHINGTON, USA (92%);   SPOKANE, WA, USA (87%);

SUBJECT: MOTION PICTURES; REVIEWS  MOVIE REVIEWS (90%); ROMANI PEOPLE (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (89%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
GENOCIDE (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); TELEVISION MOVIES & MINISERIES (77%);
HISTORY (77%); VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (75%); FAMILY (75%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(73%); MARRIAGE (72%); PUBLIC BROADCASTING (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS (66%);
LITIGATION (65%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (50%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%);

PERSON: SCOTT, A O; DELLAI, JASMINE  JIMMY MARKS (94%); JASMINE DELLAL (91%);

LOAD-DATE: April 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Jimmy Marks in the documentary "American Gypsy." (Little Dust
Productions)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             588 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 29, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sweatshop Monitor Invites Corporate Input

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


Representatives of universities belonging to a new group set up by students to
monitor apparel factories led a call yesterday to give companies a greater say
in the group's work. The move came as Nike, the footwear giant, moved once again
against a university that had joined the monitoring group.

Meeting in a Chicago suburb, university officials said it was time for the
monitoring group, the Workers Rights Consortium -- which is run by students,
university officials and human rights and union leaders -- to begin a dialogue
with apparel producers like Nike.

Over the last week, the consortium has come under heavy fire from Nike, which
accuses the group of being unfriendly to business and not giving companies a say
in its affairs. Phil Knight, Nike's chairman and founder, even announced that he
would not make a planned $30 million donation to his alma mater, the University
of Oregon, because it had joined the consortium.

On Thursday, Nike announced that it was ending negotiations to renew a six-year,
multimillion-dollar licensing agreement with the University of Michigan because
that institution had joined the consortium.

Student anti-sweatshop groups persuaded nearly 50 universities to join the
consortium as a way to monitor factories, in the United States and abroad, that
make apparel under license for colleges. The consortium's goal is to make sure
apparel carrying a university's name is not made in sweatshops.

Lawrence Mann, associate chancellor of the University of Illinois and a leader
of the Workers Rights Consortium, said a major topic at yesterday's meeting was
the universities' desire to give the industry a greater voice in the consortium.
But Mr. Mann said his university and most others in the group opposed giving
companies a seat on the board.

"The college and university group appears to be unanimous about the importance
of engaging industry in the discussion," he said in a telephone interview from
the headquarters of the Big 10 Conference in Park Ridge, Ill. "If that doesn't
happen, the reality is the membership of the Workers Rights Consortium is just
talking to itself."

Mr. Mann said the universities were pushing to give companies more say even
before Nike acted against the universities of Oregon and Michigan.

"This is not being motivated by anything Nike has done," Mr. Mann said. "But the
concern expressed by Nike and other companies is a very legitimate question."

Peter Romer-Friedman, a University of Michigan junior who is one of the 3
students on the consortium's 12-member board, praised the universities' call to
begin talking with companies.

"The Workers Rights Consortium wants to engage Nike and other companies in a
dialogue so we can work together to improve working conditions in all
factories," Mr. Romer-Friedman said.

Nike supports another monitoring group, the Fair Labor Association, which is
backed by the White House and includes a dozen companies, 135 colleges and a
handful of consumer and human rights groups. That association has created an
elaborate plan to inspect factories around the world.

But student anti-sweatshop groups insist that the Fair Labor Association is
dominated by companies and will not carry out tough, independent inspections.

Nike said it had ended negotiations with Michigan because, in its view, the
university had unilaterally changed terms of the agreement to comply with the
requirements of the Workers Rights Consortium.

Using unusually harsh language, the university said, "Nike has chosen again to
strike out at universities committed to finding appropriate ways to safeguard
and respect human rights."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (86%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (86%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS'
& INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (86%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT
& SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (86%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (86%);
SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (86%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (86%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (86%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%);

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (92%);

COMPANY: NIKE INC; WORKERS RIGHTS CONSORTIUM; FAIR LABOR ASSN; UNIVERSITY OF
MICHIGAN  NIKE INC (86%);   UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN  (82%); UNIVERSITY OF
MICHIGAN (82%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (56%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (56%);

ORGANIZATION: NIKE INC; WORKERS RIGHTS CONSORTIUM; FAIR LABOR ASSN; UNIVERSITY
OF MICHIGAN  UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN  (82%); UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN (82%);
UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (56%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   MICHIGAN, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (92%);
CHICAGO, IL, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: APPAREL; FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANTS; SHOES AND BOOTS; LABOR;
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES; CONTRACTS; SWEATSHOPS  COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%);

 STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); APPAREL
MFG (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); UNIVERSITY ADMINISTRATION (89%); MAJOR GIFTS
(78%); FOOTWEAR (77%); INTERVIEWS (73%); LABOR UNIONS (71%); CONFERENCES &
CONVENTIONS (59%); LICENSING AGREEMENTS (54%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%);

 ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN  PHILIP H 'PHIL' KNIGHT  (56%);   PHILIP KNIGHT
(78%);

LOAD-DATE: April 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             592 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 4, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone Insurgents Kill 7 In U.N. Force and Capture 49

BYLINE: By BLAINE HARDEN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words


A United Nations attempt to take charge of security in the West African country
of Sierra Leone has exploded in violence, with rebels killing seven
peacekeepers, all Kenyans, and taking hostage at least 49 other peacekeepers and
civilians, officials said yesterday.

Rebels of the Revolutionary United Front, who made a grisly name for themselves
by chopping limbs off thousands of civilians during an eight-year civil war that
ended last year, detained members of the United Nations mission after a series
of confrontations in central and north-eastern parts of the country on Monday
and Tuesday.

The violence, the worst for United Nations peacekeepers since 10 Belgians were
killed in Rwanda in 1994, is by far the most serious breakdown of a chronically
troubled peace agreement brokered last year by the United Nations between the
government of Sierra Leone and the rebels.

The rebels' leader, Foday Sankoh, who became a government minister after the
peace deal, has consistently refused to honor his promises to pacify his forces
and allow United Nations peacekeepers to move freely in rebel territory.

Human rights groups have said that Mr. Sankoh does not want peacekeepers in
rebel-controlled parts of eastern Sierra Leone because he fears they will
interfere with a lucrative diamond smuggling operation he controls there.
Diamond smuggling supported the rebels in their civil war and has reportedly
made Mr. Sankoh very wealthy.

Peacekeeping troops responded to the rebel attack by surrounding Mr. Sankoh's
house in the capital, Freetown, yesterday. A United States official in Freetown
said by telephone that he had received a statement from Mr. Sankoh saying that
if hostages were being held by the Revolutionary United Front they should be
freed. Mr. Sankoh also called for talks and free movement about the country for
United Nations forces.

A United Nations spokesman in New York said that the rebel leader's house was
surrounded because "the U.N. wants to make sure it can remain in contact with
Mr. Sankoh at this time of crisis."

"He hasn't formally been arrested for anything," said the spokesman, Farhan Haq.
"However it would be dishonest to say he can just pack up and leave."

The United Nations Security Council demanded the captives' release and said Mr.
Sankoh should order his followers to stop the attacks.

The Clinton administration is "looking into the availability" of using C-140
cargo aircraft to fly Jordanian, Bangladeshi and Indian troops into Sierra
Leone, a senior State Department official said. The officials said, however,
that these troops were not yet ready to go.

In a statement in New York, the United Nations Secretary General, Kofi Annan,
called the attacks "outrageous and criminal" and a "flagrant violation" of the
July peace accord.

In Washington, an administration official said yesterday that the United States
was looking at ways to see if Mr. Sankoh could be charged with war crimes. The
peace deal Mr. Sankoh negotiated last year exempted him and his forces from
prosecution for possible war crimes committed during the civil war. But the
State Department has said it has credible information that atrocities have been
committed by Mr. Sankoh's forces since the agreement was signed.

The United Nations made an urgent appeal Tuesday night for reinforcements for
the 8,500 peacekeepers, mostly Nigerians, Kenyans and Indians, who have been
deployed there. Members of the Security Council were asked to transport,
presumably in an emergency airlift, 3,000 more peacekeepers to Sierra Leone from
Jordan, Bangladesh and India. The United Nations authorized 11,000 troops for
the mission in Sierra Leone, but their deployment has been delayed because of
lagging troop contributions from member nations.

The nationalities of the detainees were not immediately released. In one of the
areas where attacks occurred, Kailahun, troops are mostly Indian; in the other
area of attacks, they are mostly Kenyan.

A United Nations spokeswoman said the number of dead was based on preliminary
reports and could change.

The killings and detentions provoked strong condemnations from the Security
Council, Mr. Annan and the State Department.

"The situation in Sierra Leone is unacceptable to the United Nations and should
be unacceptable to all the member states," said Richard C. Holbrooke, the
American ambassador to the United Nations, who was in Brussels and on his way
with other Security Council members to assess another shaky truce, in Congo.

Violence in Sierra Leone seems likely to raise more questions about the United
Nations' plan to send a force of about 5,500 to Congo, made up of monitors,
peacekeeping troops and a large support staff.

Influential members of Congress have been objecting to paying the American share
of the Congo operation, even though no United States troops are being
considered. "We can't turn away from crises like these," Mr. Holbrooke said,
referring both to Sierra Leone and Congo.

Mr. Annan said yesterday that the violence in Sierra Leone could discourage
Western countries from taking part in further peacekeeping operations in Africa.
He pointed out that countries were reluctant to intervene in the genocide in
Rwanda after casualties in Somalia in 1993.

"And after Sierra Leone, I think there's going to be very little encouragement
for any of them to get involved in operations in Africa," Mr. Annan said.

The worst single attack on United Nations peacekeepers was the death of 24
Pakistanis in Somalia in 1993.

There is a growing sense at the United Nations that Mr. Sankoh will have to be
tried for war crimes. "It seems as if Foday Sankoh is trying to derail the peace
process," Maj. Gen. Vijay Kumar Jetley, the Indian officer who commands the
United Nations force in Sierra Leone, said on Tuesday.

The attacks on United Nations peacekeepers occurred on Monday and Tuesday in two
north-central towns, Makeni and Magburaka, and in Kailahun in eastern Sierra
Leone.

United Nations officials say that 21 of the captives, including three military
observers policing a much-violated cease-fire, were taken in the
Makeni-Magburaka area. Twenty-eight captives in Kailahun include two civilian
employees and four members of a helicopter crew.

News from the crisis areas reaches the United Nations slowly because of poor
communications and renewed fighting, officials say, so the numbers and
identities of the dead or captured may change.

One of the peacekeepers' major tasks is to get the rebels, Mr. Sankoh's troops
and others, to give up their weapons so that a national election can be held in
2001. There were reports Tuesday that at least one attack from Mr. Sankoh's
Revolutionary United Front followed the defection of some of his soldiers to the
United Nations. When peacekeepers refused to turn them over, they came under
attack.

The House yesterday passed a bill, introduced by Representative Sam Gejdenson,
Democrat of Connecticut and the ranking member of the International Relations
Committee, that calls for $20 million to support disarmament and demobilization
in Sierra Leone.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); KENYA (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); WESTERN AFRICA
(92%); INDIA (79%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%); BELGIUM (57%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY UNITED FRONT (SIERRA LEONE); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED
NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY UNITED FRONT (SIERRA LEONE); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED
NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE; KENYA;   SIERRA LEONE (99%); KENYA (93%); UNITED
STATES (93%); WESTERN AFRICA (92%); INDIA (79%); RWANDA (79%); AFRICA (79%);
BELGIUM (57%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; DIAMONDS;
SMUGGLING  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (94%); PEACEKEEPING (92%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); SMUGGLING (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN
SERVICES (78%); WAR CRIMES (77%); PEACE PROCESS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (73%); ARRESTS (73%); DIAMOND MARKETS (71%); ARMED FORCES (70%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%);

PERSON: HARDEN, BLAINE; SANKOH, FODAY  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (51%); HILLARY
RODHAM CLINTON (51%);

LOAD-DATE: May 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Africa highlighting Sierra Leone: Rebels in Sierra Leone
reportedly seized 21 of their 49 hostages in the Magburaka and Makeni areas.


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             598 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

METRO NEWS BRIEFS: NEW YORK;
Golfer Filed Sex Bias Suit Too Late, Judge Says

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 6; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 200 words


A golfer who claimed that she suffered sex discrimination at the Westchester
Country Club for 17 years waited too long to file her lawsuit, a state human
rights judge said yesterday.

The judge, Chief Administrative Law Judge James T. King, agreed that the golfer,
Nancy Saunders, had been discriminated against "solely because of her gender,"
but said she would have had to sue within a year after becoming aware of the
discrimination, by 1986 at the latest.

Ms. Saunders sued in 1989. The judge also found that state human rights laws did
not apply to the club before 1994 because it was "distinctly private." But Ms.
Saunders's lawyer, Susan Slavin, protested because Judge King had not heard the
original case. Ms. Saunders, 50, had testified that from the time she joined the
Harrison club in 1982, she was barred, as a woman, from the club's prestigious
West Course for long stretches of time each Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and
Sunday. She also could not get into the Men's Grill, which she said had cost her
business opportunities. And when she married a fellow member, she claimed, the
club ended her membership on the ground that the husband is always the member.





http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS713910 GOLF COURSES & COUNTRY CLUBS (58%); SIC7997 MEMBERSHIP
SPORTS & RECREATION CLUBS (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

COMPANY: WESTCHESTER COUNTRY CLUB  WESTCHESTER COUNTRY CLUB INC (58%);

ORGANIZATION: WESTCHESTER COUNTRY CLUB

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (90%);   NEW YORK, USA (90%);

SUBJECT: GOLF; DISCRIMINATION; SUITS AND LITIGATION; WOMEN; DECISIONS AND
VERDICTS  LITIGATION (92%); DISCRIMINATION (91%); JUDGES (91%); GOLF (90%); NEWS
BRIEFS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); AGENCY ADJUDICATION
(77%); ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGES (77%);   ADMINISTRATIVE LAW (77%);

PERSON: KING, JAMES T (JUDGE); SAUNDERS, NANCY  NANCY SAUNDERS (92%); JAMES T
KING (71%);

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             599 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 11, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

BOOKS OF THE TIMES;
Unearthing the Tragedies Of Civil War in Sri Lanka

BYLINE: By JANET MASLIN

SECTION: Section E; Page 11; Column 3; The Arts/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 906 words



ANIL'S GHOST
By Michael Ondaatje
311 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $25.

 In the Sri Lankan setting for Michael Ondaatje's delicately fragmented new
novel, the figure known as the artificer assumes special importance. This is the
artisan deemed worthy to paint eyes on a statue of the Buddha, a task that may
be done only at 5 a.m. (the hour of the Buddha's enlightenment) with the help of
a mirror, so as not to look straight into the deity's gaze.

It is by this indirect means that "the artificer brings to light sight and truth
and presence," one of the book's many haunted characters observes. The author,
in contemplating the dreadful toll that the civil war beginning in the
mid-1980's has taken on his native land, aspires to the same role.

As he did in "The English Patient," Mr. Ondaatje is able to commingle anguish
and seductiveness in fierce, unexpected ways. "Then he turned on a slim hose and
let it hover over each bone," he writes alluringly, "air nestling into the
evidence of the trauma as if he were blowing cool breath from a pursed mouth
onto a child's burn."

That image, for all its sensual loveliness, happens to describe a forensic
examination of the skeleton of a headless torture victim. Of the warfare among
government, antigovernment insurgents and separatist guerrilla forces that
provides the book's implicit backdrop, he writes: "And we were caught in the
middle. It was like being in a room with three suitors, all of whom had blood on
their hands."

"Anil's Ghost," like the 33-year-old heroine of its title, steps into this
catastrophe at a point when much of its damage has already been done. Born in
Sri Lanka but having spent much of her life in England and America, Anil returns
to her childhood home under the auspices of a Geneva-based human rights
organization. A forensic anthropologist, she is part of a team investigating
possible war crimes.

"Anil had read documents and news reports, full of tragedy, and she had now
lived abroad long enough to interpret Sri Lanka with a long-distance gaze," Mr.
Ondaatje writes. "But here it was a more complicated world morally. The streets
were still streets, the citizens remained citizens. They shopped, changed jobs,
laughed. Yet the darkest Greek tragedies were innocent compared with what was
happening here."

Anil finds herself paired for the investigation with a government-selected
archaeologist named Sarath, a remote man 16 years her senior. Together Anil and
Sarath find four skeletons whom they nickname Tinker, Tailor, Soldier and
Sailor, the last a source of obsessive fascination. Anil becomes convinced that
pinpointing Sailor's identity and the circumstances of his death will provide
the damning evidence she and Sarath are seeking. But only in this
detective-story premise, and in the curiously theatrical gesture that ends the
book, does "Anil's Ghost" adhere to any conventional storytelling patterns.

Like "The English Patient" (despite the exquisite fluency of Anthony Minghella's
screen adaptation) "Anil's Ghost" is a novel more in name than in essence. The
author of 11 books of poetry, Mr. Ondaatje brings an oblique poetic sensibility
to unraveling the mysteries at work here. Layers peel away from both Anil and
Sarath, with a past full of ghosts for each of them and with assorted vignettes
and memories scattered across the book's fertile landscape. The path through
this terrain is not a clear or simple one.

The book drifts in flashback, for instance, from Guatemala to the Miami bedroom
where Anil has a tryst with her married lover, Cullis, who is as much on her
mind as Sailor the skeleton. She speaks about the Spanish names for bones; he
says he has written something about Norwegian snakes. While Cullis sleeps, in
the kind of effortlessly bewitching gesture Mr. Ondaatje creates so gracefully,
she photographs him, then buries the film inside his suitcase as a souvenir.

But as to how such moments -- or those in which Anil writes a letter to John
Boorman about his film "Point Blank" or ponders lyrics to a song set in New York
State by the McGarrigle sisters -- connect with the book's essential business in
Sri Lanka, that remains indistinct. Frustratingly so, since the scattered
aspects of this voyage of discovery are separately so powerful.

The book's real strengths lie in its profound sense of outrage, the shimmering
intensity of its descriptive language and the mysterious beauty of its
geography, with so many discrete passages that present the artificer in Mr.
Ondaatje so well. The atlas itself, artfully used -- with places named
Ambalangoda and Andigama, Ginigalpelessa and Boralesgamuwa -- enhances the sense
of the gorgeously exotic throughout.

"The important thing is to be able to live in a place or a situation where you
must use your sixth sense all the time," says a surgeon in the story, describing
what is most inviting about this morally outraged, viscerally vivid book. Like
the elderly blind sage Palipana, Sarath's mentor, who has had the gift of
reading between the lines of texts to glimpse hidden meanings, Mr. Ondaatje does
not deal comfortably with the obvious. But his sixth sense -- his poet's sense
-- is akin to that of Ananda, the book's character who is ultimately assigned
the job of imagining Sailor's missing features. What Ananda recreates is not the
literal physiognomy of Sailor. He conjures a different face, one that means much
more.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (95%); ENGLAND (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (50%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA (95%); ENGLAND (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);   GENEVA,
SWITZERLAND (50%);

SUBJECT: BOOKS AND LITERATURE; REVIEWS  BOOK REVIEWS (91%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); NOVELS & SHORT STORIES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (88%); FORENSICS (87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%);
LITERATURE (78%); WRITERS (78%); ARCHAEOLOGY (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%);
ANTHROPOLOGY & ARCHAEOLOGY (70%); TORTURE (70%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (70%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (65%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (50%);

PERSON: MASLIN, JANET; ONDAATJE, MICHAEL  MICHAEL ONDAATJE  (95%);

LOAD-DATE: May 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Michael Ondaatje (Peter Paterson/Alfred A. Knopf)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             601 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 16, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Good Propaganda, Bad Economics

BYLINE: By Jaime Sneider;  Jaime Sneider is editorial page editor of The
Columbia Daily Spectator.

SECTION: Section A; Page 23; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 513 words


College students continue to propagate the myth that Nike and other apparel
companies contract out to foreign "sweatshops" where overworked and underpaid
workers toil in unhealthful conditions. They are especially outraged by the
recent decision by Phil Knight of Nike to withdraw a promised $30 million
donation to the University of Oregon in protest of the school's decision to join
the Worker Rights Consortium, a labor rights group.

Rather than condemn Mr. Knight, students should commend him.

The Worker Rights Consortium, which was established last fall by students,
unions and human rights groups, accuses Nike of failing to pay its workers a
"living wage," ignoring safety concerns, and forcing employees to work overtime.
But, comparatively speaking, conditions at third world factories where Nike
goods are made are remarkably benevolent. For example, a number of the plants
have air conditioning in countries where it is a rarity. Some factories also
have clinics that can be used by employees' families, who otherwise would have
little if any medical care. Several others even have schools where workers'
children can learn everything from reading and writing to biology and physics.

A typical worker in a Nike factory in Vietnam makes about $564 a year, which may
not seem like much, but is more than twice the country's average annual income.
The employee turnover rate in Nike's factories in Indonesia is consistently
below 2 percent, low even by American standards. Such loyalty suggests that
workers do not have better prospects.

Many statistics cited by student activists are misleading and originate with the
A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has endorsed the Worker Rights Consortium. The
A.F.L.-C.I.O. has a direct economic interest: the regulations advocated by the
consortium would increase American companies' foreign manufacturing costs, thus
encouraging them to abandon their operations abroad and manufacture products
domestically instead -- employing union labor.

Phil Knight has agreed to an open monitoring of Nike factories through the Fair
Labor Association, a group composed of consumer groups, corporations and
universities that has been endorsed by the White House. Nike has said that many
students have genuine concerns about working conditions abroad, and that the
company recognizes that there is always room for improvement.

But, according to a Nike spokeswoman, "the way to get true reform is to have all
the players at the table." The Worker Rights Consortium, on the other hand, has
not prescribed clear goals or monitoring procedures, and does not yet have legal
status as a nonprofit organization. It has been reluctant to include companies
like Nike in the dialogue, claiming that corporate participation of any kind
threatens workers' rights.

While many students uncritically believe the Worker Rights Consortium, they
ignore the fact that Phil Knight and Nike have championed the well-being of
workers internationally. By trying to punish Nike, these students threaten to
impoverish the workers they claim to protect.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NKE (NYSE) (87%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS316210 FOOTWEAR MANUFACTURING (87%); NAICS315240 WOMEN'S, GIRLS'
& INFANTS' CUT & SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (87%); NAICS315220 MEN'S & BOYS' CUT
& SEW APPAREL MANUFACTURING (87%); SIC3149 FOOTWEAR, EXCEPT RUBBER, NEC (87%);
SIC3021 RUBBER & PLASTICS FOOTWEAR (87%); SIC2339 WOMEN'S, MISSES', & JUNIORS'
OUTERWEAR, NEC (87%); SIC2329 MEN'S & BOYS' CLOTHING, NEC (87%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); INDONESIA (79%); VIET NAM (55%);

COMPANY: NIKE INC  NIKE INC (87%);   UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (58%); UNIVERSITY OF
OREGON (58%);

ORGANIZATION: NIKE INC  UNIVERSITY OF OREGON  (58%); UNIVERSITY OF OREGON (58%);



GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%); INDONESIA (79%); VIET NAM (55%);

SUBJECT: SHOES AND BOOTS; LABOR; APPAREL; SWEATSHOPS; THIRD WORLD AND DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES; WAGES AND SALARIES; FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANTS  STUDENTS &
STUDENT LIFE (91%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); SWEATSHOPS (90%); COLLEGE STUDENTS
(90%); OUTSOURCING (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (91%);

 EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); EMPLOYMENT (89%); LIVING WAGE (78%); OVERTIME
(78%); EMPLOYEE TURNOVER & RETENTION (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (78%);
STUDENT ACTIVISM (78%); LABOR UNIONS (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (76%); CHILDREN (76%); CONSUMER LAW (74%); DEVELOPING
COUNTRIES (74%); FAMILY (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);   CONSUMER WATCHDOGS (71%);
   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: SNEIDER, JAIME  PHILIP H 'PHIL' KNIGHT  (73%);   PHILIP KNIGHT (90%);

LOAD-DATE: May 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             609 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Moment of Decision: The Vote on China Trade

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 179 words



To the Editor:

I take issue with Paul Krugman's "Workers vs. Workers" (column, May 21). A
living wage for workers in countries like China would not price them out of
their jobs. The unprecedented wealth differential between the developed and the
developing world means that American factories could afford to pay their
overseas workers a living wage and still maintain profitability.

In fighting against trade practices that put American companies in league with
the Chinese Communist Party in exploiting the Chinese people, the United States
labor movement is trying to slow the unchecked "race to the bottom" that allows
American companies to perpetuate virtual slavery conditions in their overseas
factories.

Mr. Krugman has previously cited the Four Tigers -- Hong Kong, Singapore, South
Korea and Taiwan -- as a case for a sweatshop phase of development. But evidence
of past success does not necessitate repetition in the future.

HARRY WU
Washington, May 22, 2000

The writer, a former political prisoner in China, is a human rights activist.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); HONG KONG (79%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(79%); TAIWAN (79%);

COMPANY: WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION  WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION  (59%); WORLD TRADE
ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION  WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION  (59%); WORLD
TRADE ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); HONG KONG (79%); KOREA,
REPUBLIC OF (79%); TAIWAN (79%);

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; LABOR; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
LIVING WAGE (90%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (90%); SWEATSHOPS (88%); GARMENT WORKERS (88%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (87%);
INTERNATIONAL TRADE (87%); POLITICAL PARTIES (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

 WRITERS (73%);   LABOR UNIONS (88%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%);

PERSON: KRUGMAN, PAUL; WU, HARRY  PAUL KRUGMAN (90%);

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             621 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

An American Town Meeting: The Issue Is Race;
The Cubans

SECTION: Section 4; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 142 words



To the Editor:

Your June 5 front-page article about two Cuban refugees, one black and one
white, whose friendship in Cuba erodes in the United States confirms an
impression I got from a short stay in Havana: that the American brand of racism
is absent in Cuba.

Light- and dark-skinned families live together in the same apartment buildings
and share the same jobs and social world.

People on the sidewalk or in restaurants were a random mix to such a degree that
after a while we stopped being aware of anybody's skin color at all.

Perhaps this short sampling does not tell the whole story, but it seems odd that
the United States can overlook human rights violations in China and not consider
that in the human right to have good race relations, Cuba is ahead of the United
States.

ROBERT CONE
Piermont, N.Y., June 6, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CUBA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (66%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%);

CITY: HAVANA, CUBA (73%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CUBA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); CHINA (66%);   NEW YORK, USA (91%);

   HAVANA, CUBA (73%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); RACE &
RACISM (88%); REFUGEES (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (87%);

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (David Suter)

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             627 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 25, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Warns That Trafficking In Human Beings Is Growing

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 722 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 23


Trafficking in people is now the fastest-growing business of organized crime,
and it is being run by new, barely understood networks that have sidelined
traditional criminal syndicates, the top anti-crime official at the United
Nations said this week.

Pino Arlacchi, an Italian sociologist who worked closely on fighting the Mafia
before becoming director general of the United Nations Office for Drug Control
and Crime Prevention three years ago, said in an interview on Thursday that the
tragic deaths this week of 58 Chinese migrants trying to reach Britain was "just
the tip of the iceberg, and one of several recent accidents that show the
magnitude and seriousness of the problem."

He said reliable estimates indicate that 200 million people may now be in some
way under the sway or in the hands of traffickers of various kinds worldwide. He
said that while four centuries of slavery moved about 11.5 million people out of
Africa, in the last decade more than 30 million women and children may have been
trafficked within and from Southeast Asia for sexual purposes and sweatshop
labor. Rates are also high in the countries of Eastern Europe and the former
Soviet Union.

"This is the fastest growing criminal market in the world because of the number
of people who are involved, the scale of profits being generated for criminal
organizations -- and because of its multifold nature," said Mr. Arlacchi, a
United Nations under secretary general. "We don't have just sexual exploitation.
We don't have just economic slavery, which includes two things, forced labor and
debt enslavement. We have also a lot of exploitation of migrants. And we have
classic slavery.

"If you put all this together under the same concept, you get the biggest
violation of human rights in the world," he said.

Among the proposals he is making to governments is that anti-slavery laws be
reintroduced where they have lapsed or been taken off the books. He is also
considering recommending temporary residence to would-be immigrants who
cooperate with authorities in identifying criminals who are trafficking in
people.

"This a measure that in some countries, like Italy and Austria, is showing very
important results in understanding the nature of networks -- how the victims are
attracted, how they are recruited and the way they are exploited," he said.

"But first of all, we really have to understand the size of the phenomenon," Mr.
Arlacchi said. "It is a sensitive political issue. No country likes to admit to
having sexual exploitation and human trafficking. So we have to be very careful
how we deal with the source countries." In Europe, he said, large numbers of
migrants are arriving from Africa, the former Soviet bloc, China, Southeast Asia
and, lately, India.

Narcotics is still a bigger profit earner for organized crime than trafficking
in people, he said. But the trade in human beings is growing quickly enough to
demand better estimates of its value and links that the smuggling networks,
strung along illegal migration routes, have with other areas of international
crime, he added. In Europe, Mr. Arlacchi said, traffickers from Eastern Europe
and Asia have already pushed crime gangs out of street prostitution in Western
Europe.

The sexual slave trade was never acceptable to the Sicilian Mafia, Mr. Arlacchi
said. "They are totally out of this business and they are losing ground vis a
vis all other international competitors because of that." Albanians and other
Balkan criminal groups, known for their ferocity, dominate street trade in drugs
and prostitutes.

"The Albanians are particularly ferocious," he said. "In three or four years in
the biggest Italian cities they have succeeded in destroying the competition of
the other organizations. Albanians scare the Sicilian Mafia."

Chinese migrants are not found often in the sex trade, Mr. Arlacchi said. Like
the migrants who died on the way to Britain and many who find their way to North
America, he said, most Chinese are headed for restaurant or sweatshop work, and
disappear into neighborhoods and businesses run by other Asians.

Compared with Italian or other European syndicates, he said, Chinese and other
Asian networks are very closed, and therefore hard to penetrate.

"The Chinese work very much inside closed communities," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (92%); ASIA (92%); INDIA (79%); AUSTRIA (72%); EASTERN EUROPE
(70%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (92%); ASIA (92%); INDIA (79%); AUSTRIA (72%); EASTERN EUROPE

 (70%);

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; ORGANIZED CRIME; ILLEGAL ALIENS  HUMAN
TRAFFICKING (91%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (90%); ORGANIZED CRIME (90%); ALIEN
SMUGGLING (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); LABOR TRAFFICKING (89%); SLAVERY (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%);
IMMIGRATION (89%); CHILD ABUSE (87%); SEX OFFENSES (87%); SEX TRAFFICKING (79%);

 SWEATSHOPS (79%); INTERVIEWS (77%); REFUGEES (77%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (76%); DRUG
POLICY (76%); NARCOTICS ENFORCEMENT (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); CRIME PREVENTION
(73%); COMPANY LISTS & RANKINGS (73%); GARMENT WORKERS (71%); ILLEGAL IMMIGRANTS

 (70%);   FORCED LABOR (79%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; ARLACCHI, PINO  PINO ARLACCHI (91%);

LOAD-DATE: June 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             636 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 9, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Nation;
Banishing the Dickensian Factor

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 5; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1037 words


IN this era when the consumer is king, many Americans are displaying noblesse
oblige toward the millions of foreign workers who make the goods that flood
store shelves. High school students have demonstrated at Disney's Mickey-filled
emporiums over the company's use of low-wage factories in China and Haiti. Nuns
concerned about child labor have distributed leaflets outside Gap stores. At
Duke and Georgetown, students have staged sit-ins to protest conditions at
factories producing apparel carrying their college logos. And everyone seems to
beat up on Nike.

For years, these anti-sweatshop protests accomplished next to nothing. Many
manufacturers responded by simply saying they did not control the overseas
factories that they contracted with. Some embarrassed designers adopted codes of
conduct, which were often ignored abroad. Before monitors visited, factory
owners hid their under-aged workers and ordered employees to say they worked
40-hour weeks, not the more typical 75 hours.

But as the anti-sweatshop movement continues to grow -- and grow louder --
manufacturers have recently taken steps that just might improve working
conditions around the world. Companies see that many consumers want to know that
their clothing was not made under Dickensian conditions. So for the first time,
industry giants have joined an ambitious effort, the Fair Labor Association,
that has adopted a code and called for large-scale overseas monitoring that
begins this fall.

Nike, Reebok, Liz Claiborne, Philips Van Heusen and other manufacturers have
joined the association, a White House-backed program that promises to inspect
hundreds of factories yearly. Currently only a factory or two is monitored each
month. The association's leaders say this latest effort, well financed and
international, should make a difference. Monitors, ranging from accounting firms
to union-friendly Jesuit advocates, will visit factories to check that there is
no child labor, that managers do not sexually harass workers and that no one
works more than 60 hours a week.

The days of companies adopting a see-no-evil stance are over, said Sam Brown,
executive director of the association, which includes several consumer and human
rights groups. "This effort says for the first time, 'You must know, you have to
know about conditions in every single factory, and you have to bear
responsibility,' " Mr. Brown said.

The association's plans call for monitoring 30 percent of its members' 4,000
factories over the next three years, with 5 to 10 percent of each company's
factories being monitored each subsequent year. Some critics say the percentage
is too small to uncover every problem, but association members say monitoring,
and requiring that complaints about conditions be investigated, will greatly
help.

Many critics say the association and other monitoring efforts will do little to
improve the lives of third-world workers. They fear that corporations may hide
the monitors' findings from the public, and that the accounting firms doing the
monitoring will not dig hard enough to find problems.

"I think the Fair Labor Association is just window-dressing," said Charles
Kernaghan, director of the National Labor Committee, a labor rights group. "You
don't have full disclosure of what's found, and it doesn't require that
factories pay a living wage. And it allows companies to produce in China, a
country that prohibits independent trade unions."

Other monitoring efforts have sprouted because some groups think the association
is too lenient toward manufacturers while others believe it is too harsh. Social
Accountability International, an offshoot of the nonprofit Council on Economic
Priorities, has persuaded Toys "R" Us, Avon Products and Eddie Bauer to push
their manufacturers to comply with minimum labor standards developed by a group
of companies, unions and nongovernment organizations. Students from 56
universities including Brown and Cornell recently formed the Workers Rights
Consortium to work with nongovernment organizations overseas to review
conditions at factories making T-shirts and other apparel carrying college
logos. And the industry's main trade group, the American Apparel Manufacturers
Association, has also adopted a code of conduct. Stung by criticisms, Nike, the
Gap and others have hired their own monitors, and many critics say these
companies have improved labor practices.

"None of the programs have achieved critical mass yet," said Elliot Schrage, a
Columbia University Business School professor who advises companies on how to
improve factory conditions, "but the principle that the conditions under which
products are made is a legitimate concern for consumers is now well
established."

The word sweatshop has long been used to describe factories with low wages and
deplorable conditions, but whether a particular factory is a sweatshop is often
in the eye of the beholder. An American or European may quickly conclude that a
Chinese or Vietnamese factory paying workers $2 a day is a sweatshop. But the
young women working there often say they earn far more than at other local
factories or in the farm villages they left behind.

"The question is to make sure these young people, mostly women a long way from
home, are not abused," Mr. Brown said. "Even if the situation is better than
where they were, that doesn't mean there shouldn't be minimal standards of
decency on how you treat people."

THE nation's largest apparel union, the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and
Textile Employees, argues that free trade has encouraged American companies to
move factories to countries with the lowest wages and worst conditions. Hoping
to slow this exodus and help foreign workers, the union wants the World Trade
Organization to allow trade sanctions against countries that perpetuate
sweatshops by not enforcing their laws on minimum wage and overtime. But the
W.T.O. has rejected such proposals.

Monitoring, Mr. Brown said, is the best alternative for improving factory
conditions. "It is the way to think about how you make free trade into fair
trade," he said. "It's a way to ensure that the goods are produced under
conditions that don't shock the conscience."


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: DIS (NYSE) (58%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS713110 AMUSEMENT & THEME PARKS (58%); NAICS515112 RADIO STATIONS
(58%); NAICS512110 MOTION PICTURE & VIDEO PRODUCTION (58%); NAICS453220 GIFT,
NOVELTY & SOUVENIR STORES (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); HAITI (92%); CHINA (88%); CAMBODIA (79%);

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%);

COMPANY: WALT DISNEY CO (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%); HAITI (92%); CHINA (88%); CAMBODIA (79%);
PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (90%);
SWEATSHOPS (90%); FOREIGN LABOR (90%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); GARMENT
WORKERS (90%); CHILD LABOR (89%); WORK WEEK (78%); RETAILERS (78%); HIGH SCHOOLS

 (77%); APPAREL MFG (77%); FASHION DESIGNERS (74%); ETHICS (74%); NEWS BRIEFS
(74%); WAGES & SALARIES (73%); SEXUAL HARASSMENT (73%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES

 (91%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); EXECUTIVES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (62%); INVESTIGATIONS (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%);   CONSUMER
WATCHDOGS (78%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (89%);

PERSON: ELISABETH 'LIZ' CLAIBORNE  (54%);

LOAD-DATE: July 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A worker sewing blue jeans for export in a factory outside of
Phnom Penh, Cambodia. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             648 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 25, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Colombia's Rebels Keep the Marxist Faith

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1466 words

DATELINE: SAN VICENTE DEL CAGUAN, Colombia, July 22


The dream of a Marxist-Leninist revolution remains improbably alive amid the
rolling cattle pastures and steamy coca fields of southern Colombia.

Guerrillas in crisp, starched fatigues wear Che Guevara buttons, strum old
leftist jeremiads on guitars and pledge to bring Yankee imperialism down to
defeat once and for all. Three portraits of Lenin grace the press office of the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, in this boisterous small
ranching town, including one of the founder of the Soviet Union petting a
kitten. The pitted roads that run through the countryside are spruced with signs
that read "No more torture" and "No More Gringo Military Advisers."

Marxist guerrillas in nearby Central America laid down their arms years ago, and
those in neighboring Peru have been nearly annihilated. As former guerrillas
serve in the parliaments of Venezuela, Bolivia and Uruguay and a Socialist
serves as president of Chile, the left has remodeled itself as a moderate,
democratic force throughout South America.

But here in Colombia, Marxist guerrillas are fighting back history, pushing
around an established army, battling a right-wing paramilitary force and drawing
the United States into a growing military role.

"I haven't read the book, but I have seen the movie, and we are like the last of
the Mohicans," said Comandante Alfonso Cano, a 52-year-old member of the
seven-man secretariat than rules the FARC, the largest and oldest of several
guerrilla groups still operating in Colombia. "There is a theory that socialism
is dead and history ends with capitalism. But have the people's problems ended?
No. With globalization, there's more poverty than ever, and a crisis is coming."

The guerrillas might seem quaint if it were not for their efficiency at making
war and dealing with cocaine traffickers. Numbering more than 15,000 rebels,
they have satellite phones that give them a communications edge over the armed
forces. They are wily at wiretapping and cloning cellular phones, enabling them
to anticipate the government's moves. They even use computers at roadblocks to
check the bank accounts of drivers, allowing them to pick out the richest for
kidnapping.

Human rights and church groups accuse them of forcibly recruiting young
teenagers, kidnapping children as young as 4 and executing suspected right-wing
paramilitaries after secret trials.

Parts of the guerrilla territory are open to travelers and news reporters and
serviced by a commercial airline owned by the Colombian Air Force. Over a
weekend visit to this ranching town and Los Pozos, which was not arranged with
the FARC, the guerrillas were in a carnival-like mood as they sponsored a youth
conference complete with clown acts and acrobatics.

A string of rebel military victories forced the Colombian government in 1998 to
give the guerrillas a demilitarized zone the size of Switzerland as an
enticement to negotiate, and the guerrillas are using the zone to show what they
can do even as they stall at the talks.

In what is dubbed "Farclandia" by some locals, the guerrillas jawbone merchants
to keep down prices of fuel and basic foods, press workers to repair local roads
and bridges, and mediate family and property disputes in small claims courts
they have organized under military tents. They decree strict controls on guns
and dry laws to stop drinking late at night, and counsel prostitutes, juvenile
delinquents and husbands who abuse their wives.

According to recent national polls, the guerrillas have the support of less than
5 percent of the population and virtually no support outside a few universities
and coca-growing areas. But with coca fields growing in their zones as
bountifully as corn in Kansas, they are surrounded by a lucrative cash crop. By
their own admission, the guerrillas "tax" traffickers and protect coca growers
from campaigns to eradicate the crops.

"It's logical that the revolutionary army has to finance itself," said
Comandante Mariana Paez, 37, who is a middle-level commander. "These coca
growers are poor farmers, and the traffickers exploit them. So the traffickers
need to be taxed."

Whatever the winds of change blowing around the world, the FARC's platform
remains largely the same as when it broke from the Colombian Communist Party to
make war on the state in 1964, with the group still demanding a radical
redistribution of land and wealth and a foreign policy that is independent of
Yankee imperialism.

"Socialists around the world supported perestroika, but we knew better and
criticized it," Comandante Paez said. Several young guerrilla fighters,
apparently parroting political lessons learned in their daily indoctrination
sessions, condemned Mikhail S. Gorbachev as an undercover United States
intelligence agent who single-handedly sabotaged the entire Soviet bloc.

The young rebels, many poor peasants who worked in the coca fields before
fumigation campaigns destroyed their livelihood, admit that they know little of
Marxist philosophy. But they praised the guerrilla group for providing them with
fresh clothes, good food, free birth control, jewelry and self-esteem.

After the Central Intelligence Agency, the Drug Enforcement Administration and
the Colombian police captured the top leadership of the Cali drug cartel in the
mid-1990's, smaller trafficking organizations took its place and moved into the
guerrilla group's zones for protection, according to American and Colombian
military and law enforcement officials. The Colombian government estimates that
the the guerrilla group now earns more than $400 million a year as an acolyte of
the drug trade, even while it does not itself traffic in narcotics.

Aerial photographs of the region indicate that coca fields have expanded and
clandestine airstrips have multiplied since the rebels were granted control of
the area.

With the FARC and a couple of small rebel groups now loosely controlling 40
percent of Colombia's rugged territory, and coca cultivation mushrooming, the
Clinton administration persuaded Congress last month to pass a $1.3 billion aid
package for the Colombian armed forces. Most of the aid will go to outfitting a
new anti-narcotics brigade with 60 attack helicopters, training and intelligence
tools to operate in the southern provinces of Putumayo and Caqueta, a remote but
extensive FARC stronghold and now the center of the country's coca cultivation.

In several interviews this week at a compound built for negotiations with the
government in nearby Los Pozos, guerrilla commanders said they would continue to
protect coca growers from the coming "invasion" even as they spread the war to
other regions. "The FARC is not going to stop fighting," said Comandante Raul
Reyes, a 50-year-old member of the group's secretariat and main rebel negotiator
at the talks with the government. "We don't have to live in the jungle. We are
growing in the population centers like Bogota, Medellin and Barranquilla."

But as the rebels speak boldly of future victories, the people who live in their
zone of control grumble and express fears of trigger-happy guerrillas at road
checkpoints as well as the knock at the door at night.

"We are cannon fodder to them," said Guillermo Lombano Gutierrez, a 46-year-old
rancher who lives here. Mr. Lombano said he watched four guerrillas come to his
door on April 16, 1999, and take away his 16-year-old son at gunpoint, accusing
him of being a paramilitary. Breaking down in tears, Mr. Lombano said the
accusation was a lie. He said he had been writing letters to guerrilla
commanders to find his son, and had not received a reply. "They care nothing for
us as people," he added.

The local office of the congressionally-appointed ombudsman has documented 41
disappearances at the hands of the guerrillas in the demilitarized zone since
its creation two years ago. "But we don't know all the cases," said Alvaro
Castel, the local office director, "because people are afraid to denounce."

Meanwhile, local Roman Catholic Church workers have documented 15 cases of child
recruitment by the guerrillas in the demilitarized zone, including a 13-year-old
girl who was simply used for sex by a comandante before a nun persuaded the
rebels to release her.

"There is not a lot of rule of law," Joanne Mariner, a deputy director of the
Americas Division of Human Rights Watch, said of the guerrilla-controlled zone.
"We have documented four disappearances and saw no evidence in any of the cases
that the people had ties to the paramilitaries."

Asked about the disappearances and forced child recruitment, Comandante Reyes
snapped, "Is this an interview or an investigation?" Then he said human rights
groups that charged the guerrillas with such crimes were "misinformed by black
propaganda."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); BOLIVIA (79%); URUGUAY (79%);
SOUTH AMERICA (79%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%); CHILE (79%);
SWITZERLAND (76%); LATIN AMERICA (58%); CENTRAL AMERICA (56%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; LATIN AMERICA; CENTRAL AMERICA;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED
STATES (94%); BOLIVIA (79%); URUGUAY (79%); SOUTH AMERICA (79%); VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%); CHILE (79%); SWITZERLAND (76%); LATIN AMERICA
(58%); CENTRAL AMERICA (56%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); LIBERALISM (89%); COCAINE (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); ARMIES (77%); GLOBALIZATION (77%); AIR FORCES (76%); CIVIL WAR
(76%); TORTURE (75%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (73%); STRINGED INSTRUMENTS
(72%); ADOLESCENTS (68%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (65%); WIRETAPPING (62%);
MOBILE & CELLULAR COMMUNICATIONS (62%); MOBILE & CELLULAR TELEPHONES (62%);
TELECOMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT (62%); RELIGION (60%); AIRLINES (50%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (50%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD

LOAD-DATE: July 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Colombian guerrilla leading marchers from a Communist youth
group last weekend in chants against the government and the U.S. (Steve
Salisbury for The New York Times)(pg. A1)

Map of Colombia shows the location of San Vicente del Caguan: Anti-American
signs abound in San Vicente del Caguan. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             654 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Displaced in Colombia

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 163 words



To the Editor:

You report (front page, July 25) that life for Colombians living in the
demilitarized zone run by the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC,
is not easy. Indeed, the Consultancy for Human Rights and Displacement, a
Colombian research group based in Bogota, reported that last year, some 3,900
people fled the zone because of threats and accusations of being informants of
the armed forces or paramilitary groups and from systematic human rights
violations.

Colombia has 1.8 million internally displaced people, the worst case of
displacement in the Western Hemisphere. All of the groups fighting for control
in Colombia are guilty of displacement, but paramilitary activity is by far the
worst culprit. Paramilitaries aim at those who flee the FARC, so that the
displaced find no refuge.

GIMENA SANCHEZ
Washington, July 27, 2000

The writer is senior research assistant, Project on Internal Displacement,
Brookings Institution.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (73%);

COMPANY: BROOKINGS INSTITUTION; REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (94%); BROOKINGS INSTITUTION  (83%);
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (83%);

ORGANIZATION: BROOKINGS INSTITUTION; REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (94%); BROOKINGS INSTITUTION  (83%);
BROOKINGS INSTITUTION (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA
(73%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE

 REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (91%);
DISPLACED PERSONS (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA

 (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); CONSULTING SERVICES (71%);

PERSON: SANCHEZ, GIMENA

LOAD-DATE: August 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             659 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

G.I.'s to Be Sent to Train Africans for Sierra Leone

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1306 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Aug. 8


In a shift of policy, the Clinton administration plans to send hundreds of
American soldiers to Nigeria this month to train and equip West African
battalions that will then be dispatched to Sierra Leone to bolster beleaguered
government troops and United Nations peacekeepers there.

A senior administration official said the United States had "gone through an
agonizing reappraisal" of its policy toward Sierra Leone, where guerrillas of
the Revolutionary United Front -- notorious for chopping off the limbs of
civilian victims -- are waging war against government forces and in May
kidnapped hundreds of United Nations troops.

By training regional soldiers to join the United Nations force, Washington hopes
to sideline the guerrillas and restore the government of Sierra Leone to
effective power, Under Secretary of State Thomas P. Pickering said.

"Our goal is to return the freely elected government to full control of the
territory of Sierra Leone and to get the guerrillas demobilized," Mr. Pickering
said.

Americans will train and equip five Nigerian battalions of 800 soldiers each,
one battalion from Ghana and one from a French-speaking West African country,
possibly Mali or Senegal, Pentagon officials said.

Several hundred Special Forces will be sent from Fort Bragg, N.C., late this
month and next month, they said. About 40 trainers are already in Nigeria.

In Congress, where there has been criticism of the administration's lack of
engagement in Sierra Leone, the latest decision has been received with relative
warmth by Republicans.

"I've long held that there should be a more aggressive posture towards the
R.U.F.," said the chairman of the House subcommittee on Africa, Rep. Ed Royce, a
California Republican. "This is a substantial change in the administration's
commitment to Sierra Leone. It's long overdue."

This move is the latest turn in the administration's diplomacy toward Sierra
Leone, a small West African nation that has been torn apart by the guerrilla
force, which has seized diamond mines and made a speciality of amputating
civilians' limbs.

Last summer, in an effort to end the civil war, the State Department helped
engineer the accord reached in Lome, Togo, which received guarded international
approval and brought the leader of the guerillas, Foday Sankoh, into the
government, effectively giving an amnesty for his troops' atrocities.

In the months after the Lome accord was signed, the United Nations slowly
assembled a peacekeeping force intended to take the place of a Nigerian-led,
largely West African force that had recaptured Sierra Leone's capital, Freetown,
from the rebels early in 1999.

But when the last of the Nigerian troops withdrew in early May, the rebels
swiftly overran several positions of United Nations peacekeepers, taking nearly
500 of them hostage. Most hostages were released after negotiations with Charles
Taylor, the president of neighboring Liberia, and after Britain, the former
colonial power in Sierra Leone, sent troops to help restore order.

The Clinton administration distanced itself from the Lome accord, saying as
other foreign governments did that Mr. Sankoh should be removed from Sierra
Leone government. He was captured in May in Freetown, where he remains in
custody.

But the administration declined to help the United Nations peacekeepers and
raised the ire of the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, by trying to
charge expensive rates for the use of Pentagon aircraft to ferry soldiers of
other nations to Sierra Leone. Now, officials say, the administration has
switched tack after extensive criticism in Congress and angry exchanges with the
British government, which made plain behind closed doors that it felt left alone
in Sierra Leone.

In part, the new policy has been driven by President Clinton's planned trip to
Nigeria -- sub-Saharan Africa's most populous country -- later this month.

Administration officials said that Mr. Clinton needed something substantial to
announce once he got there and that the president was keen to bolster the new
civilian leader of Nigeria, Olusegun Obasanjo, as well as to try and turn the
tide in Sierra Leone.

Mr. Pickering and the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Richard C.
Holbrooke, visited members of Congress last month to explain the plan. Mr.
Pickering, a former ambassador to Nigeria, went to Nigeria and other West
African countries last month to work out plans for the military assistance.

Mr. Pickering told the lawmakers that it would cost more than $50 million but
less than $100 million for equipment and the initial stage of training, expected
to be completed by the middle of next year, congressional aides said.

The equipment for the soldiers is expected to include Belgian FN rifles -- a
standard weapon for the Nigerian Army -- as well as mortars and communications
equipment, but not heavy artillery or tanks.

The exact duration of the training program is still under discussion, a senior
Pentagon official involved in the plan said today.

The official said that for the program to be effective,it should be extended
over two or three years.

"The worst possible thing would be to create a West African peace enforcement
force and then walk away," the official said. "This has to be sustained, and to
have a long-term commitment means more money. Congress understands it, but we
have a lot more work to do" among lawmakers, the official said.

Condoleezza Rice, chief foreign policy adviser to the Republican presidential
nominee, George W. Bush, said the plan to equip and train West African troops
was acceptable as long as it was enacted as currently described to Congress.

"The diplomacy was terrible in Sierra Leone," Ms. Rice said. "The United States
messed it up. If the Nigerians are willing to take up the role, we would support
it. We have always said we would support regional powers, like the Australians
in East Timor, if they are willing."

But Ms. Rice cautioned that "consultation with Congress" was vital so that it
would be known why the United States was getting involved and for how long.

On Friday the United Nations Security Council strengthened the mandate of the
peacekeeping soldiers in Sierra Leone, authorizing them to go after the
guerrillas in a forceful way.

Already early last month in Sierra Leone, United Nations troops backed by combat
helicopters freed a group of unarmed military observers and some 200 Indian
soldiers in an unusual battle that took the life of one peacekeeper but caused
much higher rebel casualties.

The American move will add about 4,000 troops from Nigeria alone to the United
Nations force, which now stands at about 13,000 and is commanded by a general
from India.

The West Africans will be trained as light infantry, ready to "get off the roads
and into the bush," the Pentagon official said.

A major goal for Sierra Leone's government is to reclaim the diamond mines, the
official added, so the revenues from diamonds go into the government treasury
and not into the kitty of the rebels, enriching their leaders and allowing them
to buy guns.

One difficulty in training Nigerian troops is that some soldiers in Nigerian
units are thought to have committed human rights abuses in Sierra Leone and at
home.

A congressional measure, sponsored by Senator Patrick Leahy, Democrat of
Vermont, forbids the American military from assisting foreign troops that have
violated human rights.

The Nigerian government has been told to select the units it wants trained by
the Americans, the Pentagon official said. The United States Embassy in Nigeria
is now checking on the units to "make a reasonable effort," as required under
the Leahy legislation, to ensure that soldiers who had violated human rights
were excluded from the training, the official said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); NIGERIA (95%); WESTERN AFRICA
(94%); AFRICA (93%); TOGO (79%); GHANA (79%); SENEGAL (79%); LIBERIA (79%); MALI

 (79%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (55%);

CITY: FAYETTEVILLE, NC, USA (55%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE (97%); UNITED STATES (96%); NIGERIA (95%); WESTERN
AFRICA (94%); AFRICA (93%); TOGO (79%); GHANA (79%); SENEGAL (79%); LIBERIA
(79%); MALI (79%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (79%); NORTH CAROLINA, USA (55%);
FAYETTEVILLE, NC, USA (55%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ARMED FORCES (90%); PEACEKEEPING
(89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); US
PRESIDENTS (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (75%); AMNESTY (60%);

PERSON: EDWARD R ROYCE (58%);

LOAD-DATE: August 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             672 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Transgender Rights

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 241 words


People who have had sex-change surgery, cross-dressers and others whose gender
identity does not conform to societal norms are often targets of violence and
bias that force them to live in fear for their safety or the loss of their jobs
and shelter. A bill now before the New York City Council would give this
marginalized population basic protection against discrimination in housing,
employment and public accommodations.

The city's human rights law has long barred discrimination based on gender.
Since the 1980's, the law has also prohibited discrimination based on "sexual
orientation." But that provision focuses on issues of heterosexuality,
homosexuality or bisexuality. It does not protect those who identify themselves
as transgender. The new legislation, which has 28 sponsors in the City Council,
would broaden the definition of "gender" to include not only a person's sex, but
also a person's expression of gender identity, self-image and appearance.

Similar anti-bias laws have been enacted in nearly two dozen cities, including
Atlanta, San Francisco and Minneapolis. The proposed measure has strong support
from civil rights groups and political leaders, including Public Advocate Mark
Green and City Comptroller Alan Hevesi. Council Speaker Peter Vallone, however,
has not taken a position on the measure. Mr. Vallone should move swiftly to get
the bill passed, and Mayor Rudolph Giuliani should sign the measure.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY; NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA

 (94%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: TRANSSEXUALS; EDITORIALS; LAW AND LEGISLATION; DISCRIMINATION
TRANSGENDER PERSONS (92%); CITY GOVERNMENT (91%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); GENDER &
SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); LEGISLATION (90%); CITIES (90%); GAYS &
LESBIANS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); GENDER IDENTITY
DISORDER (90%); HATE CRIME (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); LAYOFFS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS &
AUDITORS (71%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);

PERSON: VALLONE, PETER F (SPEAKER); GIULIANI, RUDOLPH W (MAYOR)  RUDY GIULIANI
(56%);

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             677 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 2, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1029 words



EUROPE

SPAIN: JUDGE INDICTS ARGENTINE -- Judge Baltasar Garzon indicted a former
Argentine military officer on charges of genocide, torture and terrorism, acts
he said were committed under Argentina's military government two decades ago.
Judge Garzon, who led a drive to extradite the former Chilean dictator, Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, on human rights charges, acted after hearing testimony from
Argentines in Europe who said they were tortured by the officer, Ricardo Miguel
Cavallo, pictured here. Mr. Cavallo is in Mexico awaiting possible extradition
to Spain.   Benjamin Jones (NYT)


YUGOSLAVIA: TROOP EXERCISES -- An elite Yugoslav Army unit whose stated goal is
to return to the NATO-controlled Serbian province of Kosovo held war games in
Petlovo Bojiste, Serbia, a show of force apparently meant to improve President
Slobodan Milosevic's tarnished image ahead of elections. Backed by more than 200
tanks, armored vehicles and helicopters, about 1,000 infantry troops exercised
with live ammunition in rain and fog before Yugoslav generals and a dozen
foreign diplomats. The army's chief of staff, Gen. Nebojsa Pavkovic, reminded
the troops that last year's Kosovo peace agreement between Yugoslavia and the
United Nations permits the eventual return of Yugoslav forces. The agreement led
to the withdrawal of Yugoslav troops and the deployment of NATO-led peacekeepers
in June 1999.   (AP)

FRANCE: SPEED BLAMED IN SUBWAY ACCIDENT -- The derailment of a Paris subway car
on Thursday was probably caused by excessive speed, investigators said,
contradicting earlier reports. The speed limit on the curve leading into the
station at Notre-Dame-de-Lorette was 19 miles an hour, and the train was going
about 22 m.p.h. A national radio station reported that the driver, still not
identified, had been disciplined several times for speeding. Twenty-four
passengers were injured.   Donald F. McNeil Jr. (NYT)

GREECE: ULTIMATUM ON RELIGIOUS ID'S -- Prime Minister Costas Simitis vowed to
press ahead with a decision to remove religious affiliation from new state
identity cards despite a threat by the Greek Orthodox Church to mount a mass
petition drive for a national referendum on the issue. The church, which led
protest rallies in June, has given the government until midnight Sept. 14 to
begin talks on the decision.   Anthee Carassava (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CUBA: CASTRO TO VISIT U.S. -- Fidel Castro plans to travel to the United States
for the first time since 1995 to attend summit talks next week at the United
Nations. Cuba has requested visas for Mr. Castro and other top officials and has
already discussed preliminary security arrangements with the United States
Secret Service and the New York Police Department, the Foreign Ministry said.
The meeting, which begins Wednesday, will bring together more than 150 world
leaders.   (AP)

CANADA: VIETNAM RETURNS BODY -- Vietnam has handed over to a Canadian family the
body of a woman who was executed in April for drug smuggling. The body of Nguyen
Thi Hiep, a Canadian citizen, was missing an ear, family members said. Her
mother was also released as part of a general amnesty. Both women were convicted
in a trial in Hanoi that Canadian lawyers say ignored evidence that they were
being used as unwitting couriers.
   James Brooke (NYT)

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: DE KLERK'S WARNING -- Whites have a special responsibility to deal
with racism in South Africa, but affluent blacks also have a duty to combat
discrimination, former President F. W. de Klerk said. Mr. de Klerk, who
repudiated apartheid in 1990 and shared a Nobel Peace Prize with Nelson Mandela,
said in an interview in London that racism threatened to undermine political
stability in South Africa and could lead to a backlash by Afrikaners if left
unchecked.   (Reuters)

ASIA

PHILIPPINES: REBELS ASK U.S. FOR RANSOM -- A Muslim rebel spokesman demanded a
$10 million ransom for Jeffrey Schilling, 24, an American kidnapped a week ago
on a remote southern island. In a conversation with a government negotiator
broadcast on a local radio station, the spokesman, Abu Sabaya, also asked for
food and medicine to be sent for Mr. Schilling, who American officials say has
serious health problems. American officials have ruled out paying a ransom.
Seth Mydans (NYT)

INDONESIA: PRESIDENT PRESSES FOR TRIAL -- President Abdurrahman Wahid said the
corruption trail of former President Suharto must proceed even though the former
leader failed to attend its opening, citing ill health. But Mr. Wahid repeated
his promise to pardon Mr. Suharto, 79, once the trial is completed, "on
condition he returns all of the wealth he illegally collected during his
presidency."   Seth Mydans (NYT)

EAST TIMOR: 19 NAMED IN VIOLENCE -- Indonesian state prosecutors named 19
civilians and military officers as suspects in the killings, kidnappings and
destruction that ravaged East Timor last year. The list excluded several
prominent names, most notably the former military commander, General Wiranto,
who was implicated by an earlier fact-finding commission.
   Seth Mydans (NYT)

NORTH AND SOUTH KOREA: ACCORD ON MILITARY TALKS -- After extending talks in
Pyongyang for a fourth day, North and South Korea agreed to ease tensions on the
divided peninsula by opening a dialogue among military officials, according to a
statement released in Seoul. With the talks under threat of ending without a
significant agreement, South Korea's unification minister, Pak Chae Kyu,
traveled by train to a remote province of North Korea to meet its leader, Kim
Jong Il, a move considered pivotal in reaching an accord.
   Samuel Len (NYT)

SRI LANKA: ACCUSATION DENIED -- The opposition leader Ranil Wickremesinghe
denied accusations made by President Chandrika Kumaratunga that he knew in
advance about a suicide bomb attack on her last December by Tamil rebels. Mr.
Wickremesinghe said the president was trying to smear him in advance of Oct. 10
elections. "I deny this false allegation completely," he said in a letter to
Mrs. Kumaratunga.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (58%);

COUNTRY: ARGENTINA (95%); SERBIA (94%); EUROPE (94%); SPAIN (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHILE (92%); CANADA (79%);
FRANCE (79%); GREECE (79%);

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (58%);   NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (83%);
UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (83%); UNITED NATIONS  (55%);
UNITED NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ARGENTINA (95%); SERBIA (94%); EUROPE (94%); SPAIN (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); CHILE (92%); CANADA (79%);
FRANCE (79%); GREECE (79%);   PARIS, FRANCE (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  ARMED FORCES (90%); EXTRADITION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS

 (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); URBAN TRANSIT SYSTEMS (86%); RELIGION
(85%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (78%);
TERRORISM (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); VEHICULAR OFFENSES (78%);
PASSPORTS & VISAS (78%); SPEED LIMITS (77%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (73%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (73%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (72%); INTERGOVERNMENTAL TALKS (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); RAIL TRANSPORTATION ACCIDENTS (69%); INVESTIGATIONS
(69%); REFERENDUMS (68%); PETITIONS (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%); PROTESTS
& DEMONSTRATIONS (65%); PUBLIC RADIO (64%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (64%); POLICE
FORCES (58%); HELICOPTERS (53%);   MILITARY RULE (90%);

PERSON: FIDEL CASTRO (61%);

LOAD-DATE: September 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             685 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Rebels Without a Childhood in Sri Lanka War

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1482 words

DATELINE: PALALI, Sri Lanka, Sept. 9


Renuka, a 13-year-old wisp of a girl, said she is afraid she will be scolded
because she chose not to swallow her cyanide capsule.

Recruited at age 11 by ethnic Tamil rebels to fight for a separate state, she
lay wounded on the front lines of Sri Lanka's civil war six days ago, surrounded
by the blasted bodies of three other insurgents who were on duty with her when
mortar fire hit their sentry post.

But rather than kill herself to avoid capture as her superiors in the Liberation
Tigers of Tamil Eelam had ordered, Renuka said she wrapped her bloody chest in a
sarong and waited for the soldiers from the Sri Lankan Army. "I didn't want to
die," she said in a thin, quavering voice during an interview at an army
detention camp here. "And I'm not going back to the L.T.T.E. They will threaten
me and scold me and ask why I didn't take the cyanide."

Two years ago the Tigers met in northern Sri Lanka with Olara A. Ottunu, the
United Nations official charged with trying to halt the use of an estimated
300,000 child soldiers worldwide. They promised him that they would stop
recruiting children under 17 and sending anyone under age 18 into battle. But
evidence emerging from the recent carnage in Sri Lanka's 17-year war with the
separatist rebels strongly suggests that they have continued using children in
their battle to win a homeland for the country's mostly Hindu Tamil minority in
the north and east of the country.

Renuka and Malar Arumugam, another 13-year-old girl soldier captured by the
army, gave accounts of their years with the Tigers in interviews through an
independent Tamil translator. Malar, an orphan who said she was recruited at age
8, remains fiercely loyal to the Tigers, whom she regards as her family. She
wept angrily when she spoke of what she called atrocities against Tamils by the
Sri Lankan and Indian armies.

In contrast, Renuka, who said she left her impoverished family to join the
Tigers largely because she was hungry and knew they would feed her, wants
nothing more to do with the rebels. The Tigers refused to let her see her
parents, and she believes that the rebel fighters abandoned her when she was
wounded in battle.

The girls' stories could not be independently verified, though their wounds and
scars were consistent with their accounts, as were the circumstances of their
confinement. Army officials, happy to score propaganda points against the
Tigers, readily agreed to allow Renuka, still in their custody, to be
interviewed. Her last name was withheld by The New York Times out of concern
that the rebels would punish her for turning against them.

A district magistrate in Jaffna permitted an interview with Malar, who unlike
Renuka is still a true Tiger believer. Captured in July, she is now in judicial
custody and is incarcerated in the rundown jail in Jaffna. Officials stood
listening to both interviews.

One other thing also suggests that the Tigers are using child soldiers: the
youthfulness of the rebel dead found after a Sept. 3 battle here on the Jaffna
peninsula. Six of the 36 dead rebels whose bodies were picked up by the Sri
Lankan Army and returned to the Tigers appeared to have been girls between ages
12 and 16, said an international official who inspected them, but asked that the
organization not be identified to preserve its ability to function in Jaffna.

Officials at the Jaffna Teaching Hospital, where the bodies were taken, declined
to comment, but a hospital worker who saw the dead said, "Most of them were
young, but you can't say whether they were 12, 14 16, 18 or 20. They were
small-made."

For the past year, human rights groups have alleged that the Tigers are still
using child soldiers. In July, the United Teachers for Human Rights in Jaffna
charged that the rebel group was rounding up an increasing number of boys and
girls in its push to retake the Jaffna peninsula, a northern spit of land that
had long been its stronghold.

The United States has classified the Tigers as a terrorist organization, but
Canada and Great Britain, with substantial Tamil communities, have not banned
the group, which raises money from the nearly one million Sri Lankan Tamils
living abroad.

A man who identified himself as A. Shanthan, in the group's London branch, said
he was not a spokesman for the organization and could not comment on the girls'
stories. He said he would try to get an answer to faxed questions in coming
days, though it was difficult for him to reach Tiger leaders in Sri Lanka.

The girls' stories had much in common, though Renuka was timid and softspoken,
while Malar was defiant and angry. Both said they came from poor backgrounds,
joined the Tigers without telling their families and received heavy
indoctrination and arms training in Tiger camps.

Renuka hobbled out of the detention center, dressed in a polka-dotted hospital
gown. She whimpered as she lowered herself into a chair shaded by a tree in the
parking lot. Doctors had operated the day before to remove shrapnel from her
chest.

She said she grew up in the desolate northern reaches of the country known as
the Wanni. Her father was unemployed and she, her sister and her parents
survived on the bit of money a relative in Colombo sent them every now and then.
Often they went hungry.

Tiger soldiers came to her school every month on recruiting drives from the time
she was in the 6th grade, she said. The children were gathered in the school's
main hall as men and women in battle fatigues told them it was their duty to
join the Tigers and help save the Tamil people from the approaching Sri Lankan
army.

One day when she was in the 7th grade, Renuka told her parents she was going
shopping, but instead went to a Tiger camp. She was hungry, she said, "and we
all knew that they give meals."

As it turned out, she was well fed, but said she quickly regretted her choice.
She pleaded to see her parents, but was told she could only have a visit after
she had fought on the front lines. During the next two years, she said she and
many other children were drilled in the Tiger view of history, the Tiger vision
of a Tamil homeland and the Tiger cult of martyrdom. They learned to lob a
grenade and dive for cover and to fire a machine gun on the run.

She was assigned to an all-female fighting group and dispatched a month ago to a
battlefront east of the city of Jaffna. Early in the morning of Sept. 3, the Sri
Lankan army began a deafening assault. Thousands of rounds of mortar fire rained
down. Within hours, everyone in her sentry post was dead except her.

"The L.T.T.E. took me," she said of the Tamil rebel group. "They didn't let me
see my parents. When I was injured, they didn't come to help me. I ask myself,
'Who are they?' "

Unlike Renuka, Malar, her short, curly hair pulled back by a headband, said she
is still a true believer. According to her account, she was born in the Mannar
district in northwestern Sri Lanka. Her father died of a heart attack when she
was 3 and her mother went into the hospital when she was 6 and never returned.
She moved in with her uncle, an unmarried farm laborer. Often, they had little
to eat, she said.

When she was 8, she said, a woman from the Tigers came and told her the rebels
would educate and care for her. "I thought it was better to go with the L.T.T.E.
sister because of our poverty," she said. "I also wanted to contribute to
freedom."

She was trained with 50 other girls, most of them orphans like her. They
underwent years of ideological indoctrination in Tiger schools. She once caught
a glimpse of the secretive, reclusive rebel leader, Velupillai Prabhakaran, and
said, "We treat him as our god."

Last year, at age 12, she volunteered to go to war. "I wanted to save the
country," she said. She was eventually sent to the eastern coast of the Jaffna
peninsula, carting a Chinese-made submachine gun.

In July, during a routine sweep, army soldiers tossed a grenade into her bunker.
"Eleven of us girls were in the bunker," she said as hot angry tears streaked
down her cheeks. "Ten died in front of me. The military removed the girls'
clothes and fired rounds into the bodies."

She lives now in a jail cell with Dayalani Balasubramaniam, 22, who joined the
jailhouse conversation to say she had become a Tiger cadre when she was 16. The
young woman held out her warped hands, the fingers curving at odd angles. She
said soldiers had broken the bones with batons and left the fingers to heal
without setting them. Human rights groups say the torture of rebel suspects is
not uncommon.

The girl and the young woman, sharing a dark, dank cell, seemed to bolster each
other's resolve to stay true to the cause. With their jailers listening, Miss
Balasubramaniam declared she was still worked up to fight because of the army's
bombing and shelling.

Malar fiercely echoed her words. "I feel the same," she said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (98%); INDIA (90%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (90%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; TAMIL TIGERS  LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (94%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS
(82%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; TAMIL TIGERS  LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM
(94%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA;   SRI LANKA (98%); INDIA (90%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA
(90%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; HINDUISM
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%);

 CHILDREN (90%); ARMIES (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (90%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); CHILD
SOLDIERS (89%); ORPHANS (78%); CYANIDES (78%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (77%); ARMED
FORCES (74%); RELIGION (69%); MAGISTRATES (66%); HINDUS & HINDUISM (64%);
POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (62%);

PERSON: DUGGER, CELIA W

LOAD-DATE: September 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Malar Arumugan, 13, joined the Tamil Tigers at 8 and remains
loyal after capture by the army. (Celia Dugger/The New York Times)(pg. A8)

Map of India highlighting location of Palali: A 13-year-old girl is being held
at an army detention camp in Palali. (pg. A8)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             689 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

27 Million Slaves

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 158 words



To the Editor:

You report that modern-day slavery, though found in every corner of the world,
is not widely known (editorial, Sept. 9). How have our super-advanced
information industries simply not noticed 27 million slaves?

I believe that modern-day slavery is ignored because it's not "our" story: the
middle-class public finds in neither its victims nor its oppressors people like
themselves. Slaves are prisoners of commerce, people from the lowest rungs of
their often pre-modern societies, hard for first-world activists to bond with.

The fight for a single standard of human conduct will be the fight for
humanity's future. If "universal human rights" means anything, it will mean that
Americans, who nearly tore our nation apart over the issue of slavery, will not
rest until this ancient scourge is no longer practiced anywhere by anyone.

CHARLES JACOBS
President
American Anti-Slavery Group
Boston, Sept. 12, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (91%);

SUBJECT: SLAVERY; EDITORIALS  SLAVERY (92%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (79%);

PERSON: JACOBS, CHARLES

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             693 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 23, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

China and Cuba

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 81 words



To the Editor:

You report that the Senate voted overwhelmingly to give permanent trade benefits
to China "despite the State Department's recent conclusion that China's human
rights violations have, if anything, grown more egregious this year" (front
page, Sept. 20). Isn't it time we recognized Cuba, a small nation with which we
could trade, and perhaps improve the lives of people there, or don't we have the
courage?

ESTHER B. SIEGEL
Southampton, N.Y., Sept. 20, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

COMPANY: STATE DEPARTMENT (57%);

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

LOAD-DATE: September 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             706 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 8, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SHOWDOWN IN YUGOSLAVIA: AN ALLY;
China, Once a Supporter of Milosevic Against NATO, Sends Its Congratulations to
Kostunica

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 17; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: BEIJING, Oct. 7


Briskly adapting to the fall of Slobodan Milosevic, who was a close diplomatic
ally, President Jiang Zemin today sent "heartfelt congratulations" to the newly
elected president of Yugoslavia.

In his message to Vojislav Kostunica, whose election was certified this week
only after a popular uprising that eventually forced Mr. Milosevic to relinquish
power, Mr. Jiang wished the new president "a smooth job in his new lofty
position and remarkable achievements in his endeavors towards the stability and
prosperity of Yugoslavia," according to a report by the New China News Agency.

China was one of Mr. Milosevic's staunchest supporters during last year's NATO
campaign against Yugoslavia over Kosovo, where Mr. Milosevic's security forces
were killing and repressing the majority Albanian population.

China's vehement opposition to the NATO military action -- portrayed here as an
imperialistic expansion of American "hegemony" using human rights as a pretext
-- arose in part from China's own fear that foreign powers might some day
support ethnic insurrections in Tibet or in the Muslim region of Xinjiang.

Throughout the Kosovo bombing campaign, China's official media virtually ignored
reports of "ethnic cleansing" and other Serbian atrocities in Kosovo and
described Mr. Milosevic and his government as heroic defenders of the sacred
principle of national sovereignty.

The criticism of the NATO bombing campaign grew much more shrill after American
planes bombed the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade in May 1999.

Washington apologized, saying that the bombing was an error, but the bombing
caused a deterioration in Chinese-American relations and prompted massive
demonstrations outside the American embassy in Beijing.

When the International Tribunal in the Hague indicted Mr. Milosevic last year
for alleged war crimes in Kosovo connected with ethnic cleansing by his security
forces, the Chinese government described the indictment as an American-led
"political scheme."

In June of this year, China's parliament leader, Li Peng, visited Belgrade for
three days, where Mr. Milosevic presented him with Yugoslavia's highest medal,
the Great Star.

Mr. Milosevic, and particularly his Marxist wife, Mirjana Markovic, have long
viewed Beijing and its Communist party as powerful friends and the sort of
ideological comrades they lacked in eastern Europe after the Communist regimes
of the Soviet bloc fell in quick succession in 1989.

But in the aftermath of the Kosovo war, Mr. Milosevic's international indictment
and the rise of his domestic opponents, Mr. Li and other Chinese officials have
gradually shifted the stress of their public pronouncements, stressing the
common interests linking China and Yugoslavia rather than singling out Mr.
Milosevic for praise.

Today, a foreign ministry spokesman, Sun Yuxi, said that "China respects the
choice of the Yugoslavian people," adding that "we believe that the change of
situation in Yugoslavia will not affect the healthy development of
China-Yugoslavia relations."

The political turn in Belgrade has caused lively traffic on China's Internet
bulletin boards, which last year were filled with anti-American venom.

This time, many anonymous writers have made pointed comments about the success
of democracy in Yugoslavia, with one saying, for example, "Yugoslavs win
democracy, how about us?" and another saying, "Milosevic's fall is making some
people here nervous."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); TIBET (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); EUROPE (79%); ALBANIA (79%);
EASTERN EUROPE (66%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%); NORTHWEST CHINA (79%);
XIZANG, CHINA (58%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); BEIJING, CHINA (88%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (98%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA
& MONTENEGRO (79%); TIBET (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); EUROPE (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

 EASTERN EUROPE (66%);   NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (92%); SOUTHWEST CHINA (79%);
NORTHWEST CHINA (79%); XIZANG, CHINA (58%); XINJIANG, CHINA (58%);   BELGRADE,
SERBIA (94%); BEIJING, CHINA (88%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   BOMBINGS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WAR &
CONFLICT (89%); ETHNIC GROUPS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); INDICTMENTS
(88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (74%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (74%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (73%); POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(68%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (67%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (94%); JIANG ZEMIN (74%);

LOAD-DATE: October 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vojislav Kostunica in Belgrade yesterday with Pan Zhenlin,
China's ambassador to Yugoslavia, before the presidential inauguration. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             708 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Belgrade, a Fateful Moment

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 138 words



To the Editor:

Re "Milosevic and Bush," by Anthony Lewis (column, Oct. 7):

By criticizing United States involvement in regions outside of its strategic or
economic interests, George W. Bush fails in promoting cherished American values.

The advancement of peace and security in the Balkans and elsewhere may not serve
to protect American oil investments or strategic alliances, but it does uphold
democracy, establish justice, ensure personal freedoms for the persecuted and,
above all, prevent human suffering.

An isolationist United States foreign policy is hypocritical; thus, by ignoring
"ethnic cleansing" and the gross violations of human rights that occur
throughout the world, Mr. Bush would disregard the American values that he
claims to uphold.

CLAYTON R. SWOPE
Notre Dame, Ind., Oct. 7, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (72%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (72%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE; ELECTION ISSUES  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); FOREIGN POLICY (67%); ALLIANCES &
PARTNERSHIPS (56%);

PERSON: SWOPE, CLAYTON R; BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); LEWIS, ANTHONY  GEORGE W BUSH
(92%);

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             710 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Iraq Reports Safe Ending To Hijacking Of Saudi Jet

BYLINE: By SUSAN SACHS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 15; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 799 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Oct. 14


At least two men, apparently armed with explosives, hijacked a Saudi Arabian
passenger jet enroute to London today and forced it to land in Baghdad, where
after three hours Iraqi officials announced that they had succeeded in
negotiating the freedom of all those on board.

The 90 passengers and 15 crew members, including one American traveler and 40
British citizens, were in good health and were taken by bus from the airport to
Baghdad hotels, according to Iraqi officials.

The Saudi Arabian Airlines' manager at Heathrow airport in London, Philip
Griffin, was quoted as telling Agence France-Presse that the passengers would be
flown out of Baghdad and arrive in Britain on Sunday evening. A state television
announcer in Baghdad said they would be extended "Arab hospitality." Neither
Saudi Arabia nor Britain maintain diplomatic relations with Iraq.

The hijackers, who reportedly threatened to blow up the plane on the tarmac,
were taken into custody. "The hijackers were arrested and there will be
investigations," said Tahir Jaleel al-Habous, an official of the Iraqi Ministry
of Interior.

The demands made by the hijackers, said to be Saudi nationals, were not made
public by the Baghdad authorities. Initially, officials in Baghdad said four men
had commandeered the plane, but after securing the release of the passengers
they revised the number to two.

At various points during the standoff at Saddam International Airport, Iraqi
officials said the men were upset over what they called unreported human rights
violations in Saudi Arabia, that they chose Iraq as their destination because it
rejects "American hegemony" in the region, and that they wanted "political
asylum" in Iraq.

After the standoff, an Iraqi Ministry of Interior official said the men had also
warned that if they did not get what they wanted, another plane would be
hijacked in coming days.

Saudi Arabian Airlines Flight 115 originated in the Saudi port city of Jidda.

It was not clear whether the hijacking was related to the recent weeks of deadly
conflict between Palestinians and Israelis. The violence, which has claimed
almost 100 lives, most of them Palestinian, has spurred rage and huge
demonstrations against Israel and the United States in most Arab states.

Saudi Arabia, the world's largest oil-producer, is a close ally of the United
States and the presence of American troops in the kingdom has been denounced by
religious conservatives and by the accused terrorist Osama bin Laden, a Saudi
exile who has made the expulsion of American troops his main demand.

However, the Saudi government has also strongly condemned Israeli actions
against Palestinians in the last three weeks, with Saudi leaders urging all
Muslims to donate money and other aid to the Palestinians.

Iraq has been more forceful, calling even today for attacks on Americans and
American interests around the world and proclaiming that Iraqis were prepared to
go on suicide terror missions against Israel.

The Saddam International Airport in Baghdad reopened only two months ago after
being shuttered for 10 years by the United Nations embargo on Iraq. Since Aug.
18, more than 20 planes from Egypt, Syria and Turkey have landed, reportedly
carrying permitted shipments of food and medicine.

Relations between Saudi Arabia and Iraq, however, are frigid. The gulf kingdom
was the base for the allied assault on Iraq after its 1990 invasion of
neighboring Kuwait and it has remained a bastion of opposition to ending Iraqi
isolation.

Iraqi hostility also has not abated.

Soon after the hijacked plane landed in Baghdad, an official of the Iraqi
Ministry of Interior said on state television that the hijackershad demanded
direct negotiations with Saudi authorities. The Iraqi official said the demand
was refused because the delay in getting a Saudi to Baghdad would cause
unnecessary stress for the plane's passengers.

Civil aviation officials in Cairo first reported the hijacking at about 2:55
p.m. (8:55 a.m. Eastern time), when the plane was in Egyptian airspace 70 miles
southeast of Cyprus.

In a radio transmission from the Saudi airliner monitored by officials in Israel
and then broadcast over radio and television in the region, the pilot is heard
asking the control tower at Larnaca, Cyprus, to notify Syrian airport officials
that the plane was on its way. "The hijacker is saying that he has TNT on board
and he might blow the aircraft, and we have passengers from all kinds of
nationalities," the pilot said in an even voice. "Do you read?"

A short time later, according to another transmission monitored on the ground,
the pilot was heard telling air traffic controllers that he needed permission to
fly over Syrian air space, but that the hijacker was demanding to go to Baghdad.



http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%);

COUNTRY: SAUDI ARABIA (98%); IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); ISRAEL (94%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); EGYPT (79%);

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (98%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%);   IRAQI MINISTRY (60%);

ORGANIZATION: IRAQI MINISTRY (60%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SAUDI ARABIA (98%); IRAQ (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); ISRAEL (94%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); EGYPT (79%);
BAGHDAD, IRAQ (98%); LONDON, ENGLAND (90%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HIJACKING (92%); AIRPORTS (91%);
COMMERCIAL & GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT (90%); AIRLINES (89%); TERRORISM (78%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ARRESTS (73%); MIDDLE EAST PROTESTS & UPRISINGS
(73%); INVESTIGATIONS (73%); HOTELS & MOTELS (71%); CONSERVATISM (69%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); PUBLIC TELEVISION (69%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (68%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (68%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(67%); AL-QAEDA (63%); SUICIDE (61%); RELIGION (60%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%);

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             713 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 23, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

WHOSE HOLY LAND?;
Arab Statement: 'Criminals of War Who Committed Massacres'

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 620 words

DATELINE: CAIRO, Oct. 22


Following are excerpts from the statement issued today by Arab leaders at the
end of their summit meeting as translated by The New York Times:

The summit salutes the uprising of the Palestinian people in the occupied
Palestinian land. . . .

Arab leaders hold Israel responsible for returning the region back to an
atmosphere of tension and violence as a result of the Israeli practices of
aggression and its siege of the Palestinian people in violation of its
commitments stipulated in Geneva convention, 1949, as an occupying force. . . .

The Arab leaders confirm that the Aksa intifada erupted as a result of
continuing occupation and the Israeli violation of Haram al Sharif, and the rest
of the Islamic and Christian holy sites in the Palestinian land. . . . They also
affirm the Palestinian people's right to just compensation from Israel for
moral, human and material losses. . . .

Arab leaders demand forming a neutral international committee in the framework
of the United Nations that will report to the Security Council, and the Human
Rights Committee, on the reasons and the responsibility for the dangerous
deterioration in the occupied Palestinian Land, and the massacres committed by
the Israeli occupying forces. . . .

They also ask that the Security Council and General Assembly take charge of
providing protection for the Palestinian people under Israeli occupation,
through discussing forming a force or any international presence for this
purpose. . . .

Arab Leaders affirm that Arab nations shall pursue, in accordance with
international law, those responsible for these brutal practices and demand that
the Security Council form an international tribunal dedicated to trying Israeli
criminals of war who committed massacres against the Palestinians and the Arabs
in the occupied land like the former tribunal formed for criminals of war in
Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia. . . .

Arab leaders express their deep resentment and deprecation of the Israeli
escalation in aggression and its provocation in a time when the region was
getting ready for comprehensive and just peace, especially after the Arabs
decided since the Madrid conference that a comprehensive and just peace is their
option and opens the way for a final settlement. . . .

Arab leaders affirm that a comprehensive and just peace shall not be achieved
without the return of Jerusalem to Palestinian sovereignty and without granting
the Palestinians legitimate rights including the founding of an independent
state with Jerusalem as its capital. . . . And without restoring all Arab land
occupied, including a full Israeli withdrawal from the West Bank and Gaza and
from Golan to the borders of June 4, 1967, and the completion of the Israeli
withdrawal from southern Lebanon to the international borders including Shabaa
plantation. And without the release of Arab prisoners held in the Israeli
prisons. . . .

Arab leaders stress that halting of the peace process in its bilateral track
will lead to halting of the multilateral track. They also affirm that dealing
with the issues of regional cooperation cannot be done without achievement of
real peace in the region. . . .

Arab leaders . . .remind . . . the world not to move embassies to Jerusalem and
. . . affirm cutting all relations with countries that . . .  recognize
Jerusalem as the capital of Israel.

Arab leaders affirm that achieving durable peace and security in the region
requires Israeli accession to the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. And to
submit all Israeli nuclear installations to international inspection system.
They stress the importance of making the Middle East free of nuclear weapons and
weapons of mass destruction. . . .

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (95%); RWANDA (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); EGYPT (79%); LEBANON (73%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (56%);

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%);

COMPANY: ARAB LEAGUE  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (83%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (83%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES  (59%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES
(59%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: ARAB LEAGUE  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (83%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (83%); LEAGUE OF ARAB STATES  (59%); LEAGUE OF ARAB
STATES (59%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL;   PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (97%); ISRAEL (95%);
RWANDA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); EGYPT (79%); LEBANON (73%);   GENEVA,
SWITZERLAND (56%);   JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (92%); CAIRO, EGYPT (79%);

SUBJECT: PALESTINIANS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); PEACE PROCESS
(89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS

 (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (73%); CHRISTIANS
& CHRISTIANITY (71%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (70%); RELIGION (69%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (67%);
LAW OF WAR (76%);

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (95%);

LOAD-DATE: October 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Text

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             716 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

All About Evil

BYLINE: By Steven Pinker; Steven Pinker is the Peter de Florez professor of
psychology at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and the author of "How
the Mind Works" and "Words and Rules: The Ingredients of Language."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 14; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1819 words



 HUMANITY
 A Moral History
 of the Twentieth Century.
 By Jonathan Glover.
 464 pp. New Haven:
 Yale University Press. $27.95.

Barbarism was by no means unique to the past 100 years, Jonathan Glover tells
us, but "it is still right that much of 20th-century history has been a very
unpleasant surprise." This was the century of Passchendaele, Dresden, Nanking,
Nagasaki and Rwanda; of the Final Solution, the gulag, the Great Leap Forward,
Year Zero and ethnic cleansing -- names that stand for killings in the six and
seven figures and for suffering beyond comprehension. The technological progress
that inspired the optimism of the Victorians turned out also to multiply the
effects of old-fashioned evil and criminal stupidity.

Glover is a moral philosopher, whose stock in trade is the hypothetical moral
dilemma. (A trolley is hurtling out of control. Five workers down the track
don't see it and will be killed if it continues. You can throw the switch and
save them, but it will cause the death of one person standing on a spur. What
should you do?) In this "moral history of the 20th century," Glover deftly
analyzes some of its real and terrible moral dilemmas. Is the bombing of
civilians ever justified if it would shorten a dreadful war? Should the Allies
have accepted Adolf Eichmann's offer to trade a million Jews for 10,000 trucks?
What kind of risk to self and family should a moral person be expected to take
in opposing a terrifying regime?

But when it comes to the choices made by Hitler, Stalin, Mao, Pol Pot, Milosevic
and their henchmen, moral dilemmas are beside the point. Glover wants his
profession to help us understand how great evils can happen and how they might
be prevented. That requires not just philosophy but history and psychology.

Most of "Humanity" is history: an account of the major atrocities of the
century. In novelistic detail, Glover describes the wrenching realities behind
the just wars and the utopian social projects. The descriptions are
heartbreaking, enraging, at times unbearable. No matter how bad you thought the
century was for human rights, Glover will convince you that it was even worse.
The following vignette, though lacking the death and gore of the others,
encapsulates for me how the century's political movements could obliterate all
that we value in life:

"A French ethnologist captured by the Khmer Rouge . . . befriended a girl of
about 3 whose father was marched away to probable death. He played with her and
grew fond of her, but she was forced to attend indoctrination classes. Her
smiling response to him was replaced by sullenness. One evening, looking him in
the face, she tried to insert her finger between his ankle and the rope that
bound him. Finding that she could, she called the guard to tighten the ropes."

Glover's history is not original, of course, but his psychology is, dramatically
so. The prevailing wisdom among many intellectuals has been that evil has
nothing to do with human nature and must be attributed to political
institutions. The anthropologist Ashley Montagu, at a time when the ashes of 35
million victims of World War II were still warm (or radioactive), urged Unesco
to declare that "biological studies lend support to the ethic of universal
brotherhood." In 1986, Unesco and several scholarly societies resolved that "it
is scientifically incorrect to say that war or any other violent behavior is
genetically programmed into our human nature." Scientists who have dissented
from this saccharine view have been picketed, smeared and likened to Nazis.

Glover does not let our species off so lightly. He shows that distinctive
patterns of cruelty and callousness pop up repeatedly in history, cutting across
times, places and political systems. He insists that "we need to look hard and
clearly at some monsters inside us," not to make us pessimists but as "part of
the project of caging and taming them." For Glover argues that human nature
encompasses not just destructive impulses but "moral resources": humane impulses
that sometimes recoil from the intentions of the monsters. The course of
history, and our hopes for the future, are shaped by struggles among these
impulses inside countless minds.

The great contribution of "Humanity" is a dissection of these motives. This is
not, as some might fear, an attempt to reduce history to psychology. Glover
makes it clear that the motives are responses to the larger community and
manifest themselves in different ways in different social and political
contexts.

HERE are some of the monsters. Pure, amoral self-interest. Sadism and the thrill
of the battlefield. Tribalism, which elevates the group above the individual and
turns personal enmity into feuding, war and genocide. Ideology, which can
convince people that a struggle between groups -- races for the Nazis, classes
for the Marxists -- is inevitable and necessary for progress. The "Hobbesian
trap," in which a nation is tempted to attack a neighbor out of fear that it
would otherwise attack first, like an armed homeowner who surprises an armed
burglar, tempting each to shoot first to avoid being shot.

Glover sees two countervailing moral resources. Human responses -- sympathy,
empathy and respect -- occasionally break through in people committing vicious
acts. Sometimes they are triggered by the intellect. A British World War II
navigator, safely home after a bombing raid, says to the pilot, "What about
those poor sods under those fires?" Entrenched soldiers say, "We don't want to
kill you, and you don't want to kill us, so why shoot?" At other times they are
triggered by tangible signs of a target's humanity. A soldier sees a fleeing man
holding up his trousers. The mundane detail turns him from "fascist" to
"person," and the soldier loses the will to fire. An Afrikaner policeman chases
a South African demonstrator, club in hand. She loses her shoe, and chivalry
makes him hand it back. Their eyes meet, and he finds it impossible to club her.

The other resource is moral identity, or self-respect -- the answer to the
question "Am I the kind of person who could do this?" People sometimes resist
the pressure to harm others when it conflicts with how they want to see
themselves. A moral identity can come from a religion, a culture, professional
mores (like the Hippocratic oath), a cosmopolitan humanism or sometimes just an
insistent voice inside us.

In Glover's analysis, the horrors of the century took place when the moral
resources were deliberately or accidentally disabled. Again and again he finds
that atrocities are accompanied by tactics of humiliation and dehumanization:
pejorative nicknames, degrading conditions, humiliating dress. They flip a
mental switch and reclassify another individual from "person" to "nonperson,"
making it as easy to torture or kill him as it is for us to boil a lobster
alive. Some of the most indelible images in "Humanity" are of the "cold jokes"
that brutes all over the world have used to strip their victims of dignity and
make cruelty come easier. Those who poke fun at "politically correct" names for
ethnic minorities will be reminded that they originally had a humane rationale.

Sympathy can be turned off by physical distance from the victims, as in aerial
bombardment and remote-control warfare. It can also be suppressed by sheer
willpower. It is frightening to think that our vaunted ability to subdue
emotional urges through the force of intellect and conscience (allowing us to
defer gratification and resist temptation) also allowed Nazi guards to overcome
their visceral horror at what they were doing and to persevere with distasteful
acts that they thought served a higher purpose.

Like sympathy, the moral resource of identity can be insidiously eroded. No one
is a saint, and most people calibrate their conscience against a level of
minimum decency expected of people in their peer group or culture. When the
level drifts downward, people can commit horrible crimes with the confidence
that comes from knowing that "everyone does it." Euphemisms like "resettlement
to work camps," phased decisions (in which bombing targets might shift from
isolated factories to factories near neighborhoods to the neighborhoods
themselves) and the diffusion of responsibility within a bureaucracy can lead
conscientious people to cause appalling outcomes that no one would ever
willingly choose on his own.

GLOVER draws hope from the recurring breakthroughs of moral resources and from
the happy episodes in which they conspired to avert disaster. During the Cuban
missile crisis, Nikita Khrushchev and John F. Kennedy were reminded of the human
cost of the nuclear brink they were approaching, Khrushchev by memories of two
world wars fought on his soil, Kennedy by a graphic briefing of the aftermath of
an atomic bomb. And each understood they were in a Hobbesian trap. Kennedy had
just read Barbara Tuchman's "Guns of August" and saw how the leaders of great
nations could sleepwalk into a pointless and awful war. Khrushchev, thinking
like a game theorist, wrote to Kennedy:

"You and I should not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied a
knot of war, because the harder you and I pull, the tighter this knot will
become. And a time may come when this knot is tied so tight that the person who
tied it is no longer capable of untying it, and then the knot will have to be
cut."

By identifying the trap, they could set the shared goal of escaping it. In the
teeth of opposition from many of their advisers, both made concessions that may
have literally saved the world.

In discussing topics of such gravity many authors would be tempted to flaunt a
moral superiority, but Glover does not. Though "Humanity" is a passionate book,
the voice is measured and elegant, the arguments fair and carefully reasoned.
There are also moments of dark wit. Glover tells how the Bolshevik leaders
cultivated a reputation for hardness, down to their assumed names: Kamenev (man
of stone), Molotov (the hammer), Stalin (man of steel). He notes, "A democratic
politician who changed his name to 'Man of Steel' would, one hopes, have his
political career finished by the laughter." A mordant portrait of the Nazi
philosopher Martin Heidegger should be required reading for the many academics
who continue to treat him seriously.

Glover took on a fearsome subject, and at times it got the better of him. Topics
come and go unpredictably; arguments sometimes dribble off without resolution.
Relevant literatures in moral and political philosophy and social and
evolutionary psychology are barely touched. No matter. This is an extraordinary
book: brilliant, haunting and uniquely important. Almost 40 years ago a
president read a best seller, and the world avoided a holocaust. I like to think
that some of the leaders and followers of tomorrow will read "Humanity."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS611310 COLLEGES, UNIVERSITIES & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%);

COUNTRY: RWANDA (90%); UNITED STATES (73%);

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (73%);

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (73%);

COMPANY: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS (58%);   YALE UNIVERSITY  (84%);

ORGANIZATION: YALE UNIVERSITY  (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA (90%); UNITED STATES (73%);   CONNECTICUT, USA (73%);   NEW
HAVEN, CT, USA (73%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   BOOK REVIEWS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS (79%); HISTORY (78%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL STUDIES (78%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); BOMBINGS
(70%);

PERSON: JONATHAN GLOVER (96%);

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Dusan Petricic)

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             730 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 24, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Time Is Short for U.S. to Join the International Criminal Court

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 579 words


More than 100 nations will be watching the Clinton administration over the next
two weeks for an indication whether the United States will sign the treaty
establishing the International Criminal Court.

The court would be the first such permanent body set up to try individuals
accused of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

On Monday a two-week preparatory meeting is to begin at the United Nations. The
United States is expected to announce its final position during this session.

Until Dec. 31, a nation can indicate its support for the court by signing the
treaty, even if ratification is not immediately likely.

So far, 115 nations -- including all of Europe and the NATO governments, except
the United States -- have signed and 22 countries have ratified the treaty.
After Dec. 31, a country will have to ratify before it can join.

Administration officials have said they support an international court.
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright was instrumental in establishing
temporary tribunals for the Balkans and Rwanda, which are seen as precursors of
a permanent body.

But objections from the Pentagon have forced the administration to demand a
guarantee that no American officer or civilian official on duty abroad will fall
under its jurisdiction.

Senator Jesse Helms, the North Carolina Republican who is chairman of the
Foreign Relations Committee, has vowed that the court would be "dead on arrival"
if the administration sends the treaty for ratification. Diplomats at the United
Nations assume this view would be strengthened by a Republican administration in
Washington, and look to the departing Clinton administration as a last chance.

Richard Dicker, a counsel at Human Rights Watch, said that in mid-October,
Washington in effect hardened its position against prosecution and offered the
same opportunity to other non-signers if they pledged to try their own citizens
charged with infractions, as the United States now does in courts-martial and
civilian courts. This proposal violates the 1998 treaty establishing the court,
he said, and moreover is unnecessary.

"The court's statute, the rules of procedure and evidence and the elements of
crimes more than adequately address the risk of an unjustified prosecution of a
United States national," he said. "An outright exemption would codify a two-tier
system of justice: one for the United States and another for the rest of the
world."

President Arthur Robinson of Trinidad and Tobago, who in 1989 first introduced
the motion in the General Assembly that ultimately established the court, said
in an interview in New York this week that it was "a most significant
achievement in the history of mankind."

"This court recognizes that persons can be held individually responsible for
violations of international law," he said. "And the statute does not
differentiate between persons in authority and anyone else," which he called a
"dramatic step" in international law.

Mr. Robinson recalled that it was the United States that had established the
principle of trials for the worst crimes against humanity and crimes of war by
insisting on the Nazi trial at Nuremberg, when Stalin and Churchill were
satisfied to have offenders shot without a hearing.

"The U.S. wanted trials so that the world could see the gravity of the
offenses," he said. "Nuremberg established individual guilt. Now there is a
tremendous acceptance internationally for this kind of court."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%); TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
(79%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(93%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (56%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (93%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(93%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (98%); RWANDA (79%); EUROPE (79%); TRINIDAD & TOBAGO
(79%);   NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); WAR
CRIMES (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); LITIGATION (77%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (77%); MILITARY COURTS
(77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (76%);
INTERVIEWS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (72%);

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (92%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (92%);

LOAD-DATE: November 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             731 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Dutch Court Orders an Investigation of '82 Killings in Suriname

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 549 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, the Netherlands, Nov. 23


A Dutch high court has ordered prosecutors to investigate the former military
dictator of Suriname, Desi Bouterse, for his role in the "December murders" of
1982 when 15 of the most prominent opponents of his government were tortured and
killed.

The court said it was possible to prosecute Colonel Bouterse in the Netherlands
because the case involved crimes against humanity, which under international law
can be tried at any place and any time.

The argument is similar to that made by a Spanish judge who ordered the arrest
of the former Chilean dictator Augusto Pinochet and demanded that he stand trial
in Spain for human rights abuses and genocide.

Colonel Bouterse, who seized power in a military coup in 1980 and again in 1990,
resigned in 1992. But the voluble former physical education instructor remains
an influential political figure in Suriname, the South American country that was
a Dutch colony until 1975.

He is also a notorious figure in the Netherlands, where he was tried in absentia
for money laundering and running a cocaine-smuggling network between South
America and Europe. Last June, he was sentenced to 11 years in prison but he is
still living freely in Suriname.

For more than three years, the Dutch have tried to have Colonel Bouterse
arrested and extradited. Since a new government took office in Suriname in May,
Dutch authorities have been more hopeful of cooperation. Last week, the new
government announced its own criminal investigation of Colonel Bouterse and his
role in the killings. He has denied all responsibility.

The court in Amsterdam that is hearing the case said this week it was preferable
that Colonel Bouterse be prosecuted in his own country, but that Dutch
investigations should proceed because a trial in Suriname was uncertain.

This could mean that two prosecutions get under way. Lawyers said that parallel
prosecutions for the same crimes could proceed in both countries as long as
there had been no judgement in either case.

On Wednesday, prosecutors in Amsterdam said they were opening their case, based
on charges by relatives of the victims now living in the Netherlands who have
sought justice for years.

The killings of the regime's 15 opponents, among them prominent lawyers and
trade union leaders, took place on the night of Dec. 8, 1982 in an army barracks
in Paramaribo. Some of the bodies were put on public display. The events shook
the country and led hundreds of people to flee. The United States and the
Netherlands suspended their aid programs.

In Amsterdam, Abraham Moszkowicz, a lawyer for Colonel Bouterse, has requested
that the colonel be granted diplomatic immunity because he was head of state at
the time. But the court replied, referring to the allegations of torture and
killing, that "the commission of serious criminal offenses such as these cannot
be considered the official duties of the head of state."

Dutch newspaper reports said that the Suriname government would prefer that a
trial take place in the Netherlands and that it had already conferred with Dutch
officials about how and where to detain the former strongman who still has a
following among the military. Those reports said the Surinamese feared that they
had no prison secure enough to hold the former dictator.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NETHERLANDS (98%); SURINAME (97%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); EUROPE (79%);
UNITED STATES (79%); SPAIN (79%); CHILE (79%);

CITY: AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS (93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NETHERLANDS (98%); SURINAME (97%); SOUTH AMERICA (92%); EUROPE
(79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SPAIN (79%); CHILE (79%);   AMSTERDAM, NETHERLANDS
(93%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (58%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   DECISIONS & RULINGS (91%);
INVESTIGATIONS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); LITIGATION (90%); MURDER (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); LAWYERS (89%);
EXTRADITION (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); TORTURE (89%); SENTENCING (78%);
ARREST WARRANTS (78%); COUPS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); DOUBLE
JEOPARDY (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (76%); SMUGGLING (74%); ARMED FORCES (73%); GENOCIDE (73%); IMMUNITY
(73%); ARMIES (73%); JUDGES (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); JAIL SENTENCING
(73%); MONEY LAUNDERING (71%); PHYSICAL EDUCATION (68%); COCAINE (67%);
DIPLOMATIC IMMUNITY (50%); LABOR UNIONS (50%);   MILITARY RULE (90%); MARTIAL
LAW (78%);

PERSON: DESI BOUTERSE (93%);

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             732 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Falsely Charged, Jailed, Acquitted, Jobless

SECTION: Section 4; Page 8; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 166 words



To the Editor:

Miguel Camacho was falsely charged with rape, jailed for a month and acquitted
through a DNA test, but he can't find a job because each time he fills out an
application, he is asked if he has ever been arrested ("Long Wait for DNA Result
Can Be Justice Delayed," news article, Nov. 19). You note: "He has to answer
yes, he said. Then he has to list the charges."

The New York State Human Rights Law bars an employer from asking a job applicant
about arrests that do not end in conviction. What's more, a New York court ruled
in 1977 that an applicant may not be penalized for answering no if illegally
asked if he has ever been arrested.

Since then, the courts have reiterated that sealing the record of those
acquitted after arrest is to protect them from discrimination in employment,
education, licensing and insurance.

DONALD SHAFFER
New York, Nov. 20, 2000

The writer is legal director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, Nassau
County chapter.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (91%);   NEW YORK, USA (91%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ARRESTS (91%); GENETIC SCREENING
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); BIOETHICS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%);
EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%); ACQUITTAL (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); LITIGATION
(88%); SEX OFFENSES (88%); DNA (88%); DNA TESTING (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(88%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (73%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (71%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (68%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (68%);

PERSON: MIGUEL CAMACHO (57%);

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             740 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Serb on Trial For Genocide Of Albanians In Kosovo

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 632 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Dec. 5


A Serbian law student went on trial today in the northern Kosovo town of
Mitrovica for genocide in the killings of 26 Albanian men during the NATO
bombing campaign last year.

The case remains one of the most painful episodes for the Albanian residents of
the bitterly divided town.

French gendarmes who investigated the case last year managed to trace the
missing men to a mass grave and arrested six Serbian men. At the time it was
celebrated as a case of swift and good investigative work that promised justice
for the Albanian victims.

But the trial that began today appeared to fall short on several counts. Only
one defendant appeared in court: Igor Simic, 24. The other five Serbs charged
with him in the original indictment escaped from the United Nations-run prison
in Mitrovica several months ago and remain at large, probably in Serbia. Mr.
Simic had tried to escape with them but was caught.

None of the families of the victims attended the trial. The courthouse is in the
northern, Serbian-dominated part of town, where few Kosovo Albanians dare to go.
And Mr. Simic appeared before a panel consisting mainly of Albanian judges, a
practice that has been severely criticized by the Organization for Security and
Cooperation in Europe as unfair in such highly charged trials of ethnic-related
crimes.

The prosecutor in the trial, Michael Hartmann, is an American, and a Swedish
judge, Christer Karphammer, is presiding. But the other four members of the
judicial panel -- one other judge and three citizens who deliberate with the
others as lay judges -- are Kosovo Albanians.

Courts in Kosovo are staffed almost entirely by the ethnic Albanians who make up
most of the population. Serbs have been wary of taking part because they accuse
the United Nations-led administration of being biased against them.

Those courts have begun to try Serbs for genocide and other war crimes, but
after blatant evidence of ethnic bias, the United Nations administration has
started to include judges from outside Kosovo in the system.

The European security organization, in a damning report released in October,
contended that such serious cases should be tried by international panels of
judges or a panel on which a majority of judges are from outside. Mr. Simic,
like most of the Serbs being tried for war crimes, has been in custody nearly a
year and a half awaiting trial, which raises serious concerns about human rights
violations and about the efficiency and competence of the United Nations-run
legal system in Kosovo.

Mr. Simic is accused of taking part in the killings of the 26 Albanian men, who
were forced out of their apartments, with their families, by masked gunmen on
April 14 of last year, at the height of the killings and expulsions of Kosovo
Albanians by Serbs in Kosovo.

The men were separated from the women and children and made to lie face down in
a line along an alley leading from the street. The families were then ordered to
leave and never saw the men again.

The men were killed shortly afterward and buried in a mass grave 10 miles away.
French investigators, through witnesses, traced the grave and found the bodies.
Some had been shot, some stabbed.

The investigators arrested six Serbian men, including a father and son and Mr.
Simic, all of whom lived in Popovic Street and were neighbors of the victims.
All six men were local and were still living in Mitrovica, in the northern,
Serbian-dominated side of the town.

Mr. Simic pleaded not guilty today. He testified that he had been aware of the
events that occurred, but did not take part, said a United Nations official who
attended the trial. The trial will continue on Wednesday, when the first
witness, a Kosovo Albanian, will be called. It is expected to continue into
January.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (94%);
EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

 (91%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (59%); ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY & COOPERATION IN EUROPE (55%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (91%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%); NORTH ATLANTIC
TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); ORGANIZATION FOR SECURITY & COOPERATION IN EUROPE
(55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA); MITROVICA (SERBIA);   SERBIA (99%); SERBIA
& MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (94%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES
(79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES
GENOCIDE (92%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); FAMILY (88%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (85%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); BOMBINGS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); GENDARMERIE (77%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (77%); ARRESTS (76%); MISSING PERSONS (72%); PRISONS (68%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA; SIMIC, IGOR  IGOR SIMIC (91%);

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Kosovo highlighting Mitrovica: One Serb appeared in a Mitrovica
court; five escaped from the U.N.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             743 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Car Bombing Kills 19 Civilians in Chechnya

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: VLADIKAVKAZ, Russia, Dec. 10


A car bomb exploded on Saturday near a mosque in a Chechen village, killing at
least 19 civilians, officials said, in one of the deadliest attacks in the
separatist Russian republic in weeks.

Russian officials called the bombing a terrorist act and blamed Chechen rebels.
A suspect was being questioned, said Lt. Col. Valery Baranov, a senior Russian
commander.

The bomb was planted in a car in Alkhan-Yurt, just south of the Chechen capital,
Grozny, said Igor Botnikov, an aide to the Kremlin's chief spokesman on the war,
Sergei Yastrzhembsky. Russian troops had examined the car for explosives and
found and defused one in the trunk. But there apparently was another bomb under
the hood that they did not find, and it exploded as residents gathered around to
look at the car, Mr. Botnikov said.

Colonel Baranov said 19 people had been killed and 21 wounded. Officials said no
Russian troops had been hurt.

Chechen rebels have carried out frequent attacks and bombings of Russian
checkpoints and Chechen civilian administrative buildings, but casualties have
usually been low and confined to Russian troops or pro-Moscow Chechen officials.
The attacks underline Russia's shaky hold on the region.

President Vladimir V. Putin, on a visit to the Ural region, said this week that
restoring Chechnya's economy remained a formidable task, but he insisted that
Russia was succeeding in restoring order to the republic.

Justice Minister Yuri Chaika and First Deputy Interior Minister Valery Fyodorov
met on Saturday with Lord Judd, who is leading a delegation of the parliamentary
assembly of the Council of Europe, to discuss the situation in Chechnya.

The council, the continent's leading human rights watchdog, has been one of the
most outspoken critics of the military offensive, and suspended Russia's voting
rights in protest. Lord Judd said the talks were frank and useful, but would not
say whether the rights would be restored soon.

Chechen rebels won de facto independence in a 1994-96 war. Russian forces rolled
back into Chechnya in September 1999 after rebels raided the neighboring Russian
region of Dagestan and after a series of apartment bombings in three Russian
cities that killed about 300 people.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); EUROPE (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA; CHECHNYA (RUSSIA);   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); EUROPE (79%);

   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; TERRORISM; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE
BOMBINGS (93%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); ARMED FORCES (90%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%);
JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (64%);



PERSON: VLADIMIR PUTIN (58%);

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             746 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Society's Compassion

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 163 words



To the Editor:

In "Concern Rising Over Use of Juvenile Prison to 'Warehouse' the Mentally Ill"
(news article, Dec. 5), we learn that we are increasingly cutting back on mental
health services to vulnerable children and dumping them in juvenile justice
facilities at enormous psychological cost to the children as well as to our
society in anticipated future criminal activity.

We often pride ourselves on being a society of compassion. Do we deserve to see
ourselves this way?

Our governing officials often lecture to the world on human rights abuses
abroad. Is not our grossly inappropriate incarceration of mentally troubled
children a human rights abuse?

It has been said that the humanity of a society can be measured by the way we
treat our most vulnerable citizens.

Can we not do better? If we don't, what will become of us?

BURT SHACHTER
Pomona, N.Y., Dec. 5, 2000

The writer is a retired professor of social work, New York University.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (90%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (71%);

COMPANY: NEW YORK UNIVERSITY (55%);

ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK UNIVERSITY (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (90%);   NEW YORK, USA (90%);   NEW
YORK, NY, USA (71%);

SUBJECT: PRISONS AND PRISONERS; MENTAL HEALTH AND DISORDERS; MENTAL RETARDATION

 VULNERABLE HEALTH POPULATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JUVENILE JUSTICE

 (90%); MENTAL ILLNESS (90%); PRISONS (90%); MENTAL HEALTH (88%); MENTAL
RETARDATION (88%); MENTAL HEALTH PRACTICE (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: SHACHTER, BURT

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             747 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 13, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Revisiting the World Criminal Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 344 words


Two years ago, representatives of virtually every country met in Rome to
complete work on the design of an International Criminal Court. The finished
document was endorsed by 120 nations. Only seven voted against it -- among them
Iraq, Libya, China and the United States. Now President Clinton has a last
chance to reverse this mistake and embrace the court.

The United States, which has been a strong proponent of international tribunals
for war crimes in the Balkans and Africa, balked at a permanent court that would
be able to judge those accused of genocide, crimes against humanity or war
crimes worldwide. Despite safeguards that would allow the court to take over
only if national governments were unable or unwilling to bring the accused to
justice, the Pentagon worries that the court could be used to try American
soldiers unjustly.

The Pentagon's objections are misplaced, as the court will have sufficient
safeguards to prevent frivolous prosecutions. But the Defense Department has
been vehement enough to keep the United States from endorsing a court that would
further American interests. As one of the nations most often asked to clean up
the messes created by troublemakers like Slobodan Milosevic and Saddam Hussein,
the United States would greatly benefit from the existence of a court that could
try such men and put them behind bars.

Mr. Clinton's signature now would not make the United States a party to the
treaty that created the court. That would require ratification by the Senate,
which would be desirable but is unlikely to happen soon. By signing, however,
Mr. Clinton would encourage eventual ratification, preserve American influence
in continuing discussions about the details of the court and maintain
Washington's global leadership in human rights and efforts to bring
international criminals to justice.

Mr. Clinton can sign until the end of the year. After that, countries must
simply ratify the treaty. His signature now would further American interests and
the cause of justice worldwide for decades to come.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (92%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (92%); IRAQ
(92%); AFRICA (79%);   LIBYA (92%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); CHINA (92%); LIBYAN ARAB JAMAHIRIYA (92%); IRAQ

 (92%); AFRICA (79%);   LIBYA (92%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; EDITORIALS; TREATIES; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT
AND DEFENSE  INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (92%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (91%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (86%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT
(76%); MILITARY WEAPONS (74%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (71%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  SADDAM HUSSEIN (57%);

LOAD-DATE: December 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             749 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Amnesty Sought in Nigerian Rights Inquiry

BYLINE: AFP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: LAGOS, Nigeria, Dec. 14


The chairman of a panel investigating human rights violations in Nigeria going
back to 1966 wants the power to grant an amnesty to witnesses, newspapers
reported today.

According to the reports, the chairman, Chukwudifu Oputa, a former supreme court
judge, told the Lagos State governor that without amnesty powers he had not been
able to bring forth admissions of guilt from witnesses before the panel, which
began hearings in October.

Justice Oputa said he had asked President Olusegun Obasanjo to consider
inserting an amnesty clause into the legislation setting up the panel. Without
it, he said, he has heard a series of accusations of human rights abuses by
different military governments, but few acknowledgments of guilt.

South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which investigated abuses
under apartheid, was more effective, Mr. Oputa told Gov. Bola Tinubu of Lagos
State, "because of the inclusion of an amnesty clause in the investigation
commission which made people open up."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NIGERIA (97%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%);

CITY: LAGOS, NIGERIA (90%);

COMPANY: RECONCILIATION COMMISSION (55%);

ORGANIZATION: RECONCILIATION COMMISSION (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NIGERIA (97%); SOUTH AFRICA (79%);   LAGOS, NIGERIA (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WITNESSES (90%); AMNESTY (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS
(87%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (87%); GOVERNORS (87%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (73%); SUPREME COURTS (71%); JUDGES (71%);   MILITARY RULE (73%);

PERSON: BOLA TINUBU (55%); OLUSEGUN OBASANJO (55%); CHUKWUDIFU OPUTA (55%);

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             750 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Needed: A World Criminal Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 173 words



To the Editor:

As a former staff sergeant in the United States Field Artillery, a member of
Congress and a presidential candidate, I understand well the burden of serving
our national interests. The call by Robert S. McNamara and Benjamin B. Ferencz
for President Clinton to sign the International Criminal Court treaty (Op-Ed,
Dec. 12) demonstrates the lifelong commitment of these distinguished men in that
effort as well.

Without the United States' signature on the Rome Statute before the Dec. 31
deadline, America's legacy for the protection of human rights will be
discredited. The United States' delegations to Rome in 1998 and since ensured
that the constitutional protections guaranteed to American service members are
part of the final statute.

The United States should join its military allies in signing and ratifying this
treaty to end the scourge of war crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

JOHN B. ANDERSON
President and Chief Executive
World Federalist Association
Washington, Dec. 12, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  EXECUTIVE WORLD FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION
(69%);   INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%); WORLD FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION  (56%); WORLD FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (84%); WORLD FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION  (56%); WORLD
FEDERALIST ASSOCIATION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; TREATIES; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS  INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); US PRESIDENTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (86%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (72%); GENOCIDE (71%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW
(71%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (71%); EXECUTIVES (71%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (65%);

PERSON: ANDERSON, JOHN B; MCNAMARA, ROBERT S; FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B  JOHN ANDERSON

 (76%); R JOHN ANDERSON (76%); BILL CLINTON (72%);

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             759 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

SOAPBOX;
A Cold Eye

BYLINE: By GERALD L. ZELIZER;  Gerald L. Zelizer is rabbi of Congregation Neve
Shalom in Metuchen.

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Page 13; Column 1; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 711 words


WHAT was I, a Conservative rabbi, doing in common cause with those with whom I
had clashed on many religious, moral and ethical issues -- with the Catholic
bishops of New Jersey on the matter of abortion; with the Green Party over their
torpedoing of the candidacy of Joseph I. Lieberman; with Amnesty International,
which too often employs a disproportionately large microscope to human rights
violations of Israel against the Palestinians; and with Ethical Culture on the
whole necessity of God as grounding for a moral and ethical life?

The issue that brought us unlikes to the State Legislature and to the governor's
office later in the day was Bill A-1853, which has been languishing in the
Judiciary Committee for over a year. No public hearing has been scheduled to
debate its merits, let alone post it for an Assembly vote. The bill, sponsored
by Assemblyman Alfred E. Steele, a Democrat from Paterson, calls for a two-year
moratorium on state executions, while their cost and effectiveness, including
the alternative of life imprisonment without possibility of parole, are studied.

The agenda setters for the legislature understandably resist furthering it when
so many of New Jersey's voters endorse the death penalty. We were at the State
House to persuade our legislators that the mood of New Jerseyans on the death
penalty is changing and it is time to bring Bill A-1853 to the forefront.

A recent Quinnipiac University Poll of 1,004 New Jersey voters found that they
favor capital punishment by 69 to 29 percent. But when the question was changed
to ask about the penalty for murder being "life imprisonment with absolutely no
chance of parole," 44 percent favor the death penalty while 43 percent favor
life without parole, with 13 percent undecided. By a margin of 70 percent to 25
percent margin, the state's voters say a poor person is more likely than someone
with more income to face the death penalty for the same crime. By a margin of 58
percent to 38 percent, they believe that a black person is more likely to face
the death penalty than a white person. And the most telling finding of all is
that 92 percent believe that in the last 20 years in the United States innocent
people have been executed.

Aside from the practical hesitancy about executing an innocent person, a
majority of those who oppose capital punishment express religious or moral
objections to the state taking another person's life.

Those who remain in the execution corner cite the perennial reasons of
retribution and deterrent. But as popular psychology has overtaken law and order
as a motivator, an additional rationale for the death penalty has trumped the
vintage ones. "Are not the victim and his or her survivors as precious as the
perpetrator and that family?" we hear. "Closure from their mental anguish comes
when the survivors know that the murderer has been executed."

Speaking to the matter of closure at the legislative rally were June and Lorry
Post of Cape May, whose daughter, Lisa, was stabbed to death by her husband 12
years ago as she was about to leave the marriage and take their little girl with
her. Lorry Post acknowledged that "there is still a strong hatred." But he
resents those who exploit his anger as a father of a victim to argue for the
death penalty, especially by contending that executing murderers brings
"closure" to the surviving family.

"We know the agony of those who have suffered as we have and who feel they need
this second killing in order to get on with their lives. However, there is
nothing the state can do to relieve our pain." Real closure, victims say, comes
with the knowledge that the killer has been imprisoned without chance of parole
and thus prevented from doing more harm, while leaving a window to reverse
incarceration in the event that new evidence like DNA establishes innocence.

And that was why I placed the resolution of the 1,400 Conservative rabbis
worldwide calling for an end to state killing alongside 100 others
organizations.

Legislators, the public mood is changing, A chance to debate Bill 1853 in public
hearing, and eventually post it for a vote, is not only good democracy, but good
politics. Now is the time to bring the bill down from the legislative attic.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); ISRAEL
(90%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (95%);

COMPANY: STATE HOUSE PRESS (55%);   AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (58%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL (58%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (58%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW JERSEY;   UNITED STATES (95%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); ISRAEL (90%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (95%);

SUBJECT: CAPITAL PUNISHMENT; LAW AND LEGISLATION  ETHICS (91%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); RELIGION (89%); JAIL
SENTENCING (87%); POLITICS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%);
LEGISLATION (74%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (73%); SENTENCING (72%); CAPITAL CRIMES
(72%); GOVERNORS (72%); PAROLE (71%); PSYCHOLOGY (60%);

PERSON: ZELIZER, GERALD L (RABBI); STEELE, ALFRED (ASSEMBLYMAN)  JOE LIEBERMAN
(58%);

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo (United Press International)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             760 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Allende's Daughter Sees a Circle Closing

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 780 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Jan. 21


When Congresswoman Isabel Allende, the youngest daughter of the late President
Salvador Allende Gossens, turned 55 on Tuesday, she celebrated by dancing at a
disco.

But for her, the night on the town had more to do with "this bright wonderful
moment of opportunity for Chile," rather than celebrating the beginning of one
more year of her own life.

"Ricardo Lagos's election was the best birthday present I could possibly have
received," she said of the election results on Sunday that bring the first
Socialist to power since her father died in a violent military coup in 1973. "We
have come full circle."

Sitting in the living room of the modest house where she grew up, one that is
decorated with photographs of her parents and prints and pottery that Dr.
Allende brought home from his trips, Ms. Allende expressed sublime optimism and
vindication. She said all those positive bubbling feelings were in no way
subdued by another historic event that could occur any day -- the return of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet after his 15 months under house arrest in Britain.

Home Secretary Jack Straw is expected in a few days to end an extradition
process that would have sent General Pinochet to stand trial for human rights
violations in Spain. Mr. Straw announced this month that a team of doctors had
found that the former dictator was too ill to stand trial.

As Ms. Allende sees it, General Pinochet's long absence freed Chile from many of
its unresolved conflicts of the past. With the former dictator gone, she noted,
56 retired military and police officials, including five generals, have been
arrested for human rights violations in the last year, and right-wing
politicians have begun to distance themselves from the man whom they used to
praise and salute.

She predicted that the reaction to General Pinochet's return would be subdued
and that in several months Chileans would finally have the possibility to demand
that the general face justice here.

"He returns alone, humbled, morally condemned and to a country that has changed
-- one in which even the presidential candidate of the right said he could be
tried here," Ms. Allende said. But she added a caution, saying, "If he doesn't
face justice, it will show we do not yet have a full democracy in Chile, and the
transition is still incomplete."

In Chile, physical illness does not exempt a defendant from a trial, although
insanity or dementia does.

A decorous woman with an easy smile and a taste for simple clothes and pearl
earrings, Ms. Allende repeatedly referred to General Pinochet as "he" rather say
his name. But when she talks about her father, her eyes brighten and she says,
"When I was a girl, people always said I looked like him."

For Ms. Allende, this moment has been a long time coming. She recalled seeing
her father for the last time as tanks began moving against the government and
Dr. Allende foresaw the coming air force bombing of La Moneda presidential
palace. Her father pleaded three times with her and her sister Beatriz, who was
seven months pregnant, before they agreed to leave him where he died in the
attack. "We knew the danger but we didn't want to abandon the ship," Ms. Allende
recounted. "But he was right. He wanted us to survive to be witnesses, to
denounce and to continue the cause."

She spent most of her not-easy exile in Mexico. An aunt who had cancer committed
suicide in Cuba after General Pinochet would not let her return to Chile to die.
Her sister also committed suicide in Cuba, after a deep depression.

But Isabel Allende and her mother, Hortensia Bussi de Allende, now 85, returned
in 1988, shortly before Chileans voted in a plebiscite to deny General Pinochet
eight additional years in power. Today, Ms. Allende is a congresswoman, one of
21 members on the Socialist Party Executive Committee.

On Sunday night, as it became clear that Mr. Lagos would win, Ms. Allende went
to Constitution Plaza in front of La Moneda to celebrate with thousands of
Socialist and Christian Democratic followers who supported Mr. Lagos's effort.
She said she felt a special gratitude to Mr. Lagos, because he acknowledged her
mother as "Chile's example of dignity."

"When I saw the people dancing in their happiness," she said, "it reminded me of
Sept. 4, 1970, the night of Salvador Allende's victory. Many people came up to
me and said of my father: 'He's with us now. He helped us win.' "

But like other Socialist Party leaders, she acknowledged that Mr. Lagos's
government would look quite different. "The historical context," Ms. Allende
said, "is totally different from that of 1970, when we lived in a bipolar world
in the middle of the cold war."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); SPAIN (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN;   CHILE (96%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%); SPAIN
(79%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%);

SUBJECT: ELECTIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); POLITICS
(89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS

 (78%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (76%); ARMED FORCES
(75%); EXTRADITION (72%); ARRESTS (71%); DISEASES & DISORDERS (70%); COUPS
(70%); HOUSE ARREST (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (65%); DEMENTIA (60%); POLICE
FORCES (50%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%); MILITARY RULE (75%);
MARTIAL LAW (75%);

PERSON: ALLENDE, ISABEL; ALLENDE, SALVADOR (1908-73); LAGOS, RICARDO; KRAUSS,
CLIFFORD; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN)  JACK STRAW (50%);

NAME: Isabel Allende

LOAD-DATE: January 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Isabel Allende, a daughter of the slain president, predicts a
subdued reaction to General Pinochet's return. (Helen Hughes for The New York
Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             768 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

REFLECTIONS: GERMANY;
'The United States of Africa -- It May Yet Come.'

BYLINE: By Edmund L. Andrews

SECTION: Section E; Page 42; Column 3; The Millennium

LENGTH: 782 words


Fritz Israel and Bernd Matzner were witnesses to two of this century's most
transforming events. Mr. Israel, 74, fought as a German soldier during World War
II and grew up with the horror of Hitler and the Holocaust. Mr. Matzner, 27,
grew up under communism in East Germany and watched in amazement when the Berlin
Wall fell without bloodshed.

Mr. Israel, despite his name, is not a Jew. He was wounded on D-Day and spent
two years as a prisoner of war in a British hospital. After the war, he started
a printing business in Konigstein, near Frankfurt, where he prospered and
recently retired.

Mr. Matzner grew up in a gritty industrial city called Karl Marx Stadt, which
was renamed Chemnitz after the fall of the Berlin Wall. Today, he is a Web-page
designer and co-founder of an advertising agency in Berlin.   EDMUND L. ANDREWS

FRITZ ISRAEL

It was assumed that every young person would be a member of Hitler Youth. The
Hitler Youth naturally had a political side, but it also had another side of
bringing young people together in sport and in play. The political tendencies
were there but at that time we had not suffered from those.

Our first encounter with that was really on the night of the pogrom,
Kristallnacht. I was 13 at the time. It all seemed incomprehensible. I remember
there was a vegetable salesman, a Jew, who would come through our neighborhood.
Everybody liked him. When the persecution of the Jews began, he tried to protect
himself by wearing an Iron Cross from the First World War on his chest. But then
he disappeared.

The persecution of Jews was known. There had been some talk about concentration
camps and the Holocaust. It was known, at least to some extent. But most people
acknowledged it with just a shake of their heads. No one could oppose anything
without endangering himself.

I first learned about the magnitude of the concentration camps when I was in the
hospital, watching English news films. At first we couldn't believe that it was
true. But it slowly became clear that it was.

I got the chance to speak a little English with the doctors and nurses, and we
all asked each other the same thing: What have you done to me?

But we could see that we were individuals and that the conflict wasn't between
us but rather at this level far above us. The most decisive thing was that we
rediscovered a sense of human rights. If you said to me, "You Nazi pig," we had
the possibility of at least talking. You could learn that I was just born there
and that I couldn't do anything about it.

No one should ever forget what happened or deny what happened. But I do hope for
the day when Germany can be treated the same as other countries and not be
treated as a second-class nation.

BERND MATZNER

I went to a high school that was mainly for youth heading on to the university
or to the leadership ranks.  As a result, it was a school that stayed very close
to the party line and demanded a strong identification with the system. It was
essentially a "red school."

Once a year, our class would be taken to see a movie and we would always have a
discussion about its meaning afterward. We all viewed this as a bit of theater:
we knew what questions they would ask and what answers had to be given. And we
did give them.

But in 1989 we saw a Russian movie called "The Dragon" based on a tale about a
dragon that occupied a city like a dictator. The whole city was run by a
"nomenklatura," and it was obvious that the film reflected the impact of
glasnost.

This time, there was no discussion after this film -- and they never showed it
again. For me, that was a signal. They were suddenly afraid that the criticism
of their own system would be too obvious.

The first time I went to a demonstration supporting political changes in East
Germany, it was very quiet. In my hometown there was a large statue of Karl Marx
in the city center and people simply lit candles, without saying anything, and
put them in front of the statue. One realized suddenly that this complete
stillness was much more powerful than the system.

It was very emotional. You could tell that something had happened, but the
uncertainty was great. Scenarios with tanks rolling forward like in Prague or
Beijing came to our minds. But for some reason we didn't have the feeling that
would happen. The system that had been so strong suddenly seemed defenseless.

The worrying afterthought is that when people rallied for a fast reunification
they strove to re-create a state of complacency that does not require
participation. The pursuit of individual prosperity is well and good. But people
shouldn't forget about their responsibility for the community.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: GERMANY (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%);

STATE: FRANKFURT AM MAIN, GERMANY (79%);

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GERMANY (94%); UNITED STATES (92%); EUROPE (79%);   FRANKFURT AM
MAIN, GERMANY (79%);   BERLIN, GERMANY (94%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WORLD WAR II (91%); CHRONOLOGIES
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM (89%); GENOCIDE (89%); HOLOCAUST
(89%); WORLD WAR I (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (75%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (71%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (71%); NURSES & NURSING (70%); MARKETING &
ADVERTISING (54%);   POWS & MIAS (73%);

PERSON: BERND MATZNER (76%); FRITZ ISRAEL (74%);

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Fritz Israel at home in Konigstein, where he recently retired.
(Harald H. Schroder for The New York Times); Bernd Matzner near the offices of
his ad agency in Berlin. (Mark Simon/Black Star for The New York Times)

Chronology: 1919: Treaty of Versailles strips Germany of its colonies, some
European territory and requires $33 billion in war reparations.

 1932: The Nazi Party rises in elections. A year later, its leader, Adolf
Hitler, is appointed chancellor.

 1939: Germany invades Poland, setting off World War II. Nazi genocide kills six
million European Jews and millions of others.

 1945: Allied forces defeat Germany and divide the country into four occupation
zones.

 1949: East and West Germany are established. Three years later, East Germany
closes its border.

 1961: East Germany erects the Berlin Wall to stanch the flow of refugees.

 1989: The Berlin Wall falls; East and West Germany are reunited in 1990.

TYPE: Chronology

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             779 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1177 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-8

Russia Issues Statement On Nuclear Weapons
The Kremlin issued a national security strategy that inveighs against an
expansionist Europe and United States and contemplates the use of nuclear
weapons in war "if all other means of resolving the crisis have been exhausted."

   A1

South Korea's Space Program
South Korea plans to develop a rocket capable of ferrying satellites into orbit
within the next five years. United States officials have reservations about
South Korea's ambitions, fearing that the rocket technology could be exported to
countries that might use it for military applications.   A3


Security Concerns in Panama
Panama authorities, bowing to renewed concerns about terrorist attacks, said
that they were beefing up security to protect a British ship carrying
radioactive cargo through the canal this weekend. Environmental groups fear that
the ship, carrying high-level waste from France to Japan, is vulnerable to
terrorists.   A8

5 Convicted of War Crimes
The international war crimes tribunal in The Hague convicted five Bosnian Croat
militiamen of taking part in the massacre of more than 100 Muslims in a Bosnian
village in April 1993.   A4

New Pinochet Tests Sought
Baltasar Garzon, left, the Spanish judge behind efforts to try Gen. Augusto
Pinochet for human rights abuses, asked Britain for a second medical examination
of the former Chilean dictator to determine if earlier tests erred in ruling him
unfit to stand trial.   A8

U.N. Stalls Over Arms Inspector
United Nations Security Council differences hardened over whom to appoint as the
new chief arms inspector for Iraq. The council was so deadlocked that some
officials said a new list of nominees might be needed.   A8

Mothers March in Havana
Tens of thousands of Cuban mothers marched to demand the repatriation of Elian
Gonzalez, the 6-year-old boy now separated from his father by the same sea that
took his mother's life.   A8

World Briefing   A8

NATIONAL   A10-15, 18

Supreme Court to Hear Nebraska Abortion Case
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether a Nebraska law banning a procedure
the state calls "partial birth abortion" is constitutional. The court's
election-year ruling could have a substantial impact on the politics of
abortion.   A1

Bradley Attacks Gore
Former Senator Bill Bradley sharpened his efforts to portray Vice President Al
Gore as a "nibble around the edges" politician. In a speech before several
hundred people in a high school auditorium in Johnston, Iowa, Mr. Bradley said
Mr. Gore was too willing "to settle" for small solutions to big problems.   A13

Campaigns Split Scholars
Cornel West, left, a professor at Harvard, has allied himself with Bill Bradley,
in a campaign season that has seen Harvard's top black scholars split on the
Democratic candidates.   A10

Inquiry on Primaries
The Justice Department, alerted to the closing of polling places in black
neighborhoods during South Carolina's last Republican presidential primary, has
begun asking pointed questions about both parties' coming primaries. The inquiry
raises the possibility that the primaries could be challenged by the government
under the Voting Rights Act.   A13

G.O.P. Appeals to Hispanics
Republican leaders unveiled a television commercial that they say will help
court Hispanic voters, whose rapidly growing population makes them a political
force that could swing the largest states in the 2000 presidential election.
A12

Airline Safety Plan Unveiled
President Clinton announced a program to encourage airline pilots to report
their own rule violations, in exchange for immunity from penalty, to make it
easier for the government, the airlines and the pilot unions to detect trends
that could hurt safety.   A14

Religion Journal   A15

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

Surge of Deaths Seen In Start of 2000
People in New York City died at a remarkably higher rate during the first seven
days of 2000 as compared with the same period in 1999, and they may be
emblematic of the nation as a whole. Many researchers have long believed that
people are able to postpone their deaths when they face a major event like a
family wedding, and perhaps the suspense of seeing whether computers would
malfunction proved just too alluring, given the alternative of a funeral.   A1

8 States Spared Health Cuts
Hospitals in New York and seven other states will be spared cuts in Medicare
payments under a decision announced by the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, Donna E. Shalala.   B2

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SPORTS   D1-8

ARTS & IDEAS   B9-24

SCIENCE/HEALTH

Hands and Arms Transplanted
A team of surgeons performed the world's first double hand-and-forearm
transplant on Thursday in Lyon, France, on a Frenchman who lost his hands in an
accident. The immediate surgical results appear excellent, a member of the
transplant team said.   A6

Breast Cancer Findings
Women under 45 who have lumpectomies for an early form of breast cancer are more
likely than older women to have the disease return, and that may be in part
because surgeons are not removing enough breast tissue, researchers are
reporting today. The findings apply only to women with ductal carcinoma in situ,
a very early form of breast cancer that is still confined within the milk ducts.

   A14

OBITUARIES   B7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-14

Shift in Trading Trend
Investing in the stock market for the long term, the strategy that has made the
most sense and the most money for people over the years, is all but dead. The
consequences are large: Studies show that investors who trade frequently get
lower returns and heavy trading contributes to wide swings in the market.   A1

SmithKline-Glaxo Merger Ahead
Two British pharmaceutical giants, SmithKline Beechham P.L.C. and Glaxo Wellcome
P.L.C., are near a merger deal that would create the world's largest drug maker,
said executives close to the talks.   C1

Wal-Mart to Get New C.E.O.
David D. Glass, who expanded Wal-Mart Stores into a worldwide powerhouse during
his tenure as chief executive and president, announced that he would step down.
Chief operating officer H. Lee Scott will succeed him.   C1

Stock Markets Soar
Stocks rose sharply, bolstered by comments from Alan Greenspan indicating
interest rates will be rising only slightly. The Dow soared 140.55 points, or
1.21 percent, to a closing record of 11,722.98. The Nasdaq jumped 107.06 points,
or 2.71 percent, to 4,064.27, and the S.& P. 500 increased 15.47 points, or 1.07
percent, to 1,465.15.   C3

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A16-17

Editorials: Suing on nature's behalf; the Pinochet case; gay troops in Europe;
the cozy world of judges and lawyers.

Columns: Frank Rich, Anthony Lewis.

Bridge   B23

TV Listings   B24

Crossword   B21

Weather   B22


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: A (AMEX) (81%);

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(94%); PANAMA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (79%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); IRAQ (79%); CROATIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); CHILE (79%);   CUBA
(78%);

STATE: NEBRASKA, USA (92%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);   HAVANA, CUBA (78%);

COMPANY: MORGAN STANLEY COUNTRY INDEX (JAPAN) (81%);   UNITED NATIONS  (54%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%);
UNITED NATIONS (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
(94%); PANAMA (92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (79%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); IRAQ (79%); CROATIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); CHILE (79%);   CUBA
(78%);   NEBRASKA, USA (92%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);   HAVANA, CUBA
(78%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  MILITARY WEAPONS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%);
NUCLEAR WEAPONS (91%); TERRORISM (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); NEWS BRIEFS
(90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (87%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(87%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (86%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (79%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (78%); MISSILE SYSTEMS (78%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (78%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); JUSTICE
DEPARTMENTS (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); APPOINTMENTS (73%);
HAZARDOUS WASTE (73%); ENVIRONMENTAL & WILDLIFE ORGANIZATIONS (73%); HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS TRANSPORT (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (70%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (69%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%);
JUDGES (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); ABORTION (66%); POLITICS (65%); RELIGION
(52%);

PERSON: AL GORE (77%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             780 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 18, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1496 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-11

Israel-Syria Peace Talks Are Put on Indefinite Hold
The Clinton administration said the resumption of the Israeli-Syrian peace talks
had been postponed indefinitely, after Syria demanded that its major negotiating
point -- Israel's withdrawal from the Golan Heights -- be settled immediately.
Both sides will send experts to Washington to provide comments on the draft
treaty that has been written by the United States.   A1

Dispute Over Arms Inspector
Secretary General Kofi Annan called back the Swedish arms control expert Rolf
Ekeus, left, who uncovered and destroyed large quantities of Iraqi weapons after
the gulf war of 1991, to lead a new United Nations commission created to finish
the job more than a year after monitoring broke down. But Russia formally
objected, putting the appointment in doubt.   A1


Jailed Kurdish Rebel Seeks Role
Abdullah Ocalan, assured for the moment that he will not be hanged, wants to
take part in the incipient national dialogue in Turkey about how the country
should deal with its Kurdish minority. But Turkey's prime minister ruled out a
role for Mr. Ocalan.   A10

New Offensive in Chechnya
Russian warplanes and artillery bombarded Grozny in a new offensive that Russian
commanders hoped would bring their siege of the breakaway republic's capital to
a decisive end. Benefiting from clear skies, Russian aircraft carried out a
record number of attacks on Grozny, according to Russian press reports.   A1

Mayor to Miss Holocaust Event
Mayor Eberhard Diepgen of Berlin has decided not to attend a ceremony paving the
way for a large Holocaust memorial in the German capital, a project he has long
opposed. The ceremony, to be attended by Chancellor Gerhard Schroder, President
Johannes Rau and Elie Wiesel, is intended to put to rest a decade of tumultuous
debate over the memorial.   A3

Pinochet Re-examination Asked
Spain sent Britain a petition seeking a second medical examination of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet to determine if earlier tests wrongly declared him unfit to
stand trial for human rights abuses.   A3

China Anoints 'Living Buddha'
Chinese authorities presided over the enthronement of a 2-year-old boy as an
important "living Buddha" in the Tibetan religion, the official New China News
Agency reported. The government-in-exile of the Dalai Lama, Tibet's spiritual
leader, said it would not approve the choice.   A4

Report on Hunger and Weight
A study of global trends said the number of overweight people in the world now
rivals the number of hungry, underfed people. The report says the two extremes
are increasingly found in all societies, poor as well as rich, although in
differing proportions.   A10

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-21

Gore and Bradley Tangle on Racial Profiling
Bill Bradley challenged Vice President Al Gore to press President Clinton to
issue an executive order banning racial profiling. In the debate in Des Moines a
week before the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Gore fired back with a forceful defense of
the president.   A20

Mr. Gore appeared with Coretta Scott King at a Martin Luther King Day ceremony
in Atlanta.   A20

Rally Against Rebel Flag
Tens of thousands of people marched in Columbia, S.C., to demand that the
Confederate flag that flies over the Statehouse be removed from public life.
Officials said the racially diverse marchers numbered 46,000, far surpassing the
6,000 white supporters of the flag who gathered there a week ago to praise it as
a symbol of Southern heritage. The march against the flag took place on the day
that celebrates the birth of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. -- though not
in South Carolina, which has no official commemoration.   A14

Effort to Enforce Gun Laws
The White House will ask Congress for $280 million in new spending to enforce
existing gun-control laws, a strategy intended to address one of the main
complaints of those who oppose gun restrictions, administration officials said.
   A18

Doubts About Security Study
The Transportation Department is rethinking a plan to study whether an airport
security measure discriminates against members of minorities. The Arab American
Institute had complained that the study -- which includes asking passengers
about their religion and ethnic background -- was worse than the problem it was
supposed to detect.   A14

EDUCATION

Revival of Western Classics
The classics, whose relevance has long been dismissed by critics who complain
that they celebrate the works of a cadre of writers who are almost exclusively
white, male and dead, seem to be making a comeback at a number of institutions.
   A1

ARTS   E1-12

Bertelsmann History Revised
A panel appointed by the German media conglomerate to review company history
during the Nazi era issued preliminary findings that the publisher was closed in
1944 because its books -- largely fiction for German troops -- were not
considered critically "important for the war" effort. The company had offered
the view that the closing was the result of political opposition to Hitler.   E1


A Large-Scale Art Donation
Peter and Eileen Norton said they were donating nearly 1,000 works by more than
450 artists to 29 institutions. Most of the works are from the 1990's, and Mr.
Norton, the software entrepreneur, estimated their value at $3 million. Still,
in sheer numbers, the gift is one of the largest of contemporary art by a
private donor.   E1

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-6

State G.O.P. Challenging McCain on Primary Ballot
The New York Republican State Committee, which is supporting Gov. George W. Bush
in the presidential race, said it would seek to disqualify Senator John McCain,
above, from the primary ballot today in about half the state. Party officials
said his campaign had not met arduous petition requirements. Mr. McCain, who has
sued in federal court to overturn the New York system, suggested that the state
party was trying to rig the March 7 primary.   A1

The Senate Race on King's Day
Hillary Rodham Clinton attended several holiday celebrations, tying the legacy
of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. to her own ambitions and denouncing what
she said was the racial divide of Mayor Giuliani's tenure. She also held her
first meeting with the Rev. Al Sharpton. Mr. Giuliani attended smaller events
organized by black supporters.   B1

Fugitive Seized at Border
Jaquan Muhammad, who is believed to have eluded the police in Midtown last
Tuesday by leaping from one high-rise to another, was returned to the city after
being stopped at the Canadian border. He was charged with second-degree murder
in a Brooklyn killing and is a suspect in several knifepoint robberies.   B3

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Doctors' New Interests
Thousands of doctors in New York and across the country are turning to cosmetic
medicine to keep their practices lucrative.   A1

Hope for Preventing Cancer
Scientists at the National Cancer Institute say an aspirin-like drug, a
selective cox-2 inhibitor, may be able to block cancers from forming.   F1

On Competence and Confidence
Cornell researchers said they had found that most incompetent people do not know
they are incompetent -- and are more confident than people who do handle things
well.   F7

Camera Helps Blind Man 'See'
A tiny camera wired to the brain has given a blind man a limited ability to
perceive objects.   F3

Health & Fitness   F7

BUSINESS DAY   C1-20

Turnaround at Motorola
The electronics giant, which a year ago was laying off thousands of workers and
trying to reorganize operations after huge losses, reported a profit of 82 cents
a share, or a penny better than Wall Street forecasts.   C1

G.M.'s Alliance Strategy
The automaker's chairman said G.M. would rely more on partnerships and would
better be described as "the General Motors group."   C1

Pharmaceutical Merger
Glaxo Wellcome, maker of the anti-ulcer medication Zantac, formally announced
that it would acquire SmithKline Beecham for $76 billion in stock. If regulators
approve, the new company would be the world's largest drug maker.   C1

Business Digest   C1

SPORTS   D1-8

OBITUARIES   B7

Robert R. Wilson
A physicist who was one of the most important figures in the development of
particle accelerators, which smash particles together at high energy for the
study of their interactions and composition, he was 85.   B7

FASHION   B8

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Television's risky relationship; the debilitated Russian military;
gift games in Albany; China arrests a scholar.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E10

TV Listings   E11

Public Lives   B2

Weather   C18



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA
(94%); CHINA (92%); TURKEY (92%); TIBET (91%); GERMANY (79%); SPAIN (79%); IRAQ
(79%);

STATE: SOUTHWEST CHINA (72%); XIZANG, CHINA (72%);

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SYRIA
(94%); CHINA (92%); TURKEY (92%); TIBET (91%); GERMANY (79%); SPAIN (79%); IRAQ
(79%);   SOUTHWEST CHINA (72%); XIZANG, CHINA (72%);   BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  PEACE PROCESS (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(91%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); GENOCIDE (88%); GLOBALIZATION
(79%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (78%); ARMS CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (78%); EXECUTIVE
ORDERS (77%); TRENDS (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); MILITARY WEAPONS
(75%); DESERT STORM (75%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); WEAPONS
INSPECTIONS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); RACE & RACISM (72%);
RACIAL PROFILING (72%); PRIME MINISTERS (71%); HOLOCAUST (69%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (68%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (66%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (63%); RELIGION
(60%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (50%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (78%); AL GORE (58%); DALAI LAMA (50%); GERHARD SCHRODER
(50%);

LOAD-DATE: January 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             783 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 21, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 961 words



EUROPE

RUSSIA: MIR REPRIEVE
The space station Mir got a reprieve when the government came up with more money
to keep it in orbit for another seven months. Private investors, some from the
United States, are expected to provide $28 million for the station. A crew is
expected to arrive in April for a mission of 45 to 72 days, said Yuri Koptev,
head of the space agency. Mir, in its 14th year, has been empty since August,
and was due to crash into the Pacific.   Celestine Bohlen (NYT)

POLAND: 9 RUSSIANS OUSTED AS SPIES
Poland ordered nine Russian diplomats out of the country for spying, a blow to
the countries' already uneasy relations. Moscow called the expulsions an
"explicitly unfriendly and provocative action" and warned that "appropriate
response measures become inevitable."   (Reuters)


ITALY: POPE TO SINAI
The Vatican confirmed that John Paul II will visit a monastery at the foot of
the traditional Mt. Sinai on a trip to Egypt lasting from Feb. 24 to 26, a month
before a major pilgrimage to the Holy Land. The Pope, 79, who plans to visit
Israel, Jordan and Palestinian territories in March, had hoped to begin his tour
of biblical sites at the Iraqi city of Ur, but the Iraqis squelched the plan.
Alessandra Stanley (NYT)

SWEDEN: ADMITTING MISTAKES
Prime Minister Goran Persson has taken the first step toward rewriting Swedish
history by admitting his country acted wrongly in World War II, historians and
Swedish Jews said. Mr. Persson broke 60 years of tradition by ending a defense
of neutral Sweden, which, it has emerged, sold iron ore to Germany for munitions
and let German troops cross its territory into Finland and Norway. Mr. Persson
will open a Holocaust conference next week.   (Reuters)

GERMANY: PLEA ON NAZI KILLINGS
Germany asked the Greek Supreme Court to dismiss a lower court ruling that it
owes $30 million to survivors of 218 people who were killed by Nazis in the
village of Distomo on June 10, 1944. Germany says the issue of reparations was
closed with a 1960 compensation treaty with Greece. A ruling is expected in
mid-February.   Victor Homola (NYT)

BRITAIN: QUESTIONS ON DEPORTEE
Lord Janner, chairman of the Holocaust Educational Trust, challenged the
government to explain how Alexander Schweidler, 78, is living freely and drawing
a pension in Britain since being deported by the United States in 1994 after
admitting he had been a Nazi concentration camp guard. A naturalized Briton of
Slovak origin, he was at the Mauthausen camp in Austria.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

TURKEY: POLICE SENTENCES UPHELD
A court upheld the seven-and-a-half year jail terms imposed on five police
officers convicted of beating Metin Goktepe, a journalist, to death in 1996.
Human rights advocates say the case is a test of whether Turkish officers who
commit such crimes still receive their traditional immunity from prosecution.
Stephen Kinzer (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

MEXICO: BODY HUNT HALTED
A joint search with American forensic experts for the bodies of people executed
on the orders of drug traffickers has been called off. The excavations, in
Chihuahua state near El Paso, Texas, unearthed nine bodies. More than 100 have
disappeared. A top prosecutor said Mexico would continue to investigate without
American help.   Sam Dillon (NYT)

ASIA

SRI LANKA: PEACE PLAN
The main opposition party said it would support a plan by the government of
President Chandrika Kumaratunga to bring peace to the country by giving greater
constitutional autonomy to regions dominated by the Tamil minority. The
opposition had blocked legislative passage of the measure, but now offers its
votes if some of its own reform proposals are included.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

SOUTH KOREA: A MOVE TOWARD TALKS WITH NORTH
President Kim Dae Jung said he would formally propose a summit meeting with
North Korea if his newly inaugurated governing party wins parliamentary
elections on April 13. Since taking office nearly two years ago, Mr. Kim has
often expressed a willingness to meet the North Korean leader, Kim Jong Il, but
he has never before proposed a summit meeting.   (AP)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: ANNAN ATTACKED
Stepping up a barrage of verbal attacks on Secretary General Kofi Annan for
nominating a new arms inspector that President Saddam Hussein does not like,
officials quoted in the controlled Iraqi press accused Mr. Annan of being in
league with Washington to impose a system "riddled with spies and false
experts." Mr. Annan named Rolf Ekeus, who dismantled many Iraqi arms from 1991
to 1997, as the head of a new commission, but he is being blocked by Russia,
France and China.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

IRAN: GERMAN FREE TO LEAVE
A German businessman who was sentenced to death in January 1998 for having sex
with an Iranian woman has been ruled free to leave the country. Helmut Hofer,
56, said he would leave today. Under Iranian law, sex outside marriage with
non-Muslims is punishable by death. Germany is a big trading partner of Iran and
had warned that executing Mr. Hofer would severely harm relations.   Victor
Homola (NYT)

AFRICA

SUDAN: PIPELINE REPAIRED
Officials have repaired a new 1,000-mile oil pipeline that had been damaged in a
bomb attack. The Beja Congress, representing a minority ethnic group, claimed
responsibility for the attack, the third since Sudan, locked in a 16-year civil
war, began pumping oil this summer.   Ian Fisher (NYT)

GUINEA-BISSAU: CONCEDES IN VOTE
Malam Bacai Sanha, ruling party candidate in a presidential election, conceded
defeat to Kumba Yala, head of the Party for Social Renewal, after a second-round
runoff on Sunday.   (Agence France-Presse)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (93%); EUROPE
(92%); POLAND (92%); SWEDEN (92%); IRAQ (91%); HOLY SEE (79%); EGYPT (79%);
GREECE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); JORDAN (79%);

 FINLAND (79%); TURKEY (79%); SLOVAKIA (79%); NORWAY (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (59%); AUSTRIA (54%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (93%); EUROPE

 (92%); POLAND (92%); SWEDEN (92%); IRAQ (91%); HOLY SEE (79%); EGYPT (79%);
GREECE (79%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%); JORDAN (79%);

 FINLAND (79%); TURKEY (79%); SLOVAKIA (79%); NORWAY (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); CENTRAL EUROPE (59%); AUSTRIA (54%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (90%); SPACE
STATIONS (90%); HOLOCAUST (89%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (86%); GENOCIDE (86%);
SPACECRAFT (78%); SPACE EXPLORATION (78%); DEPORTATION (74%); SPACE &
AERONAUTICS AGENCIES (73%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (73%); SPACE INDUSTRY
(73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); RELIGION (73%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (73%);
HISTORY (72%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (71%); JEWS & JUDAISM (71%); DIPLOMATIC
SERVICES (70%); WORLD WAR II (69%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (69%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (69%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (67%); SENTENCING (67%);
LITIGATION (67%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (67%); SUPREME COURTS (62%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS (50%);

PERSON: TZIPORA LIVNI (55%);

LOAD-DATE: January 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             791 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 26, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Turkish Terror Victim Espoused a Tolerant Islam

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 770 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 25


With Turkey in shock over the discovery of dozens of savagely tortured bodies
beneath the hide-outs of a religious terror group, much of the outrage and grief
has been focused on the case of the only female victim.

The woman, Konca Kuris, was often described as a Muslim feminist. In books,
articles, lectures and television appearances, she had described Islam as a
religion that guarantees women's rights, and asserted that male commentators
over the centuries had twisted its essence in ways that led to the oppression of
women.

In July 1998, Ms. Kuris was kidnapped from the street in front of her home in
the Mediterranean city of Mersin. There were no clues to her fate until her
burned and disfigured body was exhumed on Saturday from a shallow grave in
Konya, 220 miles northwest of Mersin.

Her body was one of 33 that have been found so far at properties used by
Hizbullah, or the Party of God, a group dedicated to overthrowing the secular
Turkish state and establishing an Islamic republic in its place.  Police
investigators are searching for more bodies.

Hizbullah is not believed to be connected to the similarly named group that has
fought against the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon.  Both groups,
however, proclaim loyalty to a fundamentalist interpretation of Islam.

According to press reports, the police team that uncovered Ms. Kuris's body also
found a videotape containing scenes of torture sessions she endured over a
period of weeks. During one of the sessions, her captors are said to have
accused her of seeking to become Turkey's version of Salman Rushdie or Taslima
Nasrin, writers whom some Muslims consider heretics deserving of death.

"She had a great influence on Turkish women," said Ayse Onal, who has written
several books on feminism in Turkey. "She showed that it's possible to be
completely modern and still be faithful to Islam.  That's why she was killed.
Hizbullah, which is a very sick and deeply violent group, could not tolerate her
point of view."

Ms. Kuris was the only intellectual among the Hizbullah victims found so far.
Most of the others are believed to have been Kurdish businessmen from war-torn
provinces in the southeast.

After the first bodies were found last week, several politicians, news
commentators and others charged that the Turkish military had collaborated with
Hizbullah in the early 1990's, encouraging its death squads to kill Kurds
considered favorable to the cause of Kurdish nationalism.

President Suleyman Demirel rejected that charge, but appeared to agree that some
government agents or agencies might have had connections to Hizbullah.

"The state does not commit murders or order murders to be carried out," Mr.
Demirel told reporters in Ankara on Sunday. "There may be forces belonging to
the state that act illegitimately, but they are committing a crime."

Military commanders issued a statement denying that they or their predecessors
had sponsored or aided Hizbullah.

"The general staff is closely following operations against the Hizbullah terror
organization and shares the public's justified outrage at the horrors that have
recently been uncovered," the commanders said.  "Directly linking this merciless
murder network to the Turkish armed forces is a senseless and illogical
slander."

Turkey is arguably the world's most secular Muslim country, and many people
here, especially women, considered Ms. Kuris an exemplar of their tolerant brand
of Islam.

Born in 1960, she was married at 17 and had five children. At a young age she
became interested in Islam, but quit the first religious sect she joined after
being asked to wash its leaders' clothes. Later she made a trip to Iran with a
Hizbullah delegation, but returned disillusioned with the organization because,
she said, it supported a brand of Islam that was hostile to women.

After reading the Koran and various works of commentary, she began challenging
religious orthodoxy, asserting that Islam does not require women to cover their
hair with scarves and does not require the separation of the sexes at funerals
or in schools.

She also urged that public prayers be offered in Turkish rather than the
traditional Arabic.

"Konca used her mind, her emotions and her conscience to interpret God's
message," said Gonul Tufekci, a lawyer who is prominent in Islamic feminist
circles here. "This approach challenges the ideology that tries to use Islam as
a tool to keep women down. It is based on the concept of an open mind. This
concept is repugnant not only to groups like Hizbullah, but to many institutions
in this part of the world."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); ISRAEL (79%); MEDITERRANEAN (79%); LEBANON (79%);

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH (90%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (99%); ISRAEL (79%); MEDITERRANEAN (79%); LEBANON
(79%);   ANKARA, TURKEY (79%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS; ISLAM; KURDS; WOMEN; FEMINIST
MOVEMENT; TORTURE; RECORDINGS (VIDEO)  RELIGION (96%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HEZBOLLAH (90%); FEMINISM &
WOMEN'S RIGHTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); FUNDAMENTALISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (78%); WOMEN (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); WRITERS (77%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); JOURNALISM (76%); BURN INJURIES (72%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); WAR &
CONFLICT (62%); MURDER (57%);

PERSON: KURIS, KONCA; KINZER, STEPHEN

LOAD-DATE: January 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mourners in Mersin, Turkey, prayed Sunday at the funeral of
Konca Kuris, a Turkish writer often described as a Muslim feminist, whose body
was one of 33 found last week at the hide-outs of a religious terrorist group.
(Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             794 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 29, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Turkish Military Accuses Religious Political Party

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 595 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 28


Conflict between the secular Turkish military and the country's
religious-oriented political party, which led to the forced resignation of a
prime minister in 1997, has flared up again.

Military commanders have asserted that the party, Virtue, represents the
extremist mentality of a terrorist group that claims to be acting in the name of
Islam. In recent days, Turks have been stunned by disclosures that the group,
Hizbullah, apparently gruesomely tortured and killed dozens of people that it
considered heretical. Today clerics at mosques throughout the country condemned
Hizbullah.

Virtue is the country's main opposition party, holding 105 seats in the
550-member Parliament. A senior prosecutor, Vural Savas, had already asked the
Constitutional Court to ban the party on the grounds that it poses a "clear and
present danger" to secularism in Turkey.

Until last week, when Hizbullah's apparent savagery was first made public
following the discovery of disfigured bodies buried at its hideouts, there
seemed little chance that the court would agree to close Virtue. But in the wake
of disclosures about the bodies, the climate has changed palpably. With new
discoveries, some 39 bodies have been found.

Denying a link between Virtue and Hizbollah, Numan Kurtulmus, who heads the
Virtue organization in Istanbul, said: "It is nonsense, because we strongly
support the ideas of democracy and human rights. But emotions are running very
high. Our party could be a victim."

Several prominent politicians and news commentators have contended that
Hizbullah could not have emerged in war-torn southeastern Turkey without the
cooperation of security agencies there.

Among those who suggested this connection was the Virtue leader, Recai Kutan. He
said that at the time Hizbullah was apparently kidnapping and killing Kurdish
nationalists in the early 1990's, southeastern provinces were under emergency
rule because of a crackdown on a Kurdish insurgency and "even a bird could not
fly there without the security forces knowing about it."

"What is the secret behind all those unsolved murders that have been committed
in the southeast over the last 10 years?" Mr. Kutan asked. "Why did the
authorities not launch a campaign against the terror organizations?"

Those remarks evidently outraged military commanders. On Wednesday they issued a
statement recalling that the Constitutional Court has in the past closed three
religious parties and suggesting that Virtue was "harboring guilty feelings" in
the wake of the disclosures.

"It has been seen with great regret that in a speech about the Hizbullah terror
group delivered on January 25, the leader of a political party made unjust and
unseemly accusations against the Turkish armed forces," the commanders said in a
statement. "This mentality, whose ultimate aim is to set up an Islamic state,
views the Turkish armed forces as the biggest obstacle preventing it from
reaching its goals.  The Turkish armed forces, with the support of the great
Turkish nation, will never allow this mentality to achieve its goal."

Such statements have great resonance here, because the military's mistrust of
Islamic political parties led it to pressure Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan to
resign in 1997, and later helped persuade the Constitutional Court to ban his
political party, called Welfare.

Prosecutors have asserted that the Virtue party of today is nothing more than an
extension of Welfare, and that Mr. Erbakan is controlling it from behind the
scenes even though he has been banned from politics.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (97%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (90%);

COMPANY: HIZBULLAH  HEZBOLLAH (94%);

ORGANIZATION: HIZBULLAH  HEZBOLLAH (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (97%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (90%);

SUBJECT: ISLAM  RELIGION (95%); HEZBOLLAH (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); POLITICS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(90%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
CHURCH & STATE (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); TORTURE (76%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); MURDER (57%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%);

PERSON: KURTULMUS, NUMAN; KINZER, STEPHEN

LOAD-DATE: January 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             799 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

INSIDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 108 words



Puerto Rico Agreement
The Navy and the commonwealth reached an accord allowing limited training on the
island of Vieques as part of a deal that would bring residents $90 million in
aid.   PAGE A12

East Timor Crimes Alleged
Indonesia's top military officials are facing the possibility of a government
investigation after a human rights panel accused them of committing "crimes
against humanity" in East Timor.   PAGE A11


Player Charged With Murder
Ray Lewis, a Pro Bowl linebacker with Baltimore, was charged in the slayings of
two people outside an Atlanta nightclub after the Super Bowl.   SPORTSTUESDAY,
PAGE D1




http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PUERTO RICO (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (92%);

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PUERTO RICO (94%); TIMOR-LESTE (94%); INDONESIA (92%);   ATLANTA,
GA, USA (56%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (87%); HOMICIDE
(87%); INVESTIGATIONS (87%); MURDER (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (84%);

PERSON: RAY LEWIS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             802 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 1, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Japan Puts Gas-Attack Sect Under Scrutiny

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 200 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Jan. 31


A public commission ruled today that Aum Shinrikyo, the religious group that
killed 12 people in a nerve gas attack on the Tokyo subway in 1995, continues to
pose a threat to society and it instructed security authorities to put the sect
under surveillance for up to three years.

The Public Security Examination Commission, which is technically an independent
panel but is heavily influenced by the government, invoked a law enacted last
year that will allow the police and Justice Ministry officials to enter the
sect's property for inspections without a search warrant.

Under the surveillance law -- specifically directed at the group, which recently
changed its name to Aleph from Aum Shinrikyo -- the sect must report the names
of its members and details of its assets and activities to the authorities.

Beginning on Tuesday, when the commission's decision will be published in a
government gazette, the group's every move will be monitored by the authorities,
a security official said.

Human rights advocates and civil libertarians denounced the decision as a
violation of the group's basic rights and warned that the action could have
broad implications for democracy in Japan.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: JAPAN (93%);

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (90%);

COMPANY: AUM SHINRIKYO (RELIGIOUS CULT)  AUM SHINRIKYO (94%);

ORGANIZATION: AUM SHINRIKYO (RELIGIOUS CULT)  AUM SHINRIKYO (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: JAPAN; TOKYO (JAPAN);   JAPAN (93%);   TOKYO, JAPAN (90%);

SUBJECT: RELIGIOUS CULTS; SUBWAYS; TRANSIT SYSTEMS; BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL
WARFARE  CULTS & SECTS (92%); RELIGION (92%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%);
CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (90%); PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION (78%); CHURCH & STATE

 (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (72%); SEARCH WARRANTS (70%);
SEARCH & SEIZURE (70%);

LOAD-DATE: February 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             806 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 February 4, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1327 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-10

Britain Intensifies Effort To Get I.R.A. to Disarm
Britain moved to suspend the power-sharing government in Northern Ireland by
next week, but said it would work to get paramilitary forces to begin disarming
before using that authority.   A1

Rightists in Austria Coalition
Austria's president announced that he would swear in a new government today that
includes the anti-immigrant Freedom Party of Jorg Haider, after a day of
hesitation that was marked by objections to two Freedom Party members as
proposed cabinet ministers.   A1


The European Union, which warned it would shun Austria if the Freedom Party was
in the government, prepared to carry out its threat.   A10

No Progress in Mideast Talks
Israeli and Palestinian leaders ended a summit meeting in the Gaza Strip in
frustration, still bogged down over interim issues.   A3

Russians Hand Over Journalist
Russian authorities exchanged a Radio Liberty correspondent, Andrei M. Babitsky,
for two Russian soldiers held by Chechen rebels. Russia detained the
correspondent on Jan. 16 as he left a rebel-held section of Grozny.   A8

Jordan Links Plot to bin Laden
Jordanian security agents said 13 men imprisoned in Amman on charges of plotting
terrorist attacks in Jordan had been trained in Afghan camps operated by Osama
bin Laden, the Saudi fugitive.   A4

U.S. Diverts Russian Tanker
Two American warships enforcing United Nations sanctions against Iraq seized and
diverted a Russian oil tanker in the Persian Gulf after finding evidence that it
might be smuggling oil out of southern Iraq, a Pentagon spokesman said.   A4

Former Chad Leader Indicted
A court in Senegal indicted the exiled former dictator of Chad, Hissene Habre,
on torture charges. It was believed to be the first time a former African head
of state was charged with human rights violations by a court of another country.

   A3

Hope for New Year in Vietnam
Vietnam will celebrate Tet, the Lunar New Year, today and the Year of the
Dragon's traditional promise of prosperity, after a year of economic hardship.
   A5

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A12-26

Government to Intensify Scrutiny of Gun Dealers
The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms is embarking on the most aggressive
campaign in its 30-year history to crack down on corrupt gun dealers who help
put firearms in the hands of criminals and juveniles, White House and Treasury
Department officials said.   A12

Online Tax Moratorium
A ban on new state or local taxes that single out the Internet would be extended
indefinitely under bipartisan legislation introduced in Congress, but the bill
would not settle the question of how existing sales taxes should apply to
e-commerce.   A20

Computer Security Cases
The C.I.A. director, George Tenet, dismissed comparisons between the response to
evidence of computer security lapses by his predecessor, John Deutch, who lost
his security clearance, and by a nuclear scientist, Wen Ho Lee, who is in jail
awaiting trial on felony charges.   A22

Security experts say home computers are vulnerable to intrusion.   A22

Bush Talks Tough on McCain
Gov. George W. Bush accused Senator John McCain of using misleading television
commercials and insinuated that he had not lived up to his own call for
integrity in government.   A24

Mr. McCain raised $810,000 via the Internet in the 48 hours since his triumph in
New Hampshire.   A24

Gary L. Bauer will announce today that he is quitting the race.   A24

Crew Sought Help Before Crash
A few minutes before an Alaska Airlines MD-83 jet crashed in the Pacific on
Monday, the crew radioed a company mechanic in Los Angeles that the horizontal
stabilizer, which is at the tail, was pushing the nose down, and they asked if
there was a way to cut power to the device. Offshore, searchers found the second
"black box," the flight data recorder.   A12

Welfare and Child Care
About a million additional toddlers and preschoolers are in child care because
of changes in the welfare laws, but many are in low-quality care and are lagging
in language and social development, according to a study of how welfare
revisions have affected young children.   A17

Network Pledges on Diversity
Fox and CBS, facing threats from the N.A.A.C.P. that it would file lawsuits and
stage boycotts to protest the number of minority roles in television series,
joined the other two major networks in signing commitments to greater diversity.

   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-10

G.O.P. Abandons Effort To Bar McCain From Ballot
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas and his chief supporter in New York, Gov. George E.
Pataki, dropped their efforts to keep Senator John McCain off the ballot in
several districts for the March 7 presidential primary.   A1

Diallo Witness Tells of Shots
A woman who lived across the street from Amadou Diallo testified that she saw
the four plainclothes officers approach Mr. Diallo's building and moments later
heard gunfire. She said she heard no warnings.   B4

Fine in Carving of Patient
The State Department of Health fined Beth Israel Medical Center $14,000 and told
it to improve oversight of doctors after an inquiry into a hospital obstetrician
who carved his initials into a patient's belly.   B1

NEEDIEST CASES   B9

EDUCATION

Students Put to the Test
More than 200,000 public school fourth graders in New York State took a
standardized test that will figure in promotions.   B1

SCIENCE/HEALTH

NASA to Press On With Station
The space agency, frustrated with Russian delays in the launching of a module
for the International Space Station, said it would complete and launch the
component itself.   A1

Concern Over Supplements
Two experts on birth defects asked the F.D.A. to revoke a rule to let dietary
supplement makers market products for morning sickness and leg swelling in
pregnancy.   A16

SPORTS   D1-8

OBITUARIES   A27

Richard G. Kleindienst
President Richard M. Nixon's attorney general for less than a year during the
Watergate era, who pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor involving his Congressional
testimony, he was 76.   A27

BUSINESS DAY   C1-22

$183 Billion Phone Deal
Vodafone AirTouch of Britain, the world's biggest wireless telephone company,
negotiated the acquisition of the German telecommunications giant Mannesmann in
an all-stock transaction of record proportion.   A1

Computers as a Fringe Benefit
Ford said each of its 350,000 employees would be offered a high-speed desktop
computer made by Hewlett-Packard, a color printer and unlimited Internet access
for $5 a month.   A1

Mattel's Chief Steps Down
Jill E. Barad, 48, who made Barbie a megabrand, resigned as chairwoman and chief
executive of Mattel after the toy maker reported a loss for 1999 and problems in
its software unit.   C1

New President for PBS
The Public Broadcasting Service has selected Pat Mitchell, a longtime program
executive for Turner Broadcasting, for the post of president, a PBS executive
said.   C6

Upheaval in Bond Market
Chaos swept through the bond market as traders and investors tried to make sense
of a spectacular and damaging rise in the prices of longer-term Treasury bonds.
   C1

Fed's Greenspan Is Confirmed
The Senate easily approved the nomination of Alan Greenspan, 73, to a fourth
four-year term as Federal Reserve chairman.   C2

Business Digest   C1

WEEKEND   E1-28; E29-44

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: Finally, an open primary; an unwelcome Austrian government;
California's tobacco tax; the shortage of health aides.
Columns: Gail Collins and Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E43

TV Listings   E28

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D5


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); JORDAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); IRAQ (92%); CHAD
(92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); VIET NAM
(92%); AUSTRIA (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SENEGAL (79%);
GULF STATES (74%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (78%);

CITY: AMMAN, JORDAN (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (54%);
UNITED NATIONS (54%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  (57%); EUROPEAN UNION (57%); UNITED NATIONS
(54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (95%); JORDAN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); IRAQ (92%);
CHAD (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); VIET
NAM (92%); AUSTRIA (90%); CENTRAL EUROPE (88%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); SENEGAL (79%);
GULF STATES (74%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (73%);   INDIAN OCEAN (78%);
AMMAN, JORDAN (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  NEWS BRIEFS (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); FIREARMS (89%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (89%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INDICTMENTS (87%); TAXES & TAXATION (86%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (79%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%);

 PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(76%); CHINESE NEW YEAR (76%); TAX LAW (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (75%);
PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (75%); IMMIGRATION (74%); SMUGGLING (73%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); TERRORISM (72%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (71%);
CORRUPTION (71%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%);
AL-QAEDA (71%); BULK SHIPPING (70%); HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (67%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (66%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%); LEGISLATION (63%); SALES TAX
(63%); TORTURE (63%); INTERNET & WWW (63%); ELECTRONIC COMMERCE (60%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (50%);

LOAD-DATE: February 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             816 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 13, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

U.S. Victims of Chile's Coup: The Uncensored File

BYLINE: By DIANA JEAN SCHEMO

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2223 words


Twenty-six years ago, as the forces of Gen. Augusto Pinochet overthrew the
Socialist government of Salvador Allende, two American supporters of President
Allende were killed in Chile under circumstances that stirred suspicions of
C.I.A. involvement.

American officials categorically denied any role in the young men's deaths,
which were dramatized in the 1982 movie "Missing."

Compelled by the Freedom of Information Act, the government in 1980 released the
results of classified internal investigations, heavily censored in black ink,
that appeared to clear the American and Chilean governments of any
responsibility.

But now, those thick black lines have been stripped away. Spurred by the arrest
of General Pinochet in 1998, President Clinton has ordered the declassification
of "all documents that shed light on human rights abuses, terrorism and other
acts of political violence during and prior to the Pinochet era in Chile."

Some of those documents make clear for the first time that the State Department
concluded from almost the beginning that the Pinochet government had killed the
men, Charles Horman, 31, and Frank Teruggi, 24. The investigators speculated,
moreover, that the Chileans would not have done so without a green light from
American intelligence.

"U.S. intelligence may have played an unfortunate part in Horman's death," said
one newly declassified memo. "At best, it was limited to providing or confirming
information that helped motivate his murder by the government of Chile. At
worst, U.S. intelligence was aware the government of Chile saw Horman in a
rather serious light and U.S. officials did nothing to discourage the logical
outcome of government of Chile paranoia."

With most of the blacked-out portions now restored, the documents declassified
by the State Department illustrate how exemptions in the Freedom of Information
Act -- a law that was meant to reduce secrecy -- can be misused.

Two principal exceptions that the department used allow the government to
withhold information on the grounds of national security and executive
privilege. "They're not protecting national security information at all," said
Peter Kornbluh of the nonprofit National Security Archives, which promotes the
declassification of government documents. "Preventing embarrassment is not an
exemption clause."

Even after extensive Senate intelligence committee hearings in the 1970's, the
American role in the overthrow of Mr. Allende remains a matter of dispute and
conjecture. Mr. Kornbluh said that other government agencies responsible for
carrying out United States policy in Chile, including the C.I.A. and the
Pentagon, have so far failed to release key records on the era.

Regarding Mr. Horman's death, Mark Mansfield, a spokesman for the C.I.A.,
recently released a 22-year-old letter denying any role by the agency and said
it would show the public files on the case this spring.

The State Department refused to address questions about the two deaths, saying
few of the people involved in the case still work for the government. The former
officials, most of them retired and scattered around the country, largely
disavow any responsibility for what happened.

Mr. Horman's widow, Joyce, is hoping that enough has changed to finally learn
what really happened to her husband. She is asking for Washington's help in her
quest for an honest explanation of his murder from the new Socialist government
in Chile.

"I want to know who gave the order," said Mrs. Horman, who has never remarried.
"Nobody's held accountable."

Her husband and Mr. Teruggi were friends who belonged to a group of young
left-of-center Americans attracted by Mr. Allende's socialist experiment in the
early 1970's. In Santiago, they worked for a newsletter that reprinted articles
and clippings from American newspapers critical of United States policy.

When General Pinochet seized power on Sept. 11, 1973, Mr. Horman was at Vina del
Mar, a coastal resort, with Terry Simon, a family friend from New York who was
vacationing in Chile.

Ms. Simon said she and Mr. Horman saw American warships offshore and spoke to
American naval officers stationed in nearby Valparaiso, who appeared elated at
the coup's success. The two interpreted what they saw as proof of American
connivance in the military takeover.

Eager to return to Santiago, they rode back with Capt. Ray E. Davis, chief of
the United States Military Group at the American Embassy, who had been making
his weekly visit to the naval station.

Two days later, as General Pinochet's forces moved to arrest thousands of people
around the country, men in military uniforms abducted Mr. Horman, ransacking his
apartment. His wife, Joyce, was out at the time. She never saw him again. Ms.
Simon searched with Joyce for Mr. Horman and eventually flew home to New York.

Around the same time, security forces arrested Mr. Teruggi and his roommate,
David Hathaway, at their apartment. They were held at the national stadium with
thousands of other political prisoners. Mr. Teruggi never returned from his
second interrogation.

Mr. Hathaway was released alone and later flew home to the United States. A
friend identified Mr. Teruggi's body in the government morgue. His throat had
been slashed, and he had been shot twice in the head.

The search for Mr. Horman was more tortuous. His father, Edmund, flew in from
New York to help. He and Mr. Horman's wife followed whatever leads they could,
keeping in close touch with the embassy, which supplied escorts and pressed Mrs.
Horman for a list of her husband's friends. Doubting the diplomats' motives, she
says, she never supplied it.

Captain Davis, now 74 and retired, said in a recent interview that he had
nothing to do with the deaths and he appeared offended by the resurgence of
questions about the killings.

He talked of his close ties to the Chilean military during his time there and
said he had welcomed General Pinochet at his home, but was in no position to
demand that Chilean Army commanders answer for the killings, and had not been
ordered to do so. "We weren't down there to cause trouble," he said. "We sold
them weapons."

He called Mr. Teruggi and Mr. Horman "part of the problem" in Chile. "They were
down there handing out pamphlets against the government," he said.

The two men, actually, had been supporting the Allende government, not the one
Captain Davis hoped to see in power. He corrected himself: "against the people
who were trying to do something about it."

The Hormans have long contended that despite the embassy's avowal that it was
doing all it could to find Charles, its officials would merely confirm
information the family had obtained for itself. Taken together, the newly
released documents support their suspicions.

It was not until 1976 that the State Department took a critical look at the
killings. The move was prompted by a disaffected Chilean intelligence officer,
Rafael Gonzalez, who told reporters that he had witnessed Mr. Horman being held
prisoner by Chile's chief of intelligence.

Mr. Gonzalez quoted the intelligence chief as saying Mr. Horman "had to
disappear" because he "knew too much," and said a man he presumed was American
was in the room.

Mr. Gonzalez also described a "cozy relationship" between American and Chilean
intelligence services to destabilize the Allende government, and said that
American operatives had even given their Chilean counterparts lists of suspected
leftists to be rounded up in the first days of a military takeover.

(In its hearings, the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence found that the
C.I.A. had in fact compiled arrest lists but said it had no evidence that they
were passed to the Chileans. Those lists are among the documents the C.I.A. has
not released.)

Facing pressure from Congress, the State Department ordered two internal reviews
in 1976. The first, completed in August, was carried out by Rudy V. Fimbres,
regional director for Bolivia and Chile in the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs.
The second was conducted by Frederick Smith, a State Department lawyer, in
November and December.

The investigators were permitted to examine only documents either publicly
released or already available in the State Department. Their reviews appeared to
confirm doubts and inconsistencies that American newspapers had already reported
but that State Department officials had repeatedly discredited.

The documents showed that an embassy official had received a tip that Mr. Horman
had already been killed before his father arrived in Chile. That tip was not
followed up.

Instead, embassy officials told Edmund Horman that leftists may have kidnapped
his son, contradicting their own cables home, which quoted neighbors who said
they had witnessed Chilean security forces taking Mr. Horman away.

The internal reviews also questioned the time of Mr. Horman's death, saying
there was no reason to accept the Chilean government's assertion that he died
just before the American Embassy learned of his disappearance.

The Pinochet government had ignored numerous requests from the United States for
an autopsy report on Mr. Horman, the documents show.

One review asked why Captain Davis, who had driven Mr. Horman and Ms. Simon to
Santiago, had taken their registration card from the hotel where they were
staying.

Captain Davis at first denied that he had taken the card, but changed his mind
when read a passage from a letter he wrote to one of the investigators, now
among the declassified documents, mentioning the registration card. "I don't see
why it's important," he said.

The Horman family believes the card was given to the Chilean military, and
tipped them off to the new address of the Hormans, who had moved just a few days
before.

"Based on what we have," the first inquiry concluded, "we are persuaded that the
government of Chile sought Horman and felt threatened enough to order his
immediate execution. The government of Chile might have believed this American
could be killed without negative fall-out from the U.S. government."

The memo said that there was "circumstantial evidence" that the C.I.A. "may have
played an unfortunate part in Horman's death," as well as Mr. Teruggi's. It also
said the State Department had the "responsibility" to refute baseless
allegations and "to proceed against U.S. officials if this is warranted."

The second investigation, completed a month before Gerald Ford's presidency
ended, drew a similar conclusion. It blamed the Chilean government for both
deaths and said it was "difficult to believe" that the Pinochet government would
have carried out the killings without some signal, perhaps even an inadvertent
one, that the deaths would not cause "substantial adverse consequences" in
Washington.

The memo -- to Harry W. Shlaudeman, the assistant secretary of state for
inter-American affairs -- recommended interviewing Mr. Gonzalez, the disaffected
Chilean intelligence officer, again and going back to the C.I.A. for a full
accounting.

"If an explanation exists," a memo in the investigation said, "it does not
appear in the files and must be sought elsewhere."

But both inquiries appear to have ended there. Mr. Shlaudeman himself
recommended interrogating Mr. Gonzalez further, even submitting a detailed list
of questions for the purpose that the C.I.A. was allowed to review. But he
dismissed the call for investigating the actions of the C.I.A.

Interviewed recently, Mr. Shlaudeman said that he remembered little about the
issue. "A lot of things have happened since then," he said.

Until jarred loose by General Pinochet's arrest in London in October 1998, these
reports remained largely hidden from the public.

In 1978, State Department officials debated how much of the documents to show
the Horman family, which was then suing the United States government for
"wrongful death," a case that was dismissed "without prejudice," meaning that it
could be reopened.

One official, Frank McNeil, then deputy assistant secretary of state for
inter-American affairs, urged the department to err on the side of greater
disclosure.

"Classification should not be used to prevent embarrassment of government
agencies or officials, which would be the principal reason for withholding when
one gets down to the bone," he said.

Nonetheless, the documents released to the Hormans omitted large swaths of
material on the grounds of national security and executive privilege.

Experts note that executive privilege protects the president's deliberations
with his advisers, in this instance Henry A. Kissinger, who served Presidents
Richard M. Nixon and Gerald R. Ford as secretary of state.

Dr. Kissinger said he had never seen the documents or the recommendations and
had been out of the country much of the time. "It's very easy, 30 years after
the event, to be so heroic and to create the impression that one had nothing
else to do except follow one particular case," he said. "If it were brought to
my attention I would have done something."

Mr. Fimbres himself, who is now retired, said recently that he was not surprised
at the State Department's apparent failure to pursue the investigation further.

"Something like this easily goes into the black hole," he explained.  "And
everybody watches it go down."
 http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; STATE DEPARTMENT  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY  (90%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY; STATE DEPARTMENT  CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (90%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (98%); UNITED STATES (97%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA,
USA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CLASSIFICATION OF INFORMATION
STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%); COUPS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION (89%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (89%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(88%); US PRESIDENTS (78%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); CENSORSHIP (76%);
PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); TERRORISM (73%);

 US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (72%); INTERNAL INVESTIGATIONS (71%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (69%); MURDER (58%);

PERSON: SCHEMO, DIANA JEAN; HORMAN, CHARLES; TERUGGI, FRANK; PINOCHET UGARTE,
AUGUSTO (GEN)  BILL CLINTON (58%);

LOAD-DATE: February 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: February 20, 2000, Sunday
February 22, 2000, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

An article last Sunday about newly declassified United States government
documents that shed light on the disappearance and death of two American
supporters of President Salvador Allende Gossens of Chile in 1973 misstated the
name of a private group that promotes the declassification of of government
documents. It is the National Security Archive, not Archives.

A picture credit was omitted on Feb.13 with an article about the uncovering of
American files on the deaths of Charles Horman and Frank Teruggi, American
supporters of Salvador Allende in Chile. The picture, showing Charles and Joyce
Horman, was by Karen Tweedy-Holmes.

GRAPHIC: Photos: CENSOR'S HAND -- The thick black lines imposed by a censor in
1980 have been stripped away from a government report to reveal more about the
deaths of Charles Horman, above, and Frank Teruggi in Chile in 1973. (pg. 1);
THE OTHER VICTIM -- Frank Teruggi, who, after his arrest, did not return from an
interrogation. (Associated Press); A FAMILY'S TRAUMA -- Joyce and Charles Horman
just before they left for Chile, where he was killed after the 1973 coup. Left:
Joyce with his mother, Elizabeth Horman, 95. She is hoping she can finally learn
what really happened to her husband and is asking for Washington's help. "I want
to know who gave the order," she said. (Marilynn K. Yee/The New York Times)(pg.
6)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             819 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Half of Afghan Ex-Hostages Fly Back Home From Britain

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 440 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Monday, Feb. 14


A chartered aircraft took off from a British air base early this morning, flying
more than 70 former hostages from last week's airliner hijacking back home to
Afghanistan, witnesses said.

A Home Office spokeswoman said earlier that 72 of the 142 freed hostages had
agreed to go home voluntarily.

The rest were reported to be applying for political asylum in Britain.

Three buses carrying the former hostages were seen leaving a temporary
immigration site in Gloucestershire in western England on Sunday night to go to
nearby Brize Norton air base.

"Some of the former hostages were smiling and waving as they went past," a
witness said.

The Taliban authorities of Afghanistan, Islamic fundamentalists who have no
diplomatic relations with Britain, have asked for the return of all the
hostages.

The hijacking became a political issue in Britain after news reports during the
standoff suggested that the hijackers as well as many of those on board wanted
asylum and a chance for more comfortable life under Britain's welfare system.

When the four-day hijacking ended at Stansted airport here on Thursday, it
quickly emerged through official channels that dozens had applied for asylum.

The opposition Conservatives accused Home Secretary Jack Straw of turning
Britain into a "soft touch" for immigrants.

Mr. Straw struck back today, insisting that he had the powers to turn the former
hostages away if they were not granted asylum.

"We can," he told BBC television. "Once processes are concluded, we have every
right to remove people from this country who do not have right to remain. It
happens every day."

Mr. Straw said Britain faced a difficult choice between its obligation to
provide asylum to those with a well-founded fear of persecution at home, and its
duty to "prevent and deter the very serious international terrorist crime of
hijacking."

Human rights activists urged Mr. Straw not to deport those wanting to stay in
Britain so they could avoid returning to miserable living conditions under the
Taliban government.

The police said three of the 22 people arrested in connection with the hijack
had been released without charge and had joined the freed hostages.

The remaining 19 were still being questioned by the police and were expected to
appear in court soon to be charged under the country's Prevention of Terrorism
Act.

One of the plane's pilots said at a news conference on Saturday that the
hijackers, who seized the Ariana airliner on a domestic flight in Afghanistan
last Sunday, had threatened to kill their hostages and blow the plane up when it
landed in Britain.



http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: BAY (LSE) (58%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS481111 SCHEDULED PASSENGER AIR TRANSPORTATION (58%); SIC4512 AIR
TRANSPORTATION, SCHEDULED (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED KINGDOM (96%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); ENGLAND (79%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (73%);

COMPANY: ARIANA AFGHAN AIRLINES  BRITISH AIRWAYS PLC (58%);

ORGANIZATION: ARIANA AFGHAN AIRLINES

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; GREAT BRITAIN;   UNITED KINGDOM (96%); AFGHANISTAN
(93%); ENGLAND (79%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (73%);

SUBJECT: AIRLINES AND AIRPLANES; HIJACKING; AFGHANISTAN-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-GREAT BRITAIN; ASYLUM (POLITICAL); HOSTAGES  HIJACKING (92%); AIRLINES

 (90%); POLITICAL ASYLUM (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(89%); TALIBAN (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TESTIMONY (89%); AIR CHARTER SERVICES
(78%); AIRPORTS (78%); AIRCRAFT PILOTS (78%); WITNESSES (77%); DEPORTATION
(76%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); IMMIGRATION (76%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (73%); MUSLIMS
& ISLAM (72%); ARRESTS (72%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (71%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY
(71%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (71%); FUNDAMENTALISM (69%); RELIGION (69%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (68%);   LIVING CONDITIONS (77%);

PERSON: JACK STRAW (74%);

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             820 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 14, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Feminists' Gains

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 159 words



To the Editor:

Re your Feb. 10 news article about Susan Brownmiller's feminist poker games: I
invite those who feel that the feminist movement has "lost its steam" to note
that New York is home to one of the largest and most active chapters of the
National Organization for Women in the country.

In the last two years alone, we have organized more than 50 actions and have
helped win crucial gains for women like the clinic access-anti-stalking bill and
a court victory against the New York State Division for Human Rights for their
major delays in processing discrimination claims.

We have Ms. Brownmiller's generation to thank for bringing us where we are. But
we need veteran feminists to take part, advise and encourage us, not dismiss our
hard work in the battles we are still fighting.

GALEN SHERWIN
New York, Feb. 10, 2000

The writer is president of the New York City chapter of the National
Organization for Women.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (91%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (91%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (88%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN  NEW YORK STATE DIV (75%);   NATIONAL
ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN  (91%); NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (91%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN  NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN
(91%); NATIONAL ORGANIZATION FOR WOMEN (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (91%);   NEW YORK, USA (91%);   NEW
YORK, NY, USA (88%);

SUBJECT: WOMEN  FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (94%); WOMEN (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS

 (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (87%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); POKER (73%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(87%);

PERSON: SHERWIN, GALEN; BROWNMILLER, SUSAN  SUSAN BROWNMILLER (80%);

LOAD-DATE: February 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             824 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Hearing on Suit by Reporter Held Captive

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 740 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Feb. 15


A federal judge took the first step today in awarding damages in a lawsuit filed
by Terry Anderson seeking $100 million from the Iranian government for the pain
and suffering he experienced during nearly seven years as a hostage in Lebanon.

The hearing before Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson of Federal District Court
coincided with efforts to persuade Congress to enact laws allowing victims of
terrorism and the victims' families to collect on judgments against countries
that sponsor terrorist acts.

"Iran and other sponsors of terrorism must be held accountable for supporting
activities that kill, injure, torture and imprison innocent persons," said Mr.
Anderson, the former chief Middle East correspondent for The Associated Press.
"No government is above the law when it violates basic human rights."

Mr. Anderson was among 18 Americans taken hostage in Beirut in the 1980's. He
was held the longest, spending 2,454 days in captivity before he was freed on
Dec. 4, 1991.

Judge Jackson opened the two-day hearing by saying that the government of Iran
had not responded to the lawsuit and was in default. Iran did not send a
representative to the proceedings despite being notified through diplomatic
channels.

The suit, filed last March under a 1996 law that allows legal action against
countries that the United States government accuses of sponsoring terrorism,
asserts that Mr. Anderson's kidnappers were members of Hezbollah, or Party of
God, a "a politico-paramilitary terrorist organization" with ties to Iran. The
suit also says that Hezbollah received financing, training and direction from
Iran.

"This law was designed to make terrorism expensive," Mr. Anderson said in a
break in today's proceedings. "And we are going to make it expensive for Iran."

The Islamic Republic of Iran and its Ministry of Information and Security were
named as defendants. The law that allows victims of terrorism to sue foreign
countries in American courts requires the State Department to list the country
as a sponsor of terrorism. Iran has been on the list since 1984.

Mr. Anderson's case follows others with similar intentions. In March 1998, a
federal judge ordered Iran to pay $247.5 million to the family of Alisa M.
Flatow of West Orange, N.J., who was studying at a seminary in Jerusalem in 1995
when she was killed in a suicide bus attack for which Islamic Jihad, with ties
to Iran, claimed responsibility.

In August 1998, a federal court ordered Iran to pay $65 million in damages for
its role in the kidnappings of Joseph J. Cicippio, Frank H. Reed and David P.
Jacobsen, three Americans held with Mr. Anderson in Lebanon. They have been
unable to collect on the settlements.

Congress passed a measure in October 1998 that called for the State Department
and the Department of Treasury to help victims of terrorism locate money to
settle judgments. But the legislation included a provision allowing the
president to waive implementation in the interest of national security.

Administration officials have voiced concern that the sanctity of American
diplomatic property abroad, a right extended to all diplomatic missions under
international law, might be compromised if private citizens here seized foreign
government property under such court decisions.

At the State Department today, James P. Rubin, a department spokesman, said Iran
did not accept the jurisdiction or the awards in Mr. Anderson's case and that
the State Department opposed the attachment of diplomatic property to settle
claims awarded by a court.

Senators Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, and Connie Mack,
Republican of Florida, proposed legislation in 1999 to establish a system for
tapping a foreign government's frozen assets that could be used to settle these
claims and ease the administration's concern that diplomatic property, like
foreign embassies, would be among the assets involved.

"American citizens deserve the right to know that their government stands behind
them when acts of terrorism are committed against their families," Mr. Mack said
in October when he presented the Justice for Victims of Terrorism Act.

After his release, Mr. Anderson, 52, and his wife, Madeleine Bassil, wrote a
book about his ordeal, "Den of Lions." He now teaches journalism at Ohio
University and serves on the board of the Committee to Protect Journalists, a
nonprofit group that works for press freedom around the world.


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (56%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (94%); LEBANON (94%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (79%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS  ASSOCIATED PRESS (56%);   HEZBOLLAH (71%);

ORGANIZATION: ASSOCIATED PRESS  HEZBOLLAH (71%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN; LEBANON;   UNITED STATES (95%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
(94%); LEBANON (94%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); ISRAEL (79%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (79%);
   BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

SUBJECT: SUITS AND CLAIMS AGAINST GOVERNMENT; HOSTAGES  TERRORISM (92%); DAMAGES

 (91%); LITIGATION (91%); JUDGES (91%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HOSTAGE
TAKING (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%);
KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (89%); CRIMINAL FINES (89%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); SETTLEMENTS
& DECISIONS (78%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%);
TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (73%); SUICIDE (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%);
RELIGION (69%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES & TREASURIES (62%);

PERSON: JACKSON, THOMAS PENFIELD (JUDGE); ANDERSON, TERRY  TERRY ANDERSON (93%);



LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Terry Anderson, former chief Middle East correspondent for The
Associated Press, center, talked yesterday to his daughter Sulome and his
lawyer, Stuart Newberger, outside federal court in Washington. (Associated
Press)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             825 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Two Rwandans Held in Europe In 1994 Deaths

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 337 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 15


Two high-ranking former Rwandan army officers were arrested in Europe today in
connection with the 1994 massacres in which a half million Rwandans died.

The suspects were arrested at their homes in small towns in France and Denmark
on warrants issued by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda.

The French Interior Ministry said the police arrested Francois-Xavier
Nzuwonemeye in Montauban, in southwest France.

Mr. Nzuwonemeye was the second suspect arrested in France in less than three
months in connection with the massacres. A Paris court is to decide whether Mr.
Nzuwonemeye will be extradited to Arusha, Tanzania, where the Rwanda tribunal is
situated.

French authorities did not provide information on Mr. Nzuwonemeye's alleged role
in the massacres.

The Danish police arrested Innocent Sagahutu in Ringkobing, 200 miles west of
Copenhagen.

The statement described both suspects as "high-ranking military officers, both
former members of the Rwandan Armed Forces."

An estimated 500,000 minority ethnic Tutsi and Hutu opposition members died in
three months of killing led by members of the Hutu-dominated government. The
slaughter ended when Tutsi-led rebels came to power.

Mr. Sagahutu was identified as an army captain wanted in connection with the
killing in 1994 of Rwanda's Prime Minister, Agathe Uwilingiyimana, and 10 United
Nations peacekeepers from Belgium who had been assigned to protect her.

Last November, the former Rwandan Minister of Higher Education, Jean de Dieu
Kamuhanda, was arrested in France. He was extradited to Tanzania this month to
stand trial on charges of genocide.

On Feb. 5, the British police arrested Tharcisse Muvunyi, 46, of Rwanda, on
charges of genocide.

Since it was established by the United Nations in November 1994 to "prosecute
persons responsible for genocide and other serious violations of international
humanitarian law" committed in Rwanda that year, the tribunal has delivered
seven verdicts. It is holding 39 people in custody in Arusha.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FRANCE (94%); RWANDA (94%); EUROPE (94%); DENMARK (94%); TANZANIA,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); BELGIUM (79%);

STATE: MIDI-PYRENEES, FRANCE (57%);

CITY: PARIS, FRANCE (91%); COPENHAGEN, DENMARK (77%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (58%); UNITED
NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (58%);
UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA; FRANCE; DENMARK;   FRANCE (94%); RWANDA (94%); EUROPE (94%);

 DENMARK (94%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (92%); BELGIUM (79%);
MIDI-PYRENEES, FRANCE (57%);   PARIS, FRANCE (91%); COPENHAGEN, DENMARK (77%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS; HUTU TRIBE; TUTSI TRIBE  ARRESTS (94%); EXTRADITION (91%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (78%);
PEACEKEEPING (77%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (77%);
VERDICTS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); POLITICS (72%); EDUCATION DEPARTMENTS (71%);

 HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (67%); PRIME MINISTERS (67%); COLLEGES &
UNIVERSITIES (50%);   LAW OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: NZUWONEMEYE, FRANCOIS-XAVIER; SAGAHUTU, INNOCENT  FRANCOIS-XAVIER
NZUWONEMEYE (94%);

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             831 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 20, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE WORLD: Beirut, Meet Tehran;
A Time of Testing for Islamic Zeal

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 1; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1342 words

DATELINE: NABATIYE, Lebanon


A GROUP of hard-eyed men from Hezbollah, the Party of God, were driving an
American correspondent down a narrow road outside this village in southern
Lebanon last week when the visitor pointed through the open car window toward an
Israeli fortification high on a rocky hill to the south.

Something on the hill was glinting in the blinding sunshine. It was probably an
Israeli soldier's binoculars, and the reaction of the Hezbollah fighters was
quick and angry. "In the name of Allah, don't point!" the driver said, turning
the car and racing back toward the village. "If you point, the Israelis will
think you're aiming at them, and they'll hit us with their 155-millimeters."

The reproach was a hard lesson, but it was nothing compared with the cold fury
of the Hezbollah men a little later while driving past billboards showing the
supreme icons of Hezbollah's brand of Shiite Muslim fundamentalism -- Ayatollah
Ruhollah Khomeini, who led Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979, and his successor
as the Islamic Republic's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Blundering again, the reporter asked where were the images of Iran's president,
Mohammed Khatami, an Islamic reformer whose calls for greater democracy and
human rights have electrified his country and crystallized the battle between
reformers and conservatives that culminated in the Iranian parliamentary
election held Friday.

This time the driver slowed, looked back at his questioner with something
approaching contempt, then fell silent.

Among militant Shiites in Lebanon, apparently, Mr. Khatami is a nonperson,
somebody who merits only scowls. Later, much the same reaction was evident in
Hezbollah's heavily guarded sanctuaries in the southern suburbs of Beirut, where
Hezbollah leaders are preparing to face up to their own day of reckoning. That
will be the moment in July when Israeli troops complete their promised
withdrawal from Lebanon and leave Hezbollah to make a historic choice between
the militant Islamic policies of its past and mounting pressure for more
pragmatism -- particularly if Lebanon's neighbor and protector Syria resumes
seeking peace with Israel.

AFTER 20 years of holding high the banner of Islamic fundamentalism, the
conservative mullahs of Iran and their counterparts in the leadership of
Lebanon's Hezbollah have arrived, more or less simultaneously, at their
respective political Rubicons, the point at which their cause will either adjust
or wither. Partly this is a matter of coincidence, of political timetables in
Iran and Lebanon that have their separate logics. But there are common factors,
too, as there have been since the first stirrings of Shiite clerical insurgency
in the two countries more than 40 years ago.

Reaching any broad conclusions about the tide of affairs in the Islamic world is
fraught with hazard, considering that there are more than 50 Muslim nations,
comprising more than a billion people, vastly different cultures in Africa, the
Middle East and Asia, and a deep theological and political schism between the
world's 800 million Sunni Muslims and 200 million Shiites. But some trends are
too compelling to ignore; the events now unfolding in Iran and Lebanon,
suggesting a broader movement toward political realism in the Shiite world, are
among them.

Because of the Sunni-Shiite schism, tracing back to the dynastic rupture that
followed the death of the Muslim Prophet Mohammed in 632 A.D., it would take an
intrepid chronicler to suggest that something still broader may be stirring
across all of Islam -- a slow, even crab-like move away from the militancy that
seemed like a rising tide at the onset of the 1990's. After all, Osama Bin
Laden, the heir to a Saudi Arabian fortune who is the world's most-wanted
terrorist leader, is still at large in Afghanistan, with cells of armed
supporters spread widely through the Middle East, North Africa and Europe.

Other forms of Islamic militancy continue to lurk, on the fringes of power or
underground, in dozens of countries -- Indonesia, Pakistan, Egypt, Sudan,
Algeria among them. Some experts think the world has yet to see the high tide of
Sunni fundamentalism, an equivalent of the Shiite revolution in Iran in 1979.

But for the moment, what seems inescapable is that the men who kick-started the
wave of Islamic militancy in the modern world, the Shiite clerics of Iran and
Lebanon, have their backs to the wall, even if few hard-line mullahs in either
country seem ready to fly the white flag just yet.

In Iran, where huge numbers of voters turned out for parliamentary elections
last week, the results will take days to compile and it is possible that
reformers, divided among themselves and deprived of some of their best
candidates by pre-election screeners loyal to Ayatollah Khamenei, may have to
settle for something less than outright victory. And in Lebanon, a surface
appraisal would suggest that Hezbollah, after 15 years of battling Israeli
troops, is on the verge of its brightest moment yet, the unilateral Israeli
pullout promised by Prime Minister Ehud Barak.

But in Lebanon, as in Iran, the longer-run trends seem to lie against the
militants. With Israel's troops gone, the Islamic group will be deprived of its
most powerful card, and Lebanon's 3.5 million people will be left to weigh
whether they want to give the group more political power than it already has
with its minority bloc in the Lebanese parliament. Every sign says that they do
not. In recent times, Hezbollah has even been rewriting history, pretending it
had nothing to do with the brutal terrorism it sponsored in the 1980's, and
playing down its commitment to an Islamic state.

Similarly, in Iran, the long run seems to strongly favor the pragmatists, if
only because of demographics. The young constitute a great bulge in Iran's
population -- people under 25 who are too young to remember the revolution or to
have fought against Iraq or to do anything today but chafe at the social
restrictions Ayatollah Khomeini imposed as the price of liberation from the rule
of Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi. Those young are a formidable, and growing, base
of support for the forces of reform.

If the pragmatic trends hold, it will be an ironic comeuppance for the Shiite
fundamentalists, who once viewed the Iran-Lebanon axis as the basis for building
an eventual Islamic superstate. Only in Lebanon, it seems, do many people
remember that it was here, in the 1960's, that Musa al-Sadr, an Iranian-born
Shiite cleric, pioneered the populist form of Shiite political awakening that
found its ultimate expression in the Islamic revolution in Iran. Revered by
Shiite moderates and revolutionaries alike, he disappeared on a trip to Libya in
1978, the apparent victim of a plot by the Libyan leader Muammer el-Qaddafi, a
Sunni Muslim who, most Lebanese Shiites suppose, did not favor the rise of
Shiite fundamentalist power in the heart of the Arab world.

LESS than six months after Mr. Sadr's luggage turned up off a Tripoli-Rome
flight without Mr. Sadr, Ayatollah Khomeini was on a flight from Paris to
Teheran, where he declared the Islamic state that turned Iran upside down.
Within a few years, the militant Lebanese Shiites who felt orphaned by Mr.
Sadr's disappearance were empowered again when Ayatollah Khomeini sent 5,000
Iranian revolutionary guards to Lebanon's Bekaa valley, where they armed,
trained and indoctrinated the Hezbollah force that went to war against Israel.

Now, in both countries, the hard-line clerics are faced with evanescent dreams.
About the only solace for them may be that their Shiite faith has rested from
the start on a cult of dispossession, betrayal and defeat. Just as Shiites
believe that Sunnis usurped the rightful inheritance of Ali, the Prophet
Mohammed's son-in-law and the Shiites' first imam, so now the hard-liners may
come to believe that their enemies on Earth have wrested from them the Islamic
state that, according to the militants, was the millennarian promise vouchsafed
them by the Prophet.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); LEBANON (96%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED
STATES (92%); AFRICA (79%); SYRIA (79%); IRAN (70%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (93%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (70%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH  HEZBOLLAH (96%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH  HEZBOLLAH (96%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN; LEBANON; ISRAEL; SYRIA;   IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%);
LEBANON (96%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); AFRICA (79%); SYRIA (79%);
IRAN (70%);   BEIRUT, LEBANON (93%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (70%);

SUBJECT: ISLAM  RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); HEZBOLLAH (92%);
CONSERVATISM (88%); FUNDAMENTALISM (88%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); NEWS
BRIEFS (74%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (66%); ELECTIONS (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (51%); ARMED FORCES

 (50%);

PERSON: BURNS, JOHN F; KHATAMI, MOHAMMAD (PRES)  ALI KHAMENEI (51%);

LOAD-DATE: February 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Ayatollah Khomeini's portrait frames an Iranian's worry beads.
(Reuters)(pg. 5)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             835 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 23, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Joseph R. Gregory

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 988 words



EUROPE

BRITAIN: MEDICAL REPORT CHALLENGED: Belgium, France, Switzerland and Spain
registered formal challenges to a British report suggesting that Gen. Augusto
Pinochet, 84, is medically unfit for extradition to Spain to stand trial on
torture charges. Jack Straw, the Home Secretary, promised a response "as soon as
possible."   Alan Cowell (NYT)

SPAIN: CAR BOMB KILLS 2: Fernando Buesa, a leader of the opposition Socialist
Party, and his bodyguard died when a car bomb exploded as they walked in the
Basque regional capital of Vitoria. The government blamed the Basque separatist
group E.T.A., and Prime Minister Jose Maria Aznar vowed to resist the rebels.
Al Goodman (NYT)


BRITAIN: TRIAL ON TELEVISION: Several media companies, including the BBC, CNN,
ABC and CBS, asked a Scottish court to allow them to televise the trial of two
Libyan men accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland, in
1988. Although English law bans cameras from the courtroom, Scottish law allows
trials to be broadcast after they are over.   Sarah Lyall (NYT)

GEORGIA: STALIN'S GRANDSON CAN'T RUN: The Central Election Commission rejected
an attempt by Yevgeny Dzhugashvili, a grandson of Stalin, to run for president,
ruling that he could not be a candidate in the April 9 election because he is a
Russian citizen. Mr. Dzhugashvili, a 64-year-old retired army colonel who has
called for restoration of the Soviet Union, was barred from running for
Parliament last fall. Stalin, whose original surname was Dzhugashvili, was born
in Georgia.   (AP)

TURKEY: CLASHES IN KURDISH REGION: Police forces battled demonstrators in the
Kurdish city of Diyarbakir who were protesting the arrest of three Kurdish
mayors charged with aiding Kurdish terrorists. The clash reflects the sudden
worsening of relations between Kurdish politicians and the government.   Stephen
Kinzer (NYT)

ASIA

INDONESIA: GENERAL FACES QUESTIONING: Parliament plans to question General
Wiranto about the killings and destruction in East Timor last year. The general
was suspended from his cabinet post this month so that he could concentrate on
investigations into the atrocities and on a criminal investigation by the
attorney general.   Seth Mydans (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: GUN LAW CHALLENGED: The Supreme Court heard a challenge to a law that
would require all Canadians to obtain licenses by the end of the year and
register all their guns by the end of 2001. The challenge, initiated by six
provinces, asserts that the federal government is invading their right to
regulate private property. Since the new law went into effect 15 months ago,
roughly 5 percent of Canada's estimated 3 million gun owners have applied for
licenses. A ruling is expected this spring.   James Brooke (NYT)

MEXICO: SUSPECTED KIDNAPPER HELD: Federal authorities arrested Nicolas Caletri
Lopez, 44, whom they described as one of Mexico's most prolific kidnappers, and
said they were seeking to identify government officials who may have protected
him. Authorities attributed the abduction of at least seven industrialists to
Mr. Caletri.   Sam Dillon (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: SECURITY SPENDING SLASHED: Israel cut its budget for security for the
170,000 Jewish settlers in the West Bank and Gaza, slashing such funding from
$34.5 million to $6.2 million in line with overall cuts in the Defense Ministry
budget, the government said.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)

ISRAEL: WITHDRAWAL FROM LEBANON: Maj. Gen. Giora Eiland, the Israeli Army's
chief of operations, told reporters that he expected Israeli troops to leave
Lebanon by year's end, but expressed doubt about Prime Minister Ehud Barak's
July 7 deadline for a withdrawal. The July date is based on the uncertain
prospects for a peace pact with Syria, he said, adding that without such an
agreement there could still be "some formula" for a withdrawal.   William A.
Orme, Jr. (NYT)

AFRICA

RWANDA: U.N. SEEKS REVERSAL: The United Nations war crimes prosecutor argued for
the reversal of a decision that could free a top suspect in the 1994 genocide
that took the lives of at least 500,000 ethnic Tutsi and moderate Hutu in
Rwanda. The prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, said new evidence proves that it was
not the fault of prosecutors that the suspect, Jean-Bosco Barayagwiza, a former
Hutu government official, was not charged for the crimes in a timely manner. But
Mr. Barayagwiza's lawyers said that the evidence was not new and that Mr.
Barayagwiza should be released, as ordered by an appeals court late last year.
   Ian Fisher (NYT)

BURUNDI: CLINTON URGES PEACE: President Clinton urged Burundi's leaders to
"accept the risks of peacemaking" and reach a settlement. In a speech beamed via
satellite to negotiators in Tanzania, Mr. Clinton said the United States
supported efforts to resolve the civil war in Burundi, which has killed more
than 200,000 people since 1993. Aides said it was the first time the White House
had engaged in video diplomacy.   (AP)

ZIMBABWE: MUGABE FACES SUIT: The Supreme Court ruled that human rights lawyers
may sue President Robert Mugabe to force him to release the findings of two
inquiries into alleged atrocities by troops trying to stop a rebellion in
Matabeleland in the 1980's. Mr. Mugabe commissioned the inquiries but the
results have never been made public.   Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

SOUTH AFRICA: SUBPOENAS WITHDRAWN: Bowing to pressure from the media, the Human
Rights Commission has agreed to invite -- not subpoena -- dozens of editors and
news directors to defend themselves against charges of racism. The panel agreed
to withdraw its subpoenas provided that the news organizations agreed to
participate in the hearings on racism in the media, which are scheduled for next
month.   Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

 Compiled by Joseph R. Gregory


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: PANASONIC (NSE) (69%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING  (90%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (90%);

COUNTRY: SPAIN (95%); SCOTLAND (94%); CANADA (93%); GEORGIA (92%); FRANCE (92%);

 EUROPE (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); BELGIUM (90%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
ENGLAND (79%); ASIA (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); INDONESIA (79%);

STATE: BASQUE COUNTRY, SPAIN (79%);

COMPANY: PANASONIC HOME APPLIANCES INDIA CO LTD (69%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SPAIN (95%); SCOTLAND (94%); CANADA (93%); GEORGIA (92%); FRANCE
(92%); EUROPE (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); BELGIUM (90%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

 ENGLAND (79%); ASIA (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); INDONESIA (79%);   BASQUE
COUNTRY, SPAIN (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  EXTRADITION (91%); BOMBINGS (90%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (89%); TERRORISM (89%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); POLITICS (89%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (89%); ARRESTS (77%); ELECTIONS (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (76%);
PRIME MINISTERS (76%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS

 (76%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (76%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (75%); LAWYERS
(74%); SUPREME COURTS (72%); LEGISLATION (72%); GUN CONTROL (72%); TORTURE
(72%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (68%); KIDNAPPING &
ABDUCTION (68%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (68%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (68%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (68%); GRANDCHILDREN (66%); ELECTION AUTHORITIES (66%);
LICENSES & PERMITS (66%); POLICE FORCES (63%); APPEALS (50%);   HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (75%);

PERSON: JACK STRAW (57%);

LOAD-DATE: February 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             836 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 24, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Utah Senate Approves Bill To Fight Polygamist Crimes

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 508 words


More than a century after Utah outlawed polygamy, state lawmakers are still
trying to fight polygamist clans.

The state Senate voted 28 to 1 yesterday in favor of a bill that would earmark
$500,000 for prosecution of abuse and fraud in polygamous societies and pay for
a hot line and emergency shelter for women and children who leave polygamous
enclaves. The bill now goes to the House, where a similar bill was defeated last
month.

"We want to make it clear that this is not about people with different religious
beliefs or consenting adults," said the bill's sponsor, Senator Ron Allen, a
Democrat. "This is about felonies in these communities."

Mr. Allen said that he believed there were about 50,000 polygamists in Utah and
that about 300 women and children left polygamous families in the last year.

Polygamists in the state trace their beliefs to Mormonism, but the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints long ago disavowed the practice and Utah, as a
condition of statehood, outlawed polygamy in 1896. Polygamy, a third-degree
felony, is rarely prosecuted because many of the marriages, while performed in a
church, are not registered with the authorities.

"It's come to my attention in the past couple of years that there are a number
of human rights violations in our state in these closed societies," Mr. Allen
said. "Some are the same types of crimes that occur in non-polygamous society,
such as child abuse and incest, but also welfare and tax fraud. There is a
preponderance of empirical evidence that these crimes are quite common and may
even have the tacit approval of some community members."

Mr. Allen said the extra money and resources were needed because there should be
more aggressive investigations and prosecutions, which have to penetrate what he
called "secret communities."

"These people are taught to not talk to the outside world," he said.

He cited cases of women and children who left their families behind and had
nowhere to go.

"We believe it's a first major step," Mr. Allen said, "and we are giving women
and children an opportunity to set their own directions and have a sense of
freedom in their lives."

State Representative Matt Throckmorton, a Republican, called the proposed
legislation discriminatory prosecution.

"They have a religious belief about plural marriages; they do not have a
religious belief that these crimes are acceptable," said Mr. Throckmorton, who
voted against the bill in the House.  "We currently have laws to deal with these
crimes. We don't need a new prosecutor or new money."

The Utah attorney general's office has about $75,000 in its budget for
investigations of crimes in isolated communities.

The jailing of two prominent polygamists for child abuse last year put a
spotlight on the issue. A father pleaded no contest to beating his 16-year-old
daughter after she ran away from a marriage to her uncle, who was convicted of
incest.

Vicki Varela, a spokeswoman for Gov. Michael O. Leavitt, a Republican, said the
governor supported the bill.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: UTAH, USA (97%);

COMPANY: THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UTAH;   UNITED STATES (97%);   UTAH, USA (97%);

SUBJECT: POLYGAMY; LAW AND LEGISLATION; FRAUDS AND SWINDLING; HOT LINES
POLYGAMY (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (92%); RELIGION (92%); US STATE GOVERNMENT
(91%); MORMONS & MORMONISM (90%); FELONIES (90%); MARRIAGE (90%); LEGISLATION
(90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); CHILD ABUSE
(89%); CHILDREN (89%); FAMILY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (88%); APPROVALS (87%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (78%); WOMEN (78%); TAX FRAUD (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (77%); TAX LAW (73%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (72%);
TEMPORARY SHELTERS (72%); WOMEN'S SHELTERS (71%); BUDGETS (69%); ATTORNEYS
GENERAL (62%);

PERSON: ALLEN, RON (SEN); LEAVITT, MICHAEL O (GOV)  MICHAEL O LEAVITT (58%);

LOAD-DATE: February 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             841 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 28, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Battling in Colombia but Touring Together in Europe

BYLINE: By LARRY ROHTER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1191 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Feb. 27


Officially, peace talks between the Colombian government and the largest rebel
group are stalled, with no date set for them to resume. Yet just the other day,
the government's chief negotiator boasted that "we have advanced further this
month than in 40 years of conflict."

That apparent paradox is a result of an unusual new twist to efforts to
negotiate an end to a civil conflict that has killed 35,000 Colombians just in
the last decade. Army troops continue their confrontation on the battlefield
with the leftist Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by its Spanish
acronym as Farc. But at the same time, a delegation with representatives from
each side has spent most of February touring Europe together.

The unconventional arrangement has been described by Victor G. Ricardo, the
government's chief peace negotiator, as an effort to build confidence and trust
between the adversaries while "coming to know the models of friendly countries."
At each stop along the way, the joint government-guerrilla delegation has met
with officials, intellectuals, aid donors, religious leaders and journalists,
often issuing a joint statement afterward.

Last summer, the chairman of the New York Stock Exchange visited leaders of the
rebel group at their jungle stronghold in San Vicente del Caguan. The Colombian
government explained the move as part of an effort to "educate" the guerrillas,
whose main leader has been fighting in the bush for more than 50 years, about
the modern world and its ways.

The European trip, which included stops in Norway, Sweden, Italy, the Vatican,
Switzerland, Spain and France, seemed motivated in part by the same desire.

At the very least, the guerrillas have been exposed not only to European social
democracy but also to a barrage of criticism of their involvement in drug
trafficking, kidnapping for ransom and human rights violations. The implication
is that if Europe is ever to view the group as an insurgency with legitimate
political goals, as it did Central American guerrillas in the 1980's, it must
change its behavior.

Perhaps as a result, some experts here say they have detected a slight shift of
position by the group on the question of a cease-fire. Though the guerrillas
have always said fighting would continue until at least 80 percent of the
negotiating agenda had been resolved, Raul Reyes, the leader of the rebel
delegation, has suggested that the group might be willing to call a halt to
hostilities at an earlier stage.

The rebels have also softened the tone of their criticism of links between
government security forces and right-wing death squads, which they previously
had contended were one and the same. "We know that the president has not created
the paramilitary groups and that he wants to combat them," Mr. Reyes said in
Paris last Thursday. A day later, he added, "Fortunately, it is not the entire
army but only a part of the military that participates in this."

A few optimists like Leon Valencia, a columnist for El Tiempo, the main daily
here, have even suggested that the ties being developed between the two sets of
negotiators have created an opening to international mediation of the conflict.
The rebel group has a reputation here for xenophobia, and just last summer
rejected a government request that international monitors be sent to the zone
where the government ceded them control in the hope that it would speed peace
talks.

Indeed, such a mediator already appears to be in place. The United Nations
Secretary General, Kofi Annan, recently appointed Jan Egeland, a former deputy
foreign minister of Norway, as his special adviser on the conflict here.
Colombians welcomed the move because of the crucial role Norway played in peace
agreements between Israel and the Palestinians and, more recently, the
government of Guatemala and guerrillas there.

But since taking office 18 months ago promising to bring peace, President Andres
Pastrana has often been criticized for conceding too much to the rebel group,
including control of a chunk of territory the size of Switzerland, without
receiving anything in return. For those and other critics, the European tour,
which ended over the weekend, has provided plenty of new ammunition.

"This has been like the formal presentation of an unruly debutante to polite
society," said Alfredo Rangel Suarez, a former national security adviser to the
Colombian government. "It reinforces the Farc's legitimacy as a counterweight to
the government, strengthens their image in the eye of Colombian public opinion,
and lifts the morale of their combatants in the field."

The government has repeatedly refused to grant the rebel group formal
recognition as a belligerent. But with the government and rebel negotiating
teams traveling and meeting European governments together, Mr. Ricardo, the
peace negotiator, is in practical terms both conceding the rebels that status
and saying he recognizes them as his partners in peace efforts.

But even as the European tour was taking place, the United States Congress has
been considering a Clinton administration request for $1.6 billion in emergency
assistance to Colombia. The largest single component of that proposed package,
which the rebel group has condemned, consists of 63 helicopters for the
Colombian armed forces and police, intended to allow them to operate in
coca-growing areas that the rebels dominate.

Criticizing the Clinton administration package, the director of the United
Nations counterdrug program here, Klaus Nyholm, described it last week as "a lot
of stick and very little carrot." Senator Patrick J. Leahy, Democrat of Vermont,
has expressed similar concerns at recent hearings in Washington, estimating that
79 percent of the aid package is destined for the Colombian military.

But from the Colombian government's point of view, that would beprecisely the
utility of the American aid. It would be only one part of a much more ambitious
$7.5 billion program that the Pastrana administration calls Plan Colombia, which
contains proposals both to curb the narcotics trade and to bring about economic
and social development.

So while Mr. Ricardo escorted the rebels around Europe, another Colombian
government delegation met with European governments seeking nearly $1 billion in
aid for the "carrot" part of Plan Colombia. One benefit of the rebel tour, then,
was that it permitted the Colombian government to remind potential European
donors that it is up against dogmatic guerrillas with a blinkered view of the
world and little sense of politics other than from the barrel of a gun.

In dealing with Washington, a senior government official said here on Friday,
the Pastrana administration constantly needs to remind the United States that
while "we are going to fight drugs," the peace efforts are also vital.

But because "Europe thought it strange we have a peace process and a counterdrug
strategy in the same package," he added, there is also a need to "tell Europe
the opposite": that while negotiations are essential, "you cannot address the
causes of violence without addressing drug trafficking."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (92%); HOLY SEE (79%); SWITZERLAND

 (79%); SPAIN (79%); NORWAY (79%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (54%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%); PARIS, FRANCE (54%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA  NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE LLC
(55%);   REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA  REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES
OF COLOMBIA (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (98%); EUROPE (94%); FRANCE (92%); HOLY SEE
(79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); SPAIN (79%); NORWAY (79%); NORDIC COUNTRIES (54%);
BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (58%); PARIS, FRANCE (54%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); PEACE
PROCESS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%);

 NARCOTERRORISM (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMIES (77%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); POLITICS (74%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (71%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (67%); RELIGION (67%); STOCK EXCHANGES (66%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (62%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (62%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (50%);

PERSON: ROHTER, LARRY  RAUL REYES (57%); VICTOR G RICARDO (57%);

LOAD-DATE: February 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             843 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Tribunal Sentences Croatian General to 45 Years

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 697 words

DATELINE: PARIS, March 3


An international tribunal in The Hague today sentenced a Croatian general, the
highest-ranking military commander yet brought to trial, to 45 years in prison
for war crimes committed during the Bosnian conflict.

The tribunal for the former Yugoslavia sentenced Gen. Tihomir Blaskic for
ordering a series of attacks on Muslim villagers in Bosnia between 1992 and 1994
while his forces were trying to secure the area for Croatia. It was the harshest
sentence handed down by the tribunal since the United Nations created it in
1993.

Unexpectedly, the court also indirectly indicted the government of former
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, openly stating that Zagreb had overall
control of the Bosnian Croat authorities and over General Blaskic's militia.

"The Republic of Croatia did not content itself with merely remaining a
spectator on the sidelines or even seek simply to protect its borders," the
ruling read. "It intervened in the conflict, pitting Muslims and Croats of
central Bosnia against each other."

General Blaskic, 39, was convicted for crimes against humanity, war crimes and
grave breaches of the Geneva Convention, which deals with the protection of
civilians during war. Although he was not charged with "killing a Muslim by his
own hand," the judges said that as commander of the militia, the so-called
Croatian Defense Council, he was responsible for personally ordering attacks and
for failing to prevent or punish crimes committed by his subordinates.

In Zagreb, officials of the new government immediately criticized the verdict,
saying that General Blaskic had been far more moderate than many Croatian
nationalists. "There is no doubt that the sentence is very harsh and I believe
it will have to be re-examined in the appeals process," Prime Minister Ivica
Racan said on Croatian radio.

Announcing the ruling of the three-judge panel, Judge Claude Jorda cited a long
list of atrocities by the Croatian militia against terror-stricken Muslims in
the villages of Bosnia's Lasva Valley, in which hundreds were killed and many
were beaten, raped or burned alive in their homes. One of the worst examples was
the rampage in village of Ahmici, which led to the death of more than 100 men,
women and children.

"The crimes you committed, General Blaskic, are extremely serious," Judge Jorda
said. "The acts of war carried out with disregard for international humanitarian
law and in hatred of another people, the villages reduced to rubble, the houses
and stables set on fire and destroyed, the people forced to abandon their homes,
the lost and broken lives, are unacceptable."

Witnesses said that as the sentence was read out in the courtroom, Ratka
Blaskic, the defendant's wife, broke down, sobbing, while he remained calm.

During the trial, Croatian nationalist extremists had threatened Ante Nobilo,
one of General Blaskic's lawyers, who then moved his family temporarily to The
Netherlands from Croatia.

The general's defense lawyers had argued that the commander was powerless to
stop the Croatian militiamen because they were "poorly trained recruits" in a
new and ill-organized command. But the judges ruled that the court had more
"evidence than it needs to note that the chain of command was operating
satisfactorily."

Prosecutors expressed satisfaction with the verdict and said the sentence had
helped achieve their goal of judging the most senior commanders of the war in
the former Yugoslavia.

"Today is a turning point," said Paul Risley, spokesman for the prosecutor's
office. "In previous sentences, we've been forced to deal with the foot soldiers
and camp guards and the like who carried out crimes. Now we are moving to the
more senior commanders."

Although the leaders of the war are still at large, three senior Bosnian Serb
commanders are now also in custody in The Hague, and their trials are expected
to start soon.

General Blaskic's trial took 25 months and involved testimony from 158 witnesses
and some 30,000 pages of evidence. It has been held up, both inside and outside
the tribunal, as an example of how the court should not function, paving the way
for reforms meant to speed up the proceedings.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CROATIA (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); NETHERLANDS (92%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%);   ZAGREB, CROATIA (88%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA; CROATIA;   CROATIA (99%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (97%); NETHERLANDS (92%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%);   ZAGREB,
CROATIA (88%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION  WAR CRIMES (95%); SENTENCING (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); EYEWITNESSES (89%); VERDICTS (78%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); JUDGES (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); ARSON
(77%); RELIGION (77%); LAWYERS (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (75%);
CHILDREN (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (70%); BORDER CONTROL (69%); BURN INJURIES
(66%); FIRES (66%); APPEALS (63%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (52%);   CORRECTIONS
(90%); LAW OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; BLASKIC, TIHOMIR (GEN)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             844 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 4, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Back in Chile

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (89%); SPAIN (74%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN; SPAIN;   CHILE (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (89%);
SPAIN (74%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (59%);

SUBJECT: CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-SPAIN; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-GREAT BRITAIN; EXTRADITION; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  WAR CRIMES (89%); EXTRADITION (86%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (86%);

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN)

LOAD-DATE: March 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Gen. Augusto Pinochet, the ex-dictator, arriving in Santiago
from house arrest in London. Page A3. (Agence France-Presse)

TYPE: Caption

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             846 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 5, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Silent Minority

BYLINE: By Ira M. Lapidus;  Ira M. Lapidus's most recent book is "A History of
Islamic Societies."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 19; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 708 words



THE ARAB SHI'A
 The Forgotten Muslims.
 By Graham E. Fuller
 and Rend Rahim Francke.
 290 pp. New York:
 St. Martin's Press. $45.

This book deals with a subject that receives scarcely any attention from
American policy makers and even less from the general public. The Shiite Muslims
of Iran are relatively well known to us. The Shiite minorities throughout the
Arab world are virtually unknown.

The numbers are small. Adherents of the Shia branch of Islam represent about 12
million Iraqis, or between 55 to 60 percent of the population; about 400,000
Bahrainis, or 70 percent of the population; some 500,000 Kuwaitis, or 25 to 30
percent of the population; some 300,000 to 500,000 Saudis, or 2 to 3 percent of
the population; and about 1.3 million Lebanese, or 30 to 40 percent of the
population. But they are strategically situated in the oil-producing and transit
regions of the Persian Gulf or on the sensitive Israeli frontier.

"The Arab Shi'a" calls our attention to their plight. In general, the Shiites
are impoverished, discriminated against and sometimes brutally repressed. The
regime of Saddam Hussein has curtailed their religious activities, executed the
principal religious leaders and crushed any organized Shiite opposition. After
the gulf war countless numbers of Shiites were killed for rising up against the
government. In Saudi Arabia they are not even considered Muslims. No public
expression of religious faith is allowed; religious books are banned; rights to
build mosques are restricted.

The Shiites in the Arab states ask for an end to discrimination and for freedom
to worship. But in Bahrain, Saudi Arabia and Iraq they have no leverage. No
dialogue is possible with these governments. If resistance is expressed for the
sake of a just Islamic state, both moderate Shiites and Sunni Muslims will
reject the call as religious radicalism. If Shiites present their claims in
secular democratic language, the Sunnis will reject them as a cover for
sectarian interests. Violence is not inherent in Shiism, but in these countries
there is practically no other recourse.

Graham E. Fuller, a senior policy analyst at RAND Corporation, and Rend Rahim
Francke, the executive director of the Iraq Foundation, an organization
dedicated to democratization in Iraq, urge us to recognize that the condition of
the Shiites is a serious problem in terms of human rights, the safety of oil
supplies and long-term regional stability. They are gently critical of American
policy for its support of dictatorial regimes, and they argue that Washington
should pressure Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and Kuwait to further integrate their
Shiite populations. The reader can tell that they have little hope that this
will be done. United States policy in the Persian Gulf region is based on the
support of these friendly governments.

The situation of the Shiites in Lebanon is entirely different from that in other
Arab countries. There, civil war destroyed the state and gave the Shiites, once
the poorest, most despised part of the population, a chance to become the most
powerful political force in the country. In post-civil war Lebanon, Amal, one of
the largest political parties, and the more radical Hezbollah have accepted the
idea of a multireligious society. This pluralism is Fuller and Francke's best
model for a solution to the Shia question.

The book is especially valuable for policy considerations, but it lacks the
human dimension that might engage our deeper sympathies. More important, the
central concept of "The Arab Shi'a" seems flawed. Despite shared religious
beliefs, Arab Shiites are not a single people. They do not have a central
religious authority or any common institutions. Some Shiites are religious
militants calling for a just Islamic state; others are secularists working for
integration into the existing states. While Iran is now the most important
center of Shia religious scholarship, Arab Shiites keep their distance,
understanding that Tehran has its own nationalist agenda. The truth is that the
Shiites are not unified anywhere except in this book, and there cannot be a
single American policy toward them, only a variety of responses depending upon
the conditions in each country.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (51%);

INDUSTRY: SIC8732 COMMERCIAL ECONOMIC, SOCIOLOGICAL, & EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH
(63%); NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (51%); SIC6513
OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (51%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); IRAQ (94%); BAHRAIN (93%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); GULF STATES (92%); LEBANON (92%); KUWAIT (92%);

 ISRAEL (79%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (90%);

COMPANY: RAND CORP (63%); AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (51%);
SHIITE MUSLIMS OF IRAN (81%);

ORGANIZATION: SHIITE MUSLIMS OF IRAN (81%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); SAUDI ARABIA (94%); IRAQ (94%); BAHRAIN (93%);
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); GULF STATES (92%); LEBANON (92%); KUWAIT (92%);

 ISRAEL (79%);   INDIAN OCEAN (90%);

SUBJECT: BOOKS AND LITERATURE; REVIEWS; ISLAM; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION
RELIGION (95%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (92%); BOOK REVIEWS (91%); PUBLIC POLICY (89%);
DISCRIMINATION (89%); CENSORSHIP (78%); LITERATURE (77%); DESERT STORM (75%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (71%); CIVIL WAR (70%); EXECUTIVES
(66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (60%);

PERSON: LAPIDUS, IRA M; FRANCKE, REND RAHIM; FULLER, GRAHAM E  SADDAM HUSSEIN
(50%);

LOAD-DATE: March 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             852 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 10, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

C.I.A. Gives Fired Official a Career Award

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 183 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, March 9


The C.I.A. has awarded a career achievement medal to a former senior official
who was fired in 1995 for failing to notify Congress about human rights abuses
in Guatemala, intelligence officials said.

The official, Terry Ward, had been the chief of operations for Latin America. He
was fired for his role in managing the C.I.A.'s relationship with the Guatemalan
military and for having failed to tell Congress about the agency's ties to a
Guatemalan colonel, Julio Roberto Alpirez, a paid American agent, who was
accused of involvement in the murder of an American innkeeper, Michael DeVine.

The Distinguished Career Intelligence Medal is routinely given to retiring
senior C.I.A. officials. The decision to issue it to Mr. Ward at a closed
ceremony later this month was first reported by The Washington Post. Mr. Ward
could not be reached for comment.

The award is being given to Mr. Ward at a time when the man who fired him, John
Deutch, the agency's former director, is himself under investigation by the
Justice Department for serious security lapses involving his home computers.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: WPO (NYSE) (56%);   GHC (NYSE) (56%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (56%); NAICS515120
TELEVISION BROADCASTING (56%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (56%);
NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (56%);   SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%);

COUNTRY: GUATEMALA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (72%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: WASHINGTON POST CO (56%);   GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (56%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC

 (56%);   CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (94%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA (94%); UNITED STATES (93%); LATIN AMERICA (72%);
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   DISMISSALS (90%); INTELLIGENCE
SERVICES (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT

 (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%);

PERSON: TERRY WARD (92%);

LOAD-DATE: March 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             855 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 12, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths
COHEN, MAXWELL T.

SECTION: Section 1; Page 51; Column 1; Classified

LENGTH: 88 words


COHEN-Maxwell T. February 25, 2000 after a long illness. Served as civil rights,
human rights and music industry lawyer for over 50 years. Honored for his
successful fight to overturn cabaret licensing laws (police cards),as author of
Race, Color, Creed in Adoption Proceedings and as a champion of The Genocide
Convention. Father of Rachel Val Cohen and Barbara Cohen-Stratyner. Grandfather
of Jay and Jonathan. Brother of Bernard Coran. Contributions can be made to the
Musicians Foundation or The New York Public Library.

http://www.nytimes.com

COMPANY: NEW YORK (57%); MUSICIANS FOUNDATION (57%); JAY&JONATHAN BROTHER (57%);



ORGANIZATION: NEW YORK (57%); MUSICIANS FOUNDATION (57%); JAY&JONATHAN BROTHER
(57%);

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%); LAWYERS (88%); ARTISTS &
PERFORMERS (88%); MUSIC (88%); MUSIC INDUSTRY (88%); CIVIL RIGHTS (88%);
ENTERTAINMENT & ARTS (85%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS (85%); GENOCIDE (85%); WRITERS
(84%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (84%); LICENSES & PERMITS (84%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(53%);

PERSON: COHEN, MAXWELL T.   COHEN-MAXWELL T (90%); BERNARD CORAN (57%); BARBARA
COHEN-STRATYNER (57%); RACHEL VAL (57%);

LOAD-DATE: March 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Paid Death Notice

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             866 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
Searching for Justice in Chile and Argentina

BYLINE: By TINA ROSENBERG

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 770 words


Until 16 months ago, it appeared that Chile had come to terms with the crimes of
the Pinochet years. The murders, torture and forced disappearances, most of
which took place in the mid-1970's, had faded from public attention. Not much
was happening in the courts. But on Oct. 16, 1998, Gen. Augusto Pinochet was
arrested in London on charges issued in Spain, and the illusion of Chile's
reconciliation abruptly ended.

Although General Pinochet will not face trial in Spain, today dozens of his
high-ranking military officers have been arrested in Chile on charges of murder,
kidnapping or torture. A judge is investigating 60 accusations of Mr. Pinochet's
involvement in these crimes. Questions of justice, healing and the fate of the
disappeared are once again gripping society. It is now apparent that Chile's
silence about the past was due to fear, pressure from a civilian government
anxious to keep the generals happy, and the sense that no justice was possible.
The emotion uncorked by Mr. Pinochet's arrest in connection with events that
took place a quarter-century ago shows the necessity of a reckoning with these
crimes. Time alone, it seems, will not free a society from the grip of the past.

Chile's treatment of Pinochet-era crimes has been limited by the government's
reluctance to provoke any insubordination from a still-powerful military. The
civilian government set up a truth commission, but the armed forces did not
cooperate, and to this day refuse to acknowledge that there was a policy of
killings or provide information about the fate of the disappeared. Except for a
handful of cases there were no trials, and courts respected an amnesty that
General Pinochet issued for crimes committed before 1978.

Even today, anti-Pinochet politicians are eager to grant him a peaceful
retirement. Although Chile argued to Britain that Mr. Pinochet should face
justice at home, the government and Congress supported a constitutional
amendment allowing him to keep senatorial immunity even if he gives up his
Senate seat. The amendment goes to a final vote on Saturday. The new president,
Ricardo Lagos, should start his term by vetoing this cynical proposal. Most
Chileans, according to polls, would like to see Mr. Pinochet tried. So many
torture victims have sought treatment since his arrest that organizations that
offer counseling are inundated.

To a lesser extent, judicial investigations abroad are also finding their echo
in Argentina. Baltasar Garzon, the Spanish judge who indicted Mr.  Pinochet, is
investigating several Argentine military leaders for crimes during the "Dirty
War" era, in the mid-1970's. That has helped inspire an Argentine judge to order
the arrest of several members of the Dirty War juntas, including two former
heads of state, for the kidnapping and illegal adoption of babies born to
prisoners who were later murdered.

After the dictatorships fell in 1983, Argentina convicted five junta leaders of
murder, torture and other crimes. But a series of military rebellions frightened
the civilian governments into issuing amnesties and, in 1990, pardoning the
junta members still in prison. Even today, however, the outraged families of
victims pursue justice and information about the missing. Mothers of the
disappeared still march, and an organization of the children of the missing is
active nationwide. Another group, Grandmothers of the Plaza de Mayo, has located
76 of the babies taken from prisoners. The grandmothers' efforts led to numerous
trials of low-level baby-snatchers -- a crime not covered by amnesties or
pardons -- and made possible the trials of junta members today.

The soldiers who killed and tortured, and the civilian governments who later
chose silence over justice, little imagined that decades later the crimes would
still roil their nations. One reason Chileans and Argentines are seeing justice
today is the presence of a new generation of judges who owe nothing to the
generals. In addition, most of the victims were urban, middle-class political
activists. Those who survived torture, and families of the dead and disappeared,
have the time and political skills to pursue their crusade.

The other reason that time has not brought silence is that many of those who
were killed simply disappeared. Their bodies were never found, and every family
still lives, even after 25 years, with a flicker of hope that the missing son
will someday walk through the front door. They cannot move on. As the past year
has shown, nor can a society truly bury the past while the bones are missing,
the killers free and the dead unmourned.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (58%);

COUNTRY: CHILE (99%); ARGENTINA (94%); SPAIN (94%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (91%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; GREAT BRITAIN;   CHILE (99%); ARGENTINA (94%); SPAIN (94%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (91%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-GREAT BRITAIN;
CHILE-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-SPAIN; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION  MURDER (90%);
ARRESTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); TORTURE (90%); MISSING PERSONS
(89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (87%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(78%); AMNESTY (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); VETO (77%); JUDGES (77%); ARMED FORCES (75%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (73%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (72%); POLITICS (67%); VOTERS & VOTING (66%);
INFANTS & TODDLERS (50%); ADOPTION (50%);   CORRECTIONS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (60%);

PERSON: PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); ROSENBERG, TINA  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (94%);



LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             870 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 23, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Terms of Khmer Rouge Trials Still Elude U.N. and Cambodia

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 575 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia, March 22


A team of United Nations negotiators left Cambodia today after failing again to
reach agreement with the government on the ground rules for a trial of the
surviving leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

The head of the delegation, Hans Corell, said, "We are very close." The
Cambodian government spokesman, Om Yentieng, said: "Mr. Corell has our phone
number. The door remains open."

But on at least one key point, the Cambodians appeared to be intractable as the
United Nations insisted on a tribunal that would not compromise on international
standards of justice.

Though neither side would discuss details of the talks today, diplomats said the
main sticking point involved the demand by the United Nations for a foreign
prosecutor with the authority to issue indictments.

The Cambodians insist on having co-prosecutors -- one foreign and one Cambodian.
This would effectively give the Cambodian side veto power over any indictment.

Discussions between the United Nations and Cambodia have made little progress
over the last year since the surrenders of the last fugitive leaders of the
radical Communist movement responsible for the deaths of more than a million
Cambodians from 1975 to 1979.

United Nations legal experts, who have pioneered in setting up international
tribunals for Rwanda and the former Yugoslavia, have determined that the
Cambodian justice system does not have the competence or political independence
to conduct a trial on its own.

The discussions over the past week, like previous talks, sought to find an
acceptable formula for international participation in the process.

Prime Minister Hun Sen, whose first impulse after the surrenders was to propose
to "dig a hole and bury the past," has resisted international control of a
trial, arguing that this would compromise Cambodia's national sovereignty.

Diplomats here say the chief concern of Mr. Hun Sen, who defected from the Khmer
Rouge in 1977, appears to be a loss of personal control over the process in a
country where he has proclaimed himself the "only captain of the boat," with
final say over all walks of life.

After the the Khmer Rouge killed most of Cambodia's educated people, and after a
decade of civil war that further devastated the country, there are few people
here who even understand the workings of an independent judiciary or the
shortcomings of their own system.

For example, in what was apparently intended as a demonstration that he was
cleaning up the judiciary, where acquittals are routinely purchased by those who
can afford to, Mr. Hun Sen this month simply ordered the re-arrest of several
dozen recently released defendants.

After a final meeting today with the prime minister, Mr. Corell, who is under
secretary general for legal affairs, said: "A few issues still divide us. But we
have made great progress and I am pleased to confirm that we are much further
along the road to success than we were a week ago." He said that his
seven-member team had been willing to continue talking but that the Cambodians
had asked for an adjournment.

Mr. Om Yentieng said Mr. Hun Sen might meet Secretary General Kofi Annan for
further discussions when they both attend a meeting of developing nations in
Cuba in mid-April.

Though Mr. Corell said he would be willing to return for more talks, he said he
had made clear to the Cambodians "the limits in which the United Nations has to
act in this unprecedented endeavor."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%); RWANDA (79%);

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (98%); RWANDA (79%);   PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA
(79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INDICTMENTS
(90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); HEADS OF STATE
& GOVERNMENT (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); WAR CRIMES
(75%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); VETO (73%); ACQUITTAL (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION
(70%); CIVIL WAR (65%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH  HANS CORELL (80%); HUN SEN (79%);

LOAD-DATE: March 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             871 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

METRO NEWS BRIEFS: CONNECTICUT;
Fire Chief Resigns Amid Bias Accusations

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section B; Page 4; Column 6; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 128 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD


After a troubled tenure that included accusations of racism and a three-week
suspension for the misuse of city time, Hartford's fire chief has resigned.
Deputy Chief Charles Teale will take over until a replacement is found, a city
official said yesterday.

Chief Robert Dobson has overseen the 400-member department -- the state's
largest -- since April 1995. He was suspended for three weeks in April for
working on city time at a Bloomfield art gallery and gift shop he and his wife
own and for using a city vehicle to get there.

Chief Dobson, who is black, also faces two federal lawsuits and a state human
rights complaint charging that he discriminated against white firefighters in
promotions and duty assignments. He has denied the bias allegations.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (94%);

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: HARTFORD (CONN);   UNITED STATES (94%);   CONNECTICUT, USA (94%);
HARTFORD, CT, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: FIRES AND FIREMEN; BLACKS; DISCRIMINATION; ETHICS  RACE & RACISM (90%);

 NEWS BRIEFS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(88%); MUSEUMS & GALLERIES (68%); LITIGATION (66%); ETHICS (65%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(51%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (88%);

PERSON: DOBSON, ROBERT (FIRE CHIEF)  ROBERT DOBSON (81%); CHARLES TEALE (55%);

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             875 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE POPE IN THE HOLY LAND: A STRIDENT VOICE;
Mufti Says That Israel Uses Holocaust 'to Win Sympathy'

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section 1; Page 20; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 649 words

DATELINE: JERUSALEM, March 25


The mufti of Jerusalem, who is scheduled to meet with Pope John Paul II on
Sunday, said today that he was fed up with "the way Israel uses the Holocaust to
win sympathy" and to avoid international censure for its behavior toward the
Palestinians.

Sheik Ikrima Sabri, the chief Islamic cleric of the city, who was appointed in
1994 by Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, minced no words in an interview.
All week, with the international media in town, he has availed himself quite
stridently of the public stage that he has been granted by being on the pope's
interfaith itinerary. He has made no attempt to temper his strong views.

Sheik Sabri said today that he believed that the number of 6 million Holocaust
victims is exaggerated. He said Israel demonstrated this week, when it "took
even the pope" to the Yad Vashem Holocaust memorial, that "it considers its pain
more important than anyone else's."

"There have been many massacres in the world," Sheik Sabri, 56, said. "Why is
this Holocaust in particular more important?" he asked. "When it comes to our
cause, nobody pays attention -- whether it is the Crusader massacres against
Muslims or the massacres against Palestinians committed by Israelis. And we
don't keep using and using these massacres to remind the world what we are
owed."

"I never deny that the Holocaust happened, but we believe the number of 6
million is exaggerated," he continued. "The Jews are using this issue, in many
ways, also to blackmail the Germans financially. The Holocaust is the reason
that there isn't a bigger noise against Israel as an occupying force. The
Holocaust is protecting Israel."

The words clashed starkly with the pope's message of reconciliation, and
particularly his conclusive embrace this week of the enormity of the Holocaust.
This embrace included an emphatic rejection of denial or minimization of the
Holocaust.

But the mufti, unlike the Palestinian political leaders, has not acceded to the
pope's agenda here, which includes interfaith healing. He refused to attend the
pope's interfaith gathering on Thursday, where there were verbal clashes over
the status of Jerusalem between Israel's chief rabbis and the lower-level Muslim
cleric who was assigned by Mr. Arafat to go in the sheik's place.

This puts the pope in a very awkward situation. While he has successfully
remained above the fray so far, it might be difficult if the mufti makes such
remarks in his presence on Sunday.

Vatican spokesmen said today, after similar comments were published in La
Repubblica in Italy, that the pope's schedule would not change, but that they
might add a briefing after the morning meeting. "It's certainly not our fault if
Hitler hated the Jews," the mufti was quoted as saying in the Italian newspaper.
"Weren't they hated pretty much everywhere?"

Sheik Sabri also said he believed that Israel was creating a tense atmosphere in
the Old City in advance of Sunday's meeting with the pope.

With stringent security measures, including ordering Palestinian shops in the
area closed, the Israeli police could be provoking violence, he said. He said he
would not be surprised if youths resorted to stone-throwing "because they are
being provoked."

He said his message to the pope would be, "You are a man of peace, and in order
for this city to enjoy peace, the occupation should end and you should stand
with us."

He added: "The visit of the pope opens the door for the whole world to pay
attention to what's going on in the Holy Land, the reality on the ground. This
week the Israeli media cannot monopolize the flow of information. The whole
world is here to see."

Rabbi David Rosen, director of the Anti-Defamation League here, said Israel
would look to Mr. Arafat to distance himself from the mufti's remarks. "It's
very sad that the highest Muslim official in Jerusalem sullies the name of
Islam," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL (95%); HOLY SEE (73%);

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; JERUSALEM;   PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (96%); ISRAEL
(95%); HOLY SEE (73%);   JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%);

SUBJECT: ISLAM; PALESTINIANS; NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS  RELIGION (95%); HOLOCAUST (93%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM
(92%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (90%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%);
INTERVIEWS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%);

PERSON: SONTAG, DEBORAH; SABRI, IKRIMA (SHEIK); POPE (JOHN PAUL II)  TZIPORA
LIVNI (95%);

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             878 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Policing the World

BYLINE: By Jack F. Matlock Jr.;   Jack F. Matlock Jr., a former United States
ambassador to the Soviet Union and the author of "Autopsy on an Empire," is
George F. Kennan professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton,
N.J.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 26; Column 2; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1465 words



DELIVER US FROM EVIL
 Peacekeepers, Warlords and a World
 of Endless Conflict.
 By William Shawcross.
 447 pp. New York:
 Simon & Schuster. $27.50.

William Shawcross's "Sideshow: Kissinger, Nixon and the Destruction of
Cambodia," published in 1979, set off a passionate debate over responsibility
for the massacres inflicted on the Cambodian people in the 1970's by Khmer Rouge
fanatics. Shawcross contended that President Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger,
his assistant for national security at the time, were the principal culprits.
Referring to American policy during the Vietnam War, Shawcross concluded,
"Cambodia was not a mistake; it was a crime."

To many observers, this reviewer included, Shawcross's accusation seemed not
merely excessive but perversely misdirected. Whatever mistakes the Nixon
administration might have made in Southeast Asia, the charge that the United
States government was responsible, even indirectly, for the murderous behavior
of the Khmer Rouge seemed patently unreasonable. In blaming the United States,
Shawcross implicitly lifted much of the guilt from those who were directly
responsible for one of the most gruesome atrocities in human history: the Khmer
Rouge leaders and their mentors and supporters in Mao Zedong's China.

In "Deliver Us From Evil," Shawcross is still looking for culprits other than
the local demagogues and warlords who have initiated and perpetuated conflict in
the 1990's. His current target is broader than a single government; he
identifies it at various times as the members of the United Nations Security
Council, the "international community" or even the entire "post-cold-war world."
In an early chapter he sets forth the proposition that "the post-cold-war world
has exaggerated ethnic hatreds, encouraged the failure of states, exacerbated
internal conflicts (or at least prolonged them) and led to more global
disorder." Such a statement could make one nostalgic for the cold war until one
remembers what it actually was like.

Readers, however, should not allow questionable judgments of culpability to
detract from the value of this book. When Shawcross describes what he has
witnessed, he is persuasive. His fast-paced account shifts abruptly from one
conflict to another -- Cambodia to Bosnia, Somalia to Sierra Leone, Rwanda to
Kosovo, Iraq to East Timor. Along with vivid descriptions, he gives us a feel
for the context in which these conflicts have arisen and unforgettable glimpses
of the catastrophic impact they have had on human lives.

Shawcross finds few heroes among the political leaders of the past decade. He
repeatedly characterizes the policies of the major powers as either cowardly and
inept or self-serving and destructive, usually giving scant attention to the
domestic political context in which policies were made. He is, however,
sympathetic to the United Nations officials in trouble spots. They were rarely
given the means to achieve the goals set by member governments, yet were held
responsible for failures not of their making.

If the book has a central positive character, it is Kofi Annan, the current
United Nations secretary general. Shawcross traveled with Annan in Africa, the
Balkans and elsewhere. Invariably picturing Annan's role in a favorable light,
Shawcross fuses descriptions of his trips with explanations of the way the
conflicts developed and character portraits of the local protagonists.

Whenever Shawcross focuses on a particular problem, his judgments are more
reliable than the statements he makes regarding post-cold-war conflict in
general. He notes accurately that the thousands of deaths that preceded the
Dayton agreement on Bosnia in 1995 might have been avoided if the United States
had supported the settlement proposed in 1993 by former Secretary of State Cyrus
Vance and the former British foreign secretary David Owen. The Clinton
administration undermined the Vance-Owen proposal for reasons that were more
theoretical than practical: it did not wish to "legitimatize" the consolidation
of ethnic groups into cantonal areas. Forced movement of people is indeed a
deplorable practice that should be discouraged when possible. However, given the
passions that were raging in Bosnia in 1993, relocation was surely preferable to
the mass murder, mayhem and rapine that followed the breakdown of negotiations.

The Dayton accords stopped most of the plundering and killing in Bosnia, but
ethnic cleansing has not been reversed. There is still no effective central
authority or sense of nationhood in Bosnia. Even the fragile peace that prevails
will depend, for the foreseeable future, on the willingness of foreign
governments to provide military force sufficient to deter the various factions
from going after one another once again.

Shawcross also criticizes American policy in several other troubled areas.
President Clinton precipitately withdrew American forces from Somalia once they
experienced casualties, he says, making a bad situation even worse. In addition,
Shawcross argues, though less plausibly, the United States prevented other
nations from responding promptly to the genocidal massacres that suddenly
erupted in Rwanda. And the refusal by the United States to consider intervention
on the ground in Kosovo resulted in an aerial war against Serbia that has had
many unintended negative effects: Slobodan Milosevic is still in power in
Serbia; Kosovo is under international occupation with no end in sight; and
ethnic cleansing has continued, though now against Serbs rather than Albanians.

Over all, the message implicit in "Deliver Us From Evil" is gloomy: Shawcross
describes only qualified and partial successes for peacemaking (in Cambodia and
Bosnia) and failure virtually everywhere else. Nevertheless, he makes an effort
to end the book on an optimistic note with the suggestion that the idea of
"humanitarian intervention" is gaining international support. This is a
questionable judgment, and Shawcross's prescriptions tend to be muddled and
contradictory. "Intervention can assist people when they are desperate," he
argues, but he demands that it be "consistent" and that it be "followed
through." At the same time, he considers "humility" to be "important" and warns
that "we cannot suddenly rebuild failed states . . . in our own image."

So what should be the object of intervention? Troops on the ground may prevent
atrocities (at least for a time), but do strikes from the air directed at a
country's infrastructure help? And what does "follow through" mean? Policing an
area forever? Creating a civil society? Apparently not the latter, since that
would be seeking what Shawcross considers impossible, a society "in our own
image."

The glib cliches Shawcross offers do not resolve these questions. His story,
vivid as it is, is selective and partial. He passes over with slight, if any,
mention several examples of local war and ethnic cleansing that have begun or
persisted in the past decade. More important for informed judgments, he fails to
examine situations where serious violence might well have arisen but did not.
How did apartheid end in South Africa without the violence many predicted? How
did the Baltic nations secure their independence from the Soviet Union with no
more than sympathy from the outside world? Why has there been no war (or ethnic
cleansing) between Russia and Ukraine? How did the Czechs and Slovaks manage an
amicable divorce?

Each instance of peaceful change has special aspects, but all share one feature:
the change was brought about, or peace preserved, when the leaders of the
countries and the major factions in them sought to resolve their differences
without violence. By contrast, the tragic conflicts Shawcross describes spun out
of control when force was used, either by governments or opposition movements
(usually by both), to achieve political ends. Their guilt should not be
transferred to the United States, the international community or the
"post-cold-war world." It rests with identifiable individuals and specific
groups that have chosen destructive means to achieve what are rarely if ever
laudable ends.

It is obvious that the world community has not yet created effective
international instruments to protect human rights. But the problem may be that
human rights can be protected effectively only by the societies in which people
live. How the international community can best support the development of civil
societies and encourage responsible political leadership is one of the most
daunting tasks facing humanity as it enters the new millennium. Pace Shawcross,
the answer is likely to involve less military intervention from the outside and
greater use of nonviolent political, economic and, especially, moral
instruments.

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS511130 BOOK PUBLISHERS (58%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%);

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); SIERRA
LEONE (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); KOSOVO (79%); RWANDA (79%); ASIA (79%); IRAQ
(79%);

STATE: SOUTH CHINA (58%);

COMPANY: SIMON & SCHUSTER INC (58%);   UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (54%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA (95%); UNITED STATES (93%); SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%);
SIERRA LEONE (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); KOSOVO (79%); RWANDA (79%); ASIA (79%);
IRAQ (79%);   SOUTH CHINA (58%);

SUBJECT: BOOKS AND LITERATURE; REVIEWS  BOOK REVIEWS (92%); PEACEKEEPING (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); COLD WAR (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (87%); US PRESIDENTS
(78%); VIETNAM WAR (78%); LITERATURE (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (71%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%);

PERSON: MATLOCK, JACK F JR (PROF); SHAWCROSS, WILLIAM  RICHARD NIXON (79%);

LOAD-DATE: March 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             879 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 27, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Wartime Workers in the Philippines to Sue Japanese Companies

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 372 words

DATELINE: MANILA, March 26


Thousands of Filipinos will join a class-action suit against Japanese companies
to seek compensation for forced labor during World War II, a Filipino lawyer who
is heading the suit said today.

Most of the Filipinos conscripted into the wartime labor force by the Japanese
Army were made to work in mines and plantations operated by Japanese companies,
said the lawyer, Rod Domingo. Among the companies that may be sued are members
of the Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Matsushita and Hitachi groups, as well as Toyota and
Nissan, he said.

Last week, after a long and often bitter negotiations, German companies and the
German government agreed on how to pay out $5 billion to surviving forced
laborers and others from the Nazi era. Those receiving the money include mainly
non-Jews from central European countries, and a much smaller number of mainly
Jewish slave laborers.

Mr. Domingo said the lawsuit in the Philippines would be consolidated with
similar class-action suits filed in California by former World War II prisoners
and civilians from Australia, Canada, China, England, Scotland and the
Netherlands. He encouraged living victims or their heirs to file claims.

He said the suit would "ask for an accounting and restitution from Japanese
corporations that reaped profits during the war from the misery, which they have
prolonged for the sake of profitability."

A research paper on Japanese companies that used slave labor in the Philippines
showed that more than a dozen had operated cotton plantations in more than 10
provinces in the northern, central and southern Philippines covering tens of
thousands of acres.

One company, Mitsui Kozan, reportedly used 1.5 million Filipino workers under
life-threatening conditions to reconstruct a copper mine in Mankayan in northern
Benguet province that resistance fighters had blown up.

Another company, Ishihara Sangyo, also operated an iron and copper mine in
central Antique province using 5,000 to 6,000 workers.

The lawsuit will be based on a California law that prohibits slave or forced
labor, said Mr. Domingo, who helped win a $150 million settlement for 9,539
Filipinos against the estate of the late dictator, Ferdinand Marcos, for human
rights violations.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: 4028 (TSE) (53%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS325180 OTHER BASIC INORGANIC CHEMICAL MANUFACTURING (53%);
SIC2819 INDUSTRIAL INORGANIC CHEMICALS, NEC (53%);

COUNTRY: PHILIPPINES (99%); JAPAN (94%); GERMANY (87%); NETHERLANDS (79%);
EUROPE (79%); CANADA (76%); SCOTLAND (76%); ENGLAND (76%); UNITED STATES (69%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (56%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (69%);

CITY: MANILA, PHILIPPINES (79%);

COMPANY: ISHIHARA SANGYO KAISHA LTD (53%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PHILIPPINES; JAPAN;   PHILIPPINES (99%); JAPAN (94%); GERMANY (87%);

 NETHERLANDS (79%); EUROPE (79%); CANADA (76%); SCOTLAND (76%); ENGLAND (76%);
UNITED STATES (69%); CENTRAL EUROPE (56%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (69%);   MANILA,
PHILIPPINES (79%);

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (1939-45); SLAVE LABOR; SUITS AND LITIGATION  LITIGATION
(92%); WORLD WAR II (91%); SUITS & CLAIMS (91%); SLAVERY (90%); CLASS ACTIONS
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAWYERS (89%); COPPER MINING (77%); LABOR FORCE
(77%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (73%); COTTON FARMING (64%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (50%);   FORCED LABOR (90%);

PERSON: ROD DOMINGO (85%); MITSUI KOZAN (66%);

LOAD-DATE: March 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             880 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 28, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1292 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

Russian President-Elect Presses for Economic Plan
Vladimir V. Putin, meeting with his cabinet on the day after his decisive
electoral victory, said he wanted an economic program ready by the time he was
sworn in and appointed his new government in early May.   A10

Foreign investors and business people in Moscow said Mr. Putin must take
decisive action in the next few months for the country to see marked increases
in investment.   A10


President Clinton congratulated Mr. Putin on his victory, but also reiterated
concerns about Russia's conflict in Chechnya.   A10

OPEC to Continue Talks
The ministerial meeting of the oil cartel in Vienna reached no agreement on
modest production increases, but delegates agreed to reconvene today.   A8

Israeli Inquiry for Rabbi
The attorney general opened a criminal investigation of the spiritual leader of
the ultra-Orthodox Shas party, Prime Minister Ehud Barak's most balky coalition
partner.   A1

Interior Minister Natan Sharansky said he would return some of the land that had
been taken from an Israeli Arab village northeast of Tel Aviv to develop a
Jewish town .   A12

How Syria Meeting Unraveled
President Hafez al-Assad was "immovable" during his meeting with President
Clinton in Geneva and appeared to have come with the misconception that Mr.
Clinton was in a position to give him what he wanted from Israel, an official
said.   A12

Rights Criticism of Saudi Arabia
Amnesty International accused the Saudi government of widespread human rights
abuses.   A12

Accusations for Serb Leader
The leader of Montenegro accused President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia of
using the national army to try to force him out.   A3

French Cabinet Shuffle
Prime Minister Lionel Jospin, after weeks of sinking ratings in the polls,
announced a cabinet shake-up.   A3

Uganda Cult Death Toll Rises
Eighty more bodies were exhumed from a mass grave that was discovered during the
weekend.   A8

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A14-20

Fund-Raisers and Donors Are Wary of Gore Proposal
Political donors and fund-raisers warily approached Vice President Al Gore's
latest campaign finance proposal -- the elimination of soft money and creation
of a $7 billion endowment to finance general election campaigns for Congress.
They expressed concern that such a system would diminish their influence with
candidates and create an unwieldy new government bureaucracy.   A1

Ruling on Reform Party Head
A federal judge ruled that Pat Choate, an ally of Ross Perot and Pat Buchanan,
was the Reform Party's legitimate chairman, not Jack Gargan, an ally of Gov.
Jesse Ventura who was ousted last month.   A18

U.S. Presses Boy's Return
The Clinton administration moved to take custody of Elian Gonzalez from his
relatives in Miami as early as Thursday and return him to Cuba. A federal
appeals court said it would hear arguments during the second week of May, which
could make it more difficult for the Justice Department to put its plan into
effect.   A16

Immigration Decision Stands
The Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to portions of the 1996 welfare
law that made legal immigrants ineligible for various kinds of federal welfare
assistance.   A19

Restoring Yosemite Wilderness
Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt outlined a plan to return Yosemite National
Park to a wilder state, with reductions in parking spaces, roads and bridges and
the elimination of buildings and structures.   A14

Reversal on Incinerator Plan
The Energy Department said it was abandoning a plan to build the country's first
nuclear-waste incinerator in southern Idaho, a decision that was hailed by
environmental groups that fought the plan.   A14

Housing Tight for Working Poor
A report issued by Housing Secretary Andrew Cuomo said affordable housing for
many of the working poor had become harder to find, in part because of the
booming economy.   A20

Damages in Smoking Case
A San Francisco jury ordered Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds to pay a total of
$20 million in punitive damages in the first case decided in favor of a person
who started smoking after the government required warning labels on cigarette
packages.   A14

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-7

Mayor and Museum Settle 'Sensation' Lawsuits
Mayor Giuliani agreed to stop his effort to evict the Brooklyn Museum of Art and
cut its city financing over an exhibition that contained work that Mr. Giuliani
regarded as offensive and sacrilegious. The museum agreed to drop its First
Amendment suit against the mayor.   A1

Two federal appellate judges in a case involving nude models who gathered in a
street for a photograph complained that a "relentless onslaught" of litigation
over limits on political demonstrations and artistic events had forced courts to
take on the functions of city government.   B4

Tough Measures in Nassau
County leaders, threatened with having Nassau's bonds reduced to junk status,
signed a pledge to raise taxes, if that were needed to balance the budget. The
County Legislature supported reassessment of all residential and commercial
property.   B1

ARTS   E1-10

Lincoln Center Chief to Leave
Nathan Leventhal, 57, said he would step down in December after nearly 17 years
as the center's president.   E1

OBITUARIES   A21

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Defiance or Incompetence?
Historians and scientists discussed what might have been behind Werner
Heisenberg's failure to build an atomic bomb for the Nazis.   A6

Glimpsing the Northern Lights
Scientists say the odds are unusually high of seeing the eerie heavenly fire of
the aurora borealis.   F1

Health & Fitness   F7

FASHION   B8

SPORTS   D1-8

Women Head to Final Four
Connecticut beat Louisiana State, 86-71, in the East Regional final.   D1

Penn State beat Louisiana Tech, 86-65, in the Midwest. Tennessee beat Texas
Tech, 57-44, in the Mideast.   D6

BUSINESS DAY   C1-28

11th-Hour Effort on Microsoft
A mediator pressed for a settlement in the Microsoft antitrust case, but with
positions hardening among some government officials, the likelihood grew that
the trial judge would issue a verdict, possibly today.   A1

New Leader at Bank One
James Dimon, 44, a former Citigroup executive, was named chairman and chief
executive of Bank One.   C1

Getting a Stake in Mitsubishi
DaimlerChrysler, the world's third-largest maker of motor vehicles, signed a
$2.1 billion deal to invest in Mitsubishi Motors, securing the toehold in Asia
it had long sought.   C4

Little Change in Major Indexes
The Dow fell 86.87 points, to 11,025.85; the S.& P. 500 slipped 3.60 points, to
1,523.86; and the Nasdaq sagged 4.47 points, to 4,958.56.   C14

Housing Sales Rebound
Sales of existing homes rose 6.7 percent in February, after two consecutive
months of declines caused in part by higher mortgage rates.   C12

New Approaches to Poverty
Treasury Secretary Lawrence H. Summers urged change in the way international
agencies attack poverty in Latin America, as signs indicated that robust
economic growth there had left more people behind than many economists expected.

   C4

Business Digest   C1

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Pressuring the power plants; lessons from the Dorismond funeral; Mr.
Trimble's narrow victory; harassment of gays in the military.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman, Gail Collins.

Crossword   E9

TV Listings   E10

Public Lives   B2

Weather   D7


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS 213112 OIL & GAS INDUSTRY (76%);

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ISRAEL (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); MONTENEGRO (79%); AUSTRIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UGANDA
(79%); SYRIA (79%); UNITED STATES (70%); CENTRAL EUROPE (56%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (70%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%); TEL AVIV, ISRAEL
(79%); MIAMI, FL, USA (70%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (57%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (54%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (57%); AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (54%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ISRAEL (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (89%); MONTENEGRO (79%); AUSTRIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); UGANDA
(79%); SYRIA (79%); UNITED STATES (70%); CENTRAL EUROPE (56%);   FLORIDA, USA
(70%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (90%); VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%); TEL AVIV,
ISRAEL (79%); MIAMI, FL, USA (70%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%);

 HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); PRIME MINISTERS (89%);
CAMPAIGN FINANCE (89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (88%);
LITIGATION (88%); FOREIGN INVESTMENT (79%); ECONOMIC POLICY (78%); ECONOMIC NEWS

 (78%); ELECTIONS (78%); APPOINTMENTS (78%); POLITICAL DONATIONS & FUNDRAISING
(78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); OIL & GAS INDUSTRY
(76%); CARTELS (75%); JEWS & JUDAISM (74%); CULTS & SECTS (73%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (73%); JUDGES (73%); GENOCIDE (71%); FUNDRAISING (70%); POLLS &
SURVEYS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (69%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (68%);
APPELLATE DECISIONS (63%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (61%); ENDOWMENTS (61%);
APPEALS (60%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (60%); APPEALS COURTS (50%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); VLADIMIR PUTIN (90%); AL GORE (78%); EHUD BARAK
(53%);

LOAD-DATE: March 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             893 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 3, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Justice for the Khmer Rouge

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 416 words


More than two decades after the mass slaughter in Cambodia, a critical moment is
at hand in a long-overdue attempt to bring the killers to justice. United
Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan will soon decide whether the U.N. should
participate in a criminal court that will try surviving leaders of the Khmer
Rouge, whose members killed more than a million Cambodians between 1975 and
1979. The court will be in Cambodia and needs the approval of Cambodia's
strongman, Hun Sen, who is doing all he can to impose conditions that would
enable him to manipulate the trials. Mr. Annan must make clear that the U.N.
will not abide by those conditions.

A team of U.N. negotiators left Cambodia last month after failing to reach
agreement with the government on ground rules for the tribunal. But progress was
made and the negotiations are not over. Mr. Annan is expected to take up the
matter directly with Mr. Hun Sen at a meeting of developing nations in Cuba
later this month.

Some form of international participation will be essential to real justice. The
Cambodian judicial system has neither the competence nor the political
independence to conduct credible trials on its own. The best approach would be
an international tribunal like those the U.N. established for Rwanda and the
former Yugoslavia, but Mr. Hun Sen rejected the idea. Until last month
discussions on U.N. support for Cambodian trials had made little progress since
the surrender in 1999 of the last fugitive Khmer Rouge leaders.

The main sticking point involves a legitimate demand by the U.N. that the
tribunal include a foreign prosecutor with independent authority to issue
indictments. The Cambodians have insisted on having co-prosecutors, one foreign
and one Cambodian, in a collaborative arrangement that would effectively give
Mr. Hun Sen veto power over any indictment. This would be unacceptable. The U.N.
must not participate in a process that fails to grant an independent prosecutor
sufficient authority to issue indictments.

The Khmer Rouge leader Pol Pot died in 1998, but many of his top lieutenants are
alive and free in Cambodia. Mr. Hun Sen cut deals that effectively gave some of
the top surviving Khmer Rouge leaders -- Ieng Sary, Nuon Chea and Khieu Samphan
-- immunity from prosecution in exchange for their loyalty. But their immunity
should not apply to an internationally backed tribunal, and the U.N. must insist
that these men be tried. Without them the process would be a mockery.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); RWANDA (79%); CUBA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (99%); RWANDA (79%); CUBA (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); IMMUNITY (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); WAR CRIMES (77%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); APPROVALS (72%); VETO (72%); POLITICS (66%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (66%);

PERSON: ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); HUN SEN (PRIME MIN)  HUN SEN (94%);

LOAD-DATE: April 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             896 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 966 words



AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: PROTESTING MUGABE
An opposition group vowed to begin 100 days of prayer meetings and peaceful
demonstrations to protest the policies of President Robert Mugabe and his
governing party. The decision by the National Constitutional Assembly came after
thugs attacked its peaceful march over the weekend, injuring several people. The
group, which blamed the police for failing to prevent the violence, has
criticized official corruption, the unraveling economy and Mr. Mugabe's support
of black squatters on white-owned farms.  Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

AFRICANS AND EUROPEANS MEET
African leaders pleaded in Cairo for sweeping relief of their continent's
crippling debt at the start of the first Africa-Europe summit meeting. President
Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, left, opened the talks between the 15-nation European
Union and the 52-nation Organization of African Unity with a call for a radical
solution to the debt problem. Despite economic reform and efforts to spread
democracy and human rights, he said, Western aid had slumped in the last two
decades and Africa's share of trade had shrunk.  (Reuters)

SOUTH AFRICA: UNIONS' GLOBAL VIEW
The world labor union movement said it would muster all its strength to fight
the social and economic fallout of globalization, which it said was widening the
gap between rich and poor nations. Labor leaders addressing the start in Durban
of the 17th World Congress of the International Confederation of Free Trade
Unions said globalization needed to pay attention to social rights for it to be
a sustainable economic system.  (Reuters)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: TURKS STRIKE AT KURDS
Turkish F-16 jets struck Kurdish rebel bases in northern Iraq, as more than
1,000 troops penetrated some six miles into the region in a new campaign to hunt
down the guerrillas, a military official said. Cobra helicopter gunships were
reported reinforcing the troops and armored units. No serious clashes with the
guerrillas were reported.  (AP)

ASIA

INDONESIA: SUHARTO QUIZZED
A five-member team from the attorney general's office questioned former
President Suharto at his home about corruption during his 32-year rule. The
session ended after 90 minutes when Mr. Suharto said he was tired. He has defied
summonses to appear at the attorney general's office for questioning, saying he
is too ill. Seth Mydans (NYT)

LAOS: BLAST TIED TO TERRORISTS
Authorities blamed unspecified terrorists for an explosion at the Thank You Very
Much Restaurant in the capital, Vientiane, that it said wounded six Western
tourists and two Laotians. Such acts are rare in the capital but bandits and the
remnants of anti-Communist Hmong insurgents do operate in the countryside.  Seth
Mydans (NYT)

AFGHANISTAN: CURRENCY WEAKENED
Reported drought damage to opium crops has further battered Afghanistan's weak
currency and driven money changers in Kabul to try to dump the local currency in
favor of hard currencies. A bumper harvest last year established Afghanistan as
the world's leading source of opium, the United Nations estimates. Afghanistan
relies on opium, the raw ingredient for heroin, as its primary export.
Christopher S. Wren (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

MEXICO: VOTE SPLITS PARTY
A primary in the race for governor of Tabasco State has revived bitter divisions
in the governing party, known as the PRI, with complaints that the departing
governor, Roberto Madrazo, rigged the vote to favor a longtime aide, Manuel
Andrade, over Congressman Arturo Nunez, who has spent years as a senior official
in the government and the PRI. Partial results showed Mr. Andrade with 57
percent of the vote and Mr. Nunez with 38 percent. In the presidential primary
last year Mr. Madrazo challenged the PRI establishment, losing to Francisco
Labastida.  (AP)

EUROPE

SWITZERLAND: HOLOCAUST TRIAL
A Swiss man who denies that Hitler's gas chambers existed has gone on trial on
charges that he violated Switzerland's anti-racism law. Gaston-Armand Amaudruz,
79, is being tried in Lausanne for writing that there is no evidence of the
Holocaust's gas chambers. A 1995 Swiss law makes it illegal to deny or justify
genocide. Mr. Amaudruz, a spokesman for a far-right group, faces up to three
years in jail and a $25,000 fine.  Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

IRELAND: EX-PREMIER PAYING BACK TAXES
Former Prime Minister Charlie Haughey, 74, will sell off family properties to
pay more than $1.2 million in back taxes, including interest, on gifts received
while in office from a supermarket executive. Mr. Haughey's fall from grace
reached a low last year when he was booed by spectators at the funeral of a
previous Fianna Fail party leader. He is also facing charges of obstructing a
1997 tribunal looking into payments to politicians.  Brian Lavery (NYT)

GERMANY: RIGHTIST DATA
The number of neo-Nazi and right-wing extremists declined from about 54,000 in
1998 to around 51,000 in 1999, the Federal Agency for the Protection of the
Constitution said in an official report. The number of rightists deemed likely
to commit acts of violence, however, grew by about 10 percent to 9,000, the
agency said, adding that recorded violent attacks by far rightists reached 746,
up from 708 in 1998. Germany's seven million foreigners are considered
particular targets of those attacks.  Victor Homola (NYT)

GERMANY: SPYING ON KOHL
The former head of East Germany's foreign espionage service, Markus Wolf, said
in an interview with Reuters that his agents had known for a long time about the
illegal slush fund set up by the Christian Democrats under former Chancellor
Helmut Kohl. But he said he made little use of the information because he
considered all capitalists to be corrupt.  Victor Homola (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFRICA (96%); ZIMBABWE (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); EUROPE (93%); EGYPT
(92%); TURKEY (92%); IRAQ (92%); LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (90%); SOUTH
AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); ASIA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);

 INDONESIA (79%);

CITY: CAIRO, EGYPT (79%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);   VIENTIANE, LAO PEOPLE'S
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (77%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (56%); AFRICAN UNION (56%); EUROPEAN
UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (56%);
INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS (54%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY  (56%); AFRICAN UNION (56%);
EUROPEAN UNION  (56%); EUROPEAN UNION (56%); ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
(56%); INTERNATIONAL CONFEDERATION OF FREE TRADE UNIONS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFRICA (96%); ZIMBABWE (94%); AFGHANISTAN (93%); EUROPE (93%); EGYPT

 (92%); TURKEY (92%); IRAQ (92%); LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (90%); SOUTH
AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); ASIA (79%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);

 INDONESIA (79%);   CAIRO, EGYPT (79%); KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);   VIENTIANE,
LAO PEOPLE'S DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC (77%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (91%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION (90%); PUBLIC POLICY (90%);
SOCIAL JUSTICE (90%); LABOR UNIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); GLOBALIZATION (88%); EMERGING MARKETS (79%); ECONOMIC POLICY

 (78%); ECONOMIC NEWS (78%); CORRUPTION (78%); EUROPEAN UNION (78%); CONFERENCES
& CONVENTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (77%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (76%); SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE (76%); AGRICULTURAL TRADE (75%);
CURRENCIES (72%); LAWYERS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); RURAL
COMMUNITIES (70%); ARMED FORCES (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS (67%); SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT (65%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (61%); OPIUM (50%); HELICOPTERS (50%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);

PERSON: HOSNI MUBARAK (57%);

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             915 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia's Latest Plague: Lynch Law

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1299 words

DATELINE: PHNOM PENH, Cambodia


What most unnerved Olivier de Bernon as he faced a violent mob not long ago was
the sight of a group of Buddhist monks in their bright orange robes, laughing
and pointing at him.

Mr. de Bernon, a French historian, had come across the crowd as it was kicking
and punching a young man accused of stealing a motorbike. Without stopping to
think, Mr. de Bernon stepped into the crowd, he recalled.

"He was already down and they were still beating him," Mr. de Bernon said. "At
the beginning I had one leg shaking, a mixture of fear and anger. I was so
upset. I was so upset. I knew at once that it was a lynching. They wanted to
kill him."

Without a word being spoken, the crowd fell back at the sight of the determined
foreigner. And then, for the next two hours until an ambulance arrived, Mr. de
Bernon stood over the unconscious young man, face to face with the crowd and a
dozen passive police officers and the group of giggling monks, who had not taken
part in the attack but found Mr. de Bernon's behavior so unusual as to be
amusing.

This kind of mob justice, often abetted by police officers who say they find the
lynchings and beatings a short-cut around the vagaries of the courts, has become
an epidemic in Cambodia.

The spread of mob killings in the past year is one of many signs of the failure
of a justice system that the United Nations tried to put in place here nearly a
decade ago.

All of this has led most experts to agree that Cambodian courts are unfit to
conduct a fair and professional tribunal for the men who led the Khmer Rouge
from 1975 to 1979, when more than a million people lost their lives.

When their guerrilla movement collapsed in the past two years, most of the Khmer
Rouge leaders retired, unchallenged, to quiet lives in Phnom Penh and elsewhere.
These include five former members of the Khmer Rouge standing committee, prime
defendants in any trial.

The United Nations, which has proposed to create an international court, has
reached an impasse with Prime Minister Hun Sen, who insists that Cambodian
prosecutors and judges dominate any tribunal.

As this dispute continues, the spread of mob killings -- and the number of
ordinary Cambodians who support them -- offers its own verdict on the quality of
the judicial system: the lynchings have become known as "people's courts."

"It's 'instant justice,' " said a foreign diplomat with long experience here.
"'Since there is no justice, I'll do it myself.' And the police are often
present and encourage people to do it."

"It shows the fragility or even the nonexistence of any form of a just system at
any level," he said. "I think it also shows the frustration of the people and
the brutality of this culture, still. This is a way to kill people very similar
to the way the Khmer Rouge did it. You don't need a gun; you can do it more
cheaply."

Most discouraging to those who want to reform the justice system is that many
Cambodians seem not to see the difference between the workings of a court system
and the rule of the mob.

When Mr. de Bernon returned to his office in Phnom Penh, where he is based, he
said, his Cambodian staff -- like the monks who had watched him -- found his
behavior peculiar. They tried to educate him: "But he was a thief," they said.
"People were upset."

The most prominent example of this blind spot in Cambodia's development is a new
campaign by Mr. Hun Sen -- at least partly aimed at impressing foreign critics
-- to whip the judiciary into line by executive fiat.

In what he called an anticorruption campaign, he ordered the police to rearrest
scores of suspects who were released without trial or freed before their
sentences were complete.

"The government respects the independence of the courts," the prime minister
said, "But we cannot allow bad people inside the court system to act
improperly."

This kind of attitude is the at the nub of the dispute over a trial of Khmer
Rouge leaders, said Demelza Stubbings, a representative of the London-based
rights group Amnesty International.

"Who is going to be in charge of a tribunal of the Khmer Rouge?" she asked. "Is
the government going to tell the court to try them again if it doesn't like the
results?"

More likely, experts here say, the outcome of any Cambodian-run trials would be
decided before they start. In what some people see as a test case, one Khmer
Rouge commander was tried last year for killings committed after the group was
driven from power. He was found guilty; the trial took one day.

The flip side of these convictions by fiat is the debilitating fact of life in
Cambodia that people with power, influence or money almost always go free.

"The phrase 'culture of impunity' has become almost a cliche," said the New
York-based group Human Rights Watch in a recent report on the justice system.
"The problem ranges from the failure to prosecute Khmer Rouge leaders to
hundreds of more recent unpunished crimes committed by current government
authorities."

Government officials, their bodyguards, members of the military, village leaders
and their goons, well-connected brothel owners and anybody with the money to pay
for freedom -- rarely are any of these punished.

No one has been arrested in a grenade attack at an opposition rally three years
ago in which at least 17 people were killed and more than 100 injured. No one
has been arrested in more than 100 political killings that followed Mr. Hun
Sen's coup in July 1997.

When soldiers shot dead nine fishermen suspected of stealing cows, the
investigating judge told Human Rights Watch she had not taken any action on the
case.

"I worry about my safety because the case is connected to the police, local
authorities and the military," the investigator explained. "The police and the
commune chief are O.K., but the military might be difficult."

Even if any of these cases were to reach a courtroom, the administration of
justice remains primitive.

Most educated people -- including judges and lawyers -- were executed during the
Khmer Rouge time. Many of the survivors fled as refugees in the 1980's when
Cambodia was occupied by Vietnam. Real legal education has only begun here since
the United Nations tied to restore a civil society in the early 1990's.

As a result, many judges have little or no legal education and many have not
been taught basic principles of justice.

It is a paradox that Mr. Hun Sen has formally acknowledged the inability of the
courts to try the Khmer Rouge, while insisting that they conduct the trials.

"The reason people kill robbers in the streets is that they have no trust in the
courts," he said recently.

It was into this world of topsy-turvy "justice" that Mr. de Bernon stepped the
other day. The representative in Cambodia of the French school of Asian affairs,
l'Ecole francaise d'Extreme-Orient, he has lived in Cambodia for 10 years.

"In less than two minutes it was clear that nothing would happen to me," he
recalled. "I understood rapidly that none of them was upset, enraged, angry.
They were just giving way to their bad instinct. Just because I was there I
spoiled something, a self-allowance beyond normal behavior. Physically I was
nothing, but I think I broke a game."

From time to time, he said, someone from the crowd would approach the man on the
ground and give a little kick or lift his eyelids with a key to see whether he
was still alive.

"I stood next to him, two hours, and when they came sometimes to play with the
body I interfered, gently, saying nothing," Mr. de Bernon said.

He said he spoke to a member of the crowd only once.

"The only thing I said was to a boy who kicked his head with his heel," he said.
"I had a very bad glance at him and I called him in Khmer, 'You are a chicken
with white ears.' A coward."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%);

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED
NATIONS (82%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (82%);
UNITED NATIONS (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (99%);   PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (92%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; CRIME AND
CRIMINALS; POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT  LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (87%); GENOCIDE (86%); WAR CRIMES (86%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (78%);
CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (78%); ORGANIZED CRIME (78%); MISCONDUCT (77%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); HISTORY (77%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (74%);
RELIGION (73%); LARCENY & THEFT (71%); MOTOR VEHICLES (71%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(71%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (70%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(69%); JUDGES (65%); PRIME MINISTERS (62%);   EMERGENCY VEHICLES (68%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; HUN SEN (PRIME MIN)  HUN SEN (59%);

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Lynch mobs have become an epidemic in Cambodia. A gang member
arrested by the police in a notorious murder case fell into the hands of
villagers last July. He was then chained and beaten to death by a mob. (Rob
Elliott for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             925 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 19, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

McCain Regrets Silence on Flag Issue

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 324 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 18


Senator John McCain of Arizona is expected to tell South Carolinians on
Wednesday that the state should remove the Confederate battle flag from over its
Statehouse and that he should have said so during the primary campaign there,
Republicans who have been briefed on the event said.

The Republicans said that in an address in the South Carolina capital, Columbia,
Mr. McCain would concede that he made a mistake in January when, in courting the
state's conservative voters, he said at one point that the flag was a "symbol of
heritage."

Civil rights groups have fought for removal of the flag, which was first erected
by segregationists at the height of the civil rights movement. The flag's
supporters call it a symbol of heritage, not racism, arguing that the Civil War
was over states' rights, not slavery.

The flag became a volatile issue during the primary. Mr. McCain's new position
could put pressure on Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, to alter his position that
it was a matter for South Carolina to decide.

When Mr. Bush was asked today about Mr. McCain's expected statement, he said: "I
believed the people of South Carolina should best solve this issue. I still
believe that. And I believe they will."

During the campaign, Mr. McCain made conflicting comments about the flag.

In January, Mr. McCain said he considered it "offensive" and a "symbol of racism
and slavery." The next day, in a statement distributed to South Carolina
reporters, he reversed himself and called the flag "a symbol of heritage." Aides
said he had misspoken in the television interview.

Then the next day, in an interview in New Hampshire, which was about to hold its
primary, Mr. McCain reversed himself again, saying that if he said he saw the
flag as a symbol of heritage, he had misspoken.

"My forefathers fought under the Confederate flag," Mr. McCain said. "I believe
that they believed their service was honorable."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (94%); ARIZONA, USA (92%);

CITY: COLUMBIA, SC, USA (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH CAROLINA;   UNITED STATES (94%);   SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (94%);
ARIZONA, USA (92%);   COLUMBIA, SC, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA; BLACKS; ELECTION ISSUES; PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION OF 2000; PRIMARIES  CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS
(90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US
PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN
PARTY (90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); INTERVIEWS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); ELECTIONS (79%); CIVIL WAR (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(78%); CONSERVATISM (77%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (77%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(77%); VOTERS & VOTING (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (70%);   RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (75%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (71%);

PERSON: MCCAIN, JOHN (SEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV)  JOHN MCCAIN (93%); GEORGE W
BUSH (79%);

LOAD-DATE: April 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             928 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 20, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

After Campaigning on Candor, McCain Admits He Lacked It on Confederate Flag
Issue

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section A;  Page 22;  Column 1;  National Desk

LENGTH: 952 words

DATELINE: COLUMBIA, S.C. April 19


Senator John McCain apologized today for not having called for the removal of
the Confederate battle flag from the South Carolina Statehouse when he
campaigned in the state's Republican presidential primary, saying he had
compromised his principles out of political self-interest.

Mr. McCain, who built his presidential quest on a reputation for candor and
patriotism, said he had equivocated on the flag issue because he feared that if
his true feelings had been known it would have undermined his effort to wrest
the nomination from Gov. George W. Bush of Texas. Mr. McCain said in the
campaign that the divisive issues should be left to the state, as had Mr. Bush,
who stood by the position today.

In a subdued speech at a luncheon a stone's throw from the Capitol where the
Confederate battle flag flies, Mr. McCain, a former Navy war hero whose
ancestors fought for the South, indicted himself for a lapse in honor.

"I feared that if I answered honestly, I could not win the South Carolina
primary," Mr. McCain said. "So I chose to compromise my principles. I broke my
promise to always tell the truth."

Mr. McCain lost the Feb. 19 primary, a defeat that severely hurt his chance to
derail Mr. Bush's drive to the Republican nomination.

In the pivotal primary campaign, Mr. McCain repeatedly was asked his opinion of
whether the flag should be removed from atop the Capitol dome. Many liberal and
civil rights organizations, led by the National Association for the Advancement
of Colored People, have been pressing to have the flag known as the "star and
bars" taken down, declaring that it is a symbol of slavery and oppression of
African-Americans.

In January, Mr. McCain said he considered the flag a "symbol of racism and
slavery." The next day he called it a "symbol of heritage," a phrase used by
supporters of the flag. At all times he declared that the issue should be left
up to the people of South Carolina to decide without interference from
outsiders.

Today Mr. McCain said that both of his characterizations of the flag had been
accurate and that he still believed the matter should be handled by state
officials. But, Mr. McCain went on to say that his Confederate forefathers
"fought on the wrong side of American history."

"I don't believe their service, however distinguished, needs to be commemorated
in a way that offends, that deeply hurts, people whose ancestors were once
denied their freedom by my ancestors," he said.

Mr. McCain's statement today may place pressure on Mr. Bush to clearly state
where he stands. But Mr. McCain refused to be drawn in to a discussion of what
his action might mean for his one-time rival.

"This was an issue that affected my campaign," he told reporters after his
speech. "I don't believe it will affect anyone else's."

In response to questions, Mr. McCain also repeated his insistence that he would
"categorically state to Governor Bush that I do not want to be asked" to be the
presumptive Republican nominee's running mate in the fall. The Texas governor
has said he wanted to discuss this directly with Mr. McCain at a meeting
scheduled for early May.

As for flying the battle flag, "Governor Bush believes on principle that this is
a state issue for the people of South Carolina to decide, and, as he predicted,
they are working to address," said Scott McClellan, a spokesman for Mr. Bush.

Reading from a prepared text at the luncheon, Mr. McCain acknowledged that his
belated confession would not shield him from criticism.

"I do not intend for this apology to help me evade criticism for my failure," he
said.

"I will be criticized by all sides for my late act of contrition," Mr. McCain
added. "I accept it, all of it. I deserve it. Honesty is easy after the fact
when my own interests are no longer involved. I don't seek absolution."

Mr. McCain's appearance today before the South Carolina Policy Council, a
conservative, business-oriented research group, was on his first time back in
the state since his defeat in the primary. In his absence the issue of the flag
has continued to simmer. Last week, the South Carolina Senate passed a
compromise measure that would remove the battle flag from atop the dome and
place a smaller version in a monument to Confederate soldiers on the Capitol
grounds. That measure is now before the South Carolina House of Representatives.
The outcome there is uncertain.

How Mr. McCain's comments will affect the debate here is an open question. After
his speech he was given a standing ovation by most of the about 60 people at the
luncheon. Later, several pressed forward to shake his hand and say they admired
his candor.

"I think it took a lot of courage to come back down here and do this, to admit a
mistake and to admit he may be criticized for the mistake," said Cordell Maddox,
a Democratic representative from Anderson, S.C., who supports the Senate
measure. "What I'm hoping is that it's going to give some courage to people who
are on the fence about the Senate compromise."

One person who did not join in the acclaim for Mr. McCain was Jake Knotts, a
state Republican representative from Lexington County outside Columbia who sat
in stony silence while others applauded. Mr. Knotts was one of the few
Republican legislators who supported Mr. McCain in the primary. He is also a
flag supporter who said he had pressed Mr. McCain in the campaign on his true
feelings about the Confederate icon.

"Yes, I'm disappointed in him, very disappointed in him," Mr. Knotts said to
reporters after the speech. "I'm not only disappointed, I'm ashamed of him. I'm
ashamed that he lied to the people of South Carolina in order to further his
political career."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (95%);

CITY: COLUMBIA, SC, USA (93%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR FEMALE EXECUTIVES (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH CAROLINA;   UNITED STATES (95%);   SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (95%);
   COLUMBIA, SC, USA (93%);

SUBJECT: FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA; BLACKS; ELECTION ISSUES; PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION OF 2000; PRIMARIES  CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS
(91%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (91%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (86%); ELECTIONS
(79%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); LIBERALISM (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HISTORY (73%); RACE & RACISM (69%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (64%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (64%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS
(90%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);

PERSON: HOLMES, STEVEN A; MCCAIN, JOHN (SEN); BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV)  JOHN MCCAIN
(93%); GEORGE W BUSH (79%);

LOAD-DATE: April 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             930 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For Iran, Dark Pages of History

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 134 words



To the Editor:

Your recognition of the lingering Iranian bitterness toward the United States as
a result of the 1953 coup is laudable (editorial, April 18). However, it is
disingenuous to link the coup to the hostage-taking in 1979 as if the two were
somehow equivalent.

The Central Intelligence Agency's actions reinstituted a government that
oppressed millions and that required 25 years and thousands of lost lives to
overthrow. And anger at the meddlesome United States was at the heart of the
hostage-taking, from which all the hostages emerged alive after less than 15
months.

Neither the hostage-taking nor the coup is excusable, but if moral equivalence
is a condition for improved relations, then the cause is hopeless.

MAZDAK ATIGHI
Palo Alto, Calif., April 18, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (84%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (84%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN;   UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS;
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; HOSTAGES; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
HOSTAGE TAKING (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); COUPS (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%);

PERSON: ATIGHI, MAZDAK

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             952 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 6, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Sri Lanka, Limiting Reports, Says It Pushed Back Rebels

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 501 words

DATELINE: COLOMBO, Sri Lanka, May 5


A day after tightening press censorship in the interests of national security,
the government said in an official press release today that troops had pushed
back Tamil rebels who were trying to capture the northern city of Jaffna, the
cultural capital of the minority Tamils.

But as they issued the release, officials also deleted portions of reports by
international news agencies that described an opposition rally organized by the
United National Party to protest the authorities' sweeping new powers.

"I consider this an issue of national security," said the chief censor, Ariya
Rubasinghe, director of information. "We can't afford to have commotions or
civil disturbances."

The regulations announced on Thursday let the government censor articles by
foreign reporters and close Sri Lankan newspapers that defy censorship rules.
Before, local journalists who ignored the censor received written warnings. The
government can also seize private property and prohibit strikes, political
rallies and criticism of President Chandrika Kumaratunga if it believes that is
necessary for security.

Mr. Rubasinghe said that although the regulations allowed censoring criticism of
Ms. Kumaratunga, "we won't enforce it seriously."

Since last month, the government has been in a pitched battle with the
Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, a group that has been fighting for a separate
homeland for the Hindu Tamil minority since 1983 and that the United States has
included on its list of terrorist organizations.

Since April 22, the rebels have taken control of two military bases in the
Tamil-dominated north in a push to regain Jaffna, which the government
recaptured five years ago. The majority of this island nation of 18 million is
Sinhalese and Buddhist.

The press release issued by Mr. Rubasinghe today said the government had
strengthened its position since April 22, when it pulled out of its sprawling
military base at Elephant Pass, which the Tigers now occupy.

"Continuous attacks by the troops caused the terrorists to flee southward with
their casualties," the release said. "All troops in Jaffna Peninsula are
determined to push back the terrorists. Due to confrontations on 3rd and 4th of
May, terrorists are in a state of disarray. However, the terrorists continued to
fire mortars at the troops."

The government said two soldiers were killed today and one was wounded. It added
that life continued normally in Jaffna, with government offices and schools
functioning. The government said it was providing "ample food" to residents who
needed the help.

It was not possible to assess the contents of the release, because no reporters
have been allowed to go to the battle front or to Jaffna, and telephone
communications to the peninsula have been disrupted.

Members of the United National Party held a rally here today in Independence
Square to protest the new regulations, including those that censor foreign press
accounts, saying they infringed on civil liberties.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDIA (94%); SRI LANKA (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%);

COMPANY: INDEPENDENCE SQUARE PROPERTIES (50%);   LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM  (84%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (84%);

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (84%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA; JAFFNA (SRI LANKA);   INDIA (94%); SRI LANKA (94%);
UNITED STATES (79%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; NEWS AND NEWS MEDIA; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS  CENSORSHIP (94%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); ARMED
FORCES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); POLITICS (89%);
WAR & CONFLICT (89%); NEWS REPORTING (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); JOURNALISM (78%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); AGENCY
RULEMAKING (78%); WRITERS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); RELIGION (65%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (70%);

PERSON: DUGGER, CELIA W  CHANDRIKA KUMARATUNGA (66%);

LOAD-DATE: May 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             978 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

As Political Crisis Mounts, Peru's Leader Relishes Fight

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1186 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru, May 20


Taking a moment's break from a boisterous campaign rally the other day in the
colonial city of Cajamarca, President Alberto K. Fujimori pointed to a dark
cloud gliding over his head and cried, "Let there be rain for the farmers!"

Within moments, the sky poured open, and thousands cheered.

"Don't worry," Mr. Fujimori laughed into his microphone. "Everything is
coordinated."

It has often seemed that way over the last 10 years, as Mr. Fujimori effectively
confronted an array of plagues -- from hyperinflation to terrorism to an
invasion of narcotics traffickers, from war with Ecuador to massive flooding
caused by El Nino.

But only a day after Mr. Fujimori played with the clouds over Cajamarca, he
faced a mounting political crisis that will surely challenge his considerable
pluck and power. Alejandro Toledo, his opponent in the May 28 runoff
presidential election, dropped out of the race on Thursday. Mr. Fujimori was
left with an open field for victory and the prospect of a third five-year term,
but one in which his legitimacy and credibility would be questioned both here
and abroad.

Mr. Fujimori now faces the possibility of unending protest marches, criticism
from Washington and other foreign capitals, and even, perhaps, economic
sanctions from the United States Congress and the Organization of American
States that could impede his fight against drug trafficking and unemployment.

The 61-year-old president, who is the son of Japanese immigrants, was able to
face down international pressures after he suspended the operations of his own
Congress and Supreme Court in 1992 because he had overwhelming popular support.
But now Peru is badly split, with university students and labor unions preparing
to mount the biggest street protests in more than a generation.

Mr. Fujimori, in effect, has become a victim of his own success. Now that he has
virtually defeated the terrorists of the Maoist Shining Path, a growing number
of Peruvians are seeking an easing of his authoritarianism. In the last three
years, even as the terrorism waned, Mr. Fujimori did not ease his hold on power.
He tightened it.

Mr. Fujimori decided he could run for re-election this year even though the
Constitution prohibits three consecutive terms. He had three judges dismissed by
Congress when they disagreed with his legal interpretation that the
constitutional term limit did not cover his first term because it was completed
before the Constitution itself. He then established control over several
television networks through legal maneuvers, and withdrew Peru from the
jurisdiction of a regional human rights court.

Mr. Fujimori's powers were amply on display in the first round of the
presidential race when all television networks, save for one cable channel,
virtually boycotted his opposition.

"He has been manipulating so much that even if he won fairly, people wouldn't
believe it was a fair process," said Enrique Zileri, editor of the political
magazine Caretas. "Whatever happens, Fujimori becomes a much weaker president
who will be discredited internationally."

Hernan Chaparro Melo, a pollster, said, "With 57 percent of the people
continuing to believe the election process is unjust, we are entering difficult
times."

But Mr. Fujimori has had his back to the wall before, and he has always shown
himself to be a leader of great resourcefulness and impeccable timing.

Over the last few weeks, Mr. Fujimori suddenly emerged from his early campaign
slumber and appeared eager for a fight. He told enthusiastic campaign rallies
with growing crowds that he would not accept a postponement of the election even
before Mr. Toledo demanded that the vote be put off several weeks to give
foreign election observers time to test new computer software installed to count
the vote.

Mr. Fujimori sharpened his message on television and on the stump, arguing more
forcefully that he is the one candidate strong enough to lead this desperately
poor and often chaotic country. Taking on his greatest weaknesses, he pledged an
all-out attack on unemployment and confronted his foreign critics with diatribes
designed to inspire Peruvian nationalism.

"We don't need foreigners to tell us how to hold elections," Mr. Fujimori told a
crowd in the city of Trujillo shortly after Mr. Toledo's announcement that he
was dropping out of the race if the election was not postponed. "We're sovereign
Peruvians and we have the right to hold our democracy."

And after underestimating Mr. Toledo, an American-educated business school
professor who rose meteorically in the weeks before the first round vote, Mr.
Fujimori finally began taking him on -- calling him a rudderless, indecisive
leader who only knows how to turn to Washington, Buenos Aires and European
capitals for political direction.

Mr. Fujimori's old magic was amply on display this week as he toured the north
of the country. He laughed, danced and gleefully tossed cassettes of his
campaign songs to passersby who thrilled at seeing their president.

As his campaign caravan twisted through the streets of Chiclayo, a local
witchdoctor livened the proceedings by cavorting before the president's campaign
truck, waving a giant pumpkin and spritzing some alcoholic brew through his
teeth and onto the swelling crowds.

And as a brass band played his campaign theme song, Mr. Fujimori went into a
fevered jig on the stump as a throng of more than 10,000 went wild. "My advisers
tell me I shouldn't dance," President Fujimori laughed, "but I can't help
myself!" It was the kind of populist touch that led him to landslide victories
in 1990 and 1995.

Speaking in his heavily accented English for effect, he told the crowd, "They
ask: 'What is happening in Peru?' " Then answering the question firmly in
Spanish, he said, "We've had a government the last 10 years that has been
decisive and has never ducked the tough issues."

To crowds that filled the central plaza of Cajamarca, a highland city of
magnificent baroque churches, luscious cheeses and lyrical poets where the Incas
made their first stand against the Spanish invaders in the 16th century, Mr.
Fujimori called on the crowd to cheer loud enough so the Argentine government
could hear.

Donning a tall straw hat popular with the Indian peasants here, he snickered at
Mr. Toledo for traveling earlier in the week to Buenos Aires to consult with
President Fernando de la Rua and former President Raul Alfonsin.

Speaking of his opponents, he said: "If they were really democrats and really
trusted the people, they wouldn't complain all the time in Washington and Buenos
Aires. They show by going abroad that they don't care about the votes of the
Peruvian people."

Sharpening the nationalistic argument is Francisco Tudela, a former foreign
minister and Mr. Fujimori's vice presidential candidate. "I think there is a
fear, an ideological fear, of a very independent government in Latin America
that is outside the establishment," Mr. Tudela said in an interview. He added,
"The fact that President Fujimori did not negotiate with terrorist groups
irritates some abroad."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); ECUADOR (79%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (53%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(82%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (82%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(82%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU;   PERU (97%); UNITED STATES (94%); ECUADOR (79%);   LIMA, PERU

 (53%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; ELECTIONS; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT; EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
ELECTIONS (90%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (87%);

 TELEVISION INDUSTRY (83%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (78%); TERM LIMITS (78%); NATURAL DISASTERS (77%); WEATHER (77%);
BOYCOTTS (74%); EL NINO & LA NINA (72%); FLOODS & FLOODING (72%); IMMIGRATION
(71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (70%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME
(70%); DRUG POLICY (70%); SUPREME COURTS (69%); JUDGES (68%); STUDENTS & STUDENT
LIFE (64%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (64%); CABLE TELEVISION (60%); LABOR UNIONS
(50%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (89%); HYPERINFLATION (70%);

PERSON: FUJIMORI, ALBERTO K (PRES); KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; TOLEDO, ALEJANDRO  ALBERTO
K FUJIMORI (97%); ALEJANDRO TOLEDO (63%);

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Although President Alberto K. Fujimori faces rising criticism as
he seeks a third term, he is campaigning vigorously, arguing that only he is
strong enough to lead Peru. He spoke at a rally in Cajamarca this week. (Ana
Cecilia Gonzales-Vigil)

Map of Peru shows the location of Cajamarca: In northern Peru, President
Fujimori has drawn large crowds.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             981 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 22, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Mr. Putin's Missteps

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 494 words


As President Clinton prepares to visit Moscow next month, there are disquieting
signs that Russia's new president, Vladimir Putin, is steering the Kremlin
toward anti-democratic policies. A government raid on a private media company
earlier this month and Moscow's recent welcome for Yugoslavia's defense
minister, who has been indicted for war crimes, suggest a contempt for
democratic values that Mr. Clinton and his aides must consider as they plan for
the Moscow summit meeting.

It is possible that the police raid on the offices of Media-MOST and the defense
minister's visit were tactical maneuvers designed to placate some of Mr. Putin's
conservative political allies rather than a signal of new policies. Even so, Mr.
Putin must have understood that the steps would send a chilling message in the
first days of his presidency.

The government defended the crude search of Media-MOST headquarters as necessary
to gather information for a criminal investigation of suspected financial
irregularities at the company. Mr. Putin himself echoed that view when he
endorsed the police action, while affirming his support for a free press. But it
is difficult to believe that the arrival of masked agents with automatic weapons
was not an effort to intimidate an enterprise whose publications and broadcast
outlets have been critical of Mr. Putin and his prosecution of the war in
Chechnya.

By hosting Dragoljub Ojdanic, Belgrade's defense minister and a loyal ally of
Slobodan Milosevic, the Yugoslav president, Moscow defied the war crimes
tribunal in The Hague, which was established by the United Nations Security
Council to deal with atrocities in the recent Balkan ethnic conflicts. Mr.
Ojdanic was army chief of staff during the war in Kosovo. The tribunal last May
charged him and other Yugoslav leaders with responsibility for the deportation
of hundreds of thousands of ethnic Albanians and the murder of hundreds of
others.

As a member state of the U.N., Russia had an obligation to detain Mr. Ojdanic so
he could be brought to trial. Instead, he met with Russian defense officials and
moved freely through Moscow during a five-day visit that coincided with Mr.
Putin's inauguration. Last week, after a visit by Belgrade's foreign minister,
Moscow granted Yugoslavia a $102 million loan. Mr. Putin may be playing to
nationalist and Slavic sentiment in Russia with his embrace of Belgrade, but
these steps are a direct slap at Washington.

Mr. Clinton's advisers talk about the coming summit meeting as an opportunity to
take the measure of Mr. Putin, and a chance to explore a broad agenda of common
interests. The Russian leader may turn out to be a pragmatic negotiator.
Certainly he is more energetic and more familiar with policy details than his
predecessor, Boris Yeltsin. On economic issues, he seems inclined to spur
reform. But on such critical issues as respect for democratic principles, Mr.
Putin has not made a promising start.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); SERBIA (93%); UNITED STATES (92%); KOSOVO
(79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%); MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); THE HAGUE,
NETHERLANDS (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); SERBIA (93%); UNITED STATES
(92%); KOSOVO (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (93%);

 MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; EDITORIALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; RUSSIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);

 DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY
(89%); FOREIGN POLICY (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%);
POLITICS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); FREEDOM OF PRESS
(77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (76%); INVESTIGATIONS (76%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (76%); DEPORTATION (76%); INDICTMENTS (76%); CONSERVATISM (72%);
ARMIES (72%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (69%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (64%);

PERSON: PUTIN, VLADIMIR V (PRES); CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  VLADIMIR PUTIN (93%);
BILL CLINTON (90%);

LOAD-DATE: May 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1000 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 28, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Turkey Reviews the Darkest Hours in Its Painful Past

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 629 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, May 27


When a Turkish prosecutor announced recently that he wanted to indict Gen. Kenan
Evren, who led the 1980 military coup, officials in Ankara were not amused.

They quickly announced that the prosecutor had been placed in semiretirement,
and then said he would be investigated for abusing his office.

"For years I waited for someone to open this case, but too much time was passing
so I decided to do it myself," said the prosecutor, Sacit Kayasu. "This army is
my army, and it should protect me, not repress me."

It remains highly unlikely that General Evren, now an 83-year-old retiree, will
ever be called to account for his three unsuccessful coup attempts, for the one
that succeeded in September 1980, or for the excesses committed during three
years of military rule that followed. But the fact that a prosecutor could even
consider indicting him reflects a new climate in which the coup, along with
other painful episodes in modern Turkish history, can be discussed more openly
than ever before.

Before leaving power in 1983, the military imposed a law giving itself immunity
from prosecution for crimes committed during the period when it ran the country.
A move to repeal that law is gathering strength, though there is no prospect of
a repeal anytime soon.

According to the official version of the events of 1980, Turkey had fallen into
such chaos -- with people cowering in their homes as cities were besieged by
terror -- that the military was forced to intervene. The arrest of thousands of
people after the coup is said to have been a regrettable necessity.

Attempts to prosecute General Evren are not the only signs that a revisionist
view is emerging. Two new films portray the torture that was widespread in
military prisons.

One of the films, called "Where the Rose Wilted," tells the story of an innocent
man who is arrested following the coup and, in intensely graphic scenes,
savagely tortured by sadistic police officers.

"How can they do this?" one character wonders. "Even beasts wouldn't do such a
thing."

The other film, "After the Fall," tells the story of the coup through the eyes
of a 5-year-old boy whose family is shattered by its effects. His parents are
arrested and tortured, his grandmother collapses and dies during an army raid on
her house, and his grandfather begins losing his mind as he wonders who is
responsible for the tragedy unfolding around him.

"If one family in a small village suffered so much from the coup, imagine what
happened to the whole country," said the film's director, Atif Yilmaz. "The
effects of the coup are still with us. A lot of people are still carrying scars
after 20 years."

Some of those who were tortured after the coup have gone on to become successful
in business, journalism and academia. A handful have even been elected to
Parliament, including one man whose glistening teeth are all false, replacements
for the ones smashed out during torture sessions.

"It's finally becoming possible to acknowledge and discuss these things," Mr.
Yilmaz said. "There's more openness and more desire for honesty. Part of it
comes from our moving closer to the European Union, but a lot of it just has to
do with Turkey starting to grow up. What people like me are doing is trying to
give this country back its memory."

The 1980 coup is not the only sensitive subject filmmakers are beginning to
confront. One much-praised new film deals with the "wealth tax" that was imposed
on Christian and Jewish Turks during the 1940's with the intention of
bankrupting them or forcing them to emigrate. Another portrays Kurds as victims
of discrimination and military repression.

"I wouldn't say the military likes this," said a foreign ambassador posted in
Ankara, "but they're letting it happen."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (96%);

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (73%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (96%);   ANKARA, TURKEY (73%); ISTANBUL, TURKEY
(58%);

SUBJECT: COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT;
ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS  COUPS (92%);
ARMIES (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); TORTURE (89%); ARMED FORCES (78%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (78%); CRIMINAL DEFENSES (78%); IMMUNITY (73%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%);
LAW ENFORCEMENT (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); MOVIE REVIEWS (69%); FILM DIRECTORS
(63%); JOURNALISM (62%);   MILITARY RULE (90%); MARTIAL LAW (90%);

PERSON: KINZER, STEPHEN; KAYASU, SACIT; EVREN, KENAN (GEN) (RET)  KENAN EVREN
(92%);

LOAD-DATE: May 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1008 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Fiji Military Takes Control And Declares Martial Law

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 342 words

DATELINE: PACIFIC HARBOR, Fiji, May 29


Fiji's military said today that it was taking control of the country and
declared martial law, stepping into a crisis in which the prime minister has
been held hostage by gunmen since May 19.

The head of the armed forces, Commodore Frank Bainimarama, announced tonight
that the military was taking power.

The commodore said the Fiji Military Forces reserved the right to use force if
necessary to maintain and enforce the curfew. "I have, with much reluctance,
assumed executive authority of the country and henceforth declared martial law,"
he said at a news conference. Troops on leave and reservists were recalled to
barracks.

Local news media reported that a group of military officers had met with Fiji's
president, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, presented him with a whale's tooth in a
traditional ceremony and asked him to step down.

Mr. Mara's private secretary, Joe Brown, said military officials had informed
him that the president had resigned to enable the enforcement of martial law.

In Suva, the capital, witnesses said military personnel armed with automatic
weapons had taken over checkpoints that were previously manned by unarmed
police.

The coup leader, George Speight, led a band of gunmen into the parliament
complex on May 19 and took Prime Minister Mahendra Chaudhry, an ethnic Indian,
and some 30 other people hostage, including Mr. Mara's daughter.

Mr. Speight said he was acting on behalf of indigenous Fijians in deposing the
Chaudhry government, dominated by ethnic Indians. He has since then been locked
in negotiations with President Mara about the future of the Pacific island
nation.

Mr. Speight proclaimed himself the new leader of Fiji, but President Mara had
declared a state of emergency and claimed executive powers for himself. The two
sides negotiated through the indigenous Fijian Great Council of Chiefs.

On the first day of the coup, mobs looted Suva and, as negotiations dragged on,
violence returned when two soldiers and a journalist were injured by gunfire
last Saturday.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FIJI (97%);

CITY: SUVA, FIJI (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FIJI;   FIJI (97%);   SUVA, FIJI (92%);

SUBJECT: COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT; MARTIAL LAW; FREEDOM AND HUMAN
RIGHTS; HOSTAGES; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  ARMED FORCES (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); COUPS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%);
CURFEW (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRESS
CONFERENCES (77%); JOURNALISM (75%); POLITICS (73%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (72%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (69%);   MARTIAL LAW (94%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (78%);

PERSON: CHAUDHRY, MAHENDRA (PRIME MIN)  SIR KAMISESE MARA (87%); GEORGE SPEIGHT
(85%); MAHENDRA CHAUDHRY (66%);

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1009 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 31, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

To Right the Wrongs of Slavery

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 116 words



To the Editor:

I agree with Glenn C. Loury (Op-Ed, May 29) that all Americans "should be
challenged to understand the contemporary consequences" of slavery. But I
disagree that this "historic" crime deserves special treatment in the form of a
truth and reconciliation process. Can we say that the abusive treatment of
Native Americans, women and gays is of lesser evil than that perpetrated against
slaves?

Each of these groups was treated by our leaders as well as by most citizens in
ways that deprived them of their human rights, dignity and often their lives by
massacres, legal indifference to sexual abuse and gay bashing.

DAVID H. BERNARD
San Francisco, May 29, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (57%);

SUBJECT: SLAVERY; BLACKS  HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); SLAVERY (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (86%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: BERNARD, DAVID H; LOURY, GLENN C (PROF)  GLENN C LOURY (61%); OP-ED MAY
(61%); DAVID H BERNARD SAN FRANCISCO (56%);

LOAD-DATE: May 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1021 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   June 9, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

FILM REVIEW;
Against All Odds, a Haven For the Youngest Refugees

BYLINE: By A. O. SCOTT

SECTION: Section E; Part 1; Page 12; Column 5; Movies, Performing Arts/Weekend
Desk

LENGTH: 638 words


The tiny village of Chabannes, in the Creuse region of central France, is a
quiet, obscure place, one of those corners of rural Europe that seem strangely
untouched by the modern world. But 60 years ago Chabannes confronted
20th-century European brutality at its worst, and responded with unusual courage
and humanity. The village served as a haven for nearly 400 Jewish children --
most of them refugees from Germany and Austria -- whom its citizens protected
from the Nazis and from the betrayal of their own collaborationist government.

"The Children of Chabannes," a documentary opening today at the Quad Cinema (it
will also be shown on Sunday evening on the HBO Signature channel), was made by
Lisa Gossels and Dean Wetherell; Ms. Gossels's father and uncle were among the
rescued children. Inspired by her father's stories, and by a 1996 reunion of the
children and their protectors, Ms. Gossels has constructed a moving record of
the unassuming, uncompromising heroism of ordinary people.

The children were brought to Chabannes by a Jewish social-service organization,
Ouvre de Secours aux Enfants, and housed at the local chateau. Their sanctuary
was administered by Felix Chevrier, whose stubbornness and charisma make him a
powerful presence in the film, even though he died in 1962. Chevrier, a
Freemason, was also a staunch embodiment of the French republican tradition.

His adherence to the enlightenment tenets of universalism and human rights was
shared by many of the villagers, for whom the embrace of endangered foreigners
was an essentially patriotic act. His eloquent, sarcastic letters to the local
authorities, read aloud by one of his old friends, are nearly as powerful as the
singing of "La Marseillaise" in "Casablanca."

Chevrier, who recorded the children's activities in journals and photographs,
managed to ensure the survival of his charges even when the Vichy government
began rounding up Jews for deportation to the Nazi camps. He was aided by Reine
and Renee Paillassou, local schoolteachers now in their 80's, whose pluck is
still evident, and by the tough, pragmatic members of the Jewish organization.

At enormous personal risk they managed to create something like a normal life,
with daily calisthenics, mushroom-hunting trips into the forest (where they
would later hide from the police) and lessons taught with proper Gallic rigor.
The surviving children, most of whom live in the United States and France, look
back on their time in Chabannes with fondness and amazement. The Chabannais
preserved not only their lives but, more remarkably, their childhoods as well.

The survival of a few hundred children hardly mitigates the horror of the
Holocaust, and this comparatively happy tale can be understood only with
reference to the horrors of its context. These have been documented in epochal,
large-scale films like "Shoah" and "The Sorrow and the Pity." But the cinematic
fulfillment of the imperative to remember has more recently been taken up in
smaller, more individuated acts of commemoration. "Children of Chabannes," an
honest, careful film, is a fine example of this tendency.

THE CHILDREN OF CHABANNES

Directed, produced and edited by Lisa Gossels and Dean Wetherell; in English and
French, with English subtitles; directors of photography, Mustapha Barat and
Philippe Bonnier; music by Joel Goodman; released by Castle Hill Productions and
HBO Signature Double Exposure. At the Quad Cinema, 34 West 13th Street,
Greenwich Village. Running time: 91 minutes. This film is not rated.

WITH: Georges Loinger, Reine and Renee Paillassou and Rachel Pludermacher
(teachers); Peter Gossels, Werner Gossels, Norbert Bikales, Wolfgang
Blumenreich, Jerry Gerard, Ruth Keller and Ernest Rosner (children of
Chabannes); and Serge Klarsfeld (historian).

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FRANCE (95%); EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (88%); UNITED STATES (79%); AUSTRIA

 (72%);

STATE: LIMOUSIN, FRANCE (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FRANCE; CHABANNES (FRANCE); FRANCE;   FRANCE (95%); EUROPE (92%);
GERMANY (88%); UNITED STATES (79%); AUSTRIA (72%);   LIMOUSIN, FRANCE (92%);

SUBJECT: MOTION PICTURES; NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; DOCUMENTARY
FILMS AND PROGRAMS; REVIEWS; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; HEROISM AND HEROES; RESCUES;
JEWS  JEWS & JUDAISM (90%); DOCUMENTARY FILMS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); MOVIE
REVIEWS (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); YOUTH CLUBS
& ACTIVITIES (76%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (75%); DEPORTATION (71%); VISUAL &
PERFORMING ARTS (69%); PRIMARY & SECONDARY SCHOOL TEACHERS (61%);   ASSOCIATIONS
& ORGANIZATIONS (71%);

PERSON: SCOTT, A O; CHEVRIER, FELIX (D1962); PAILLASSOU, RENEE; PAILLASSOU,
REINE; WETHERELL, DEAN; GOSSELS, LISA  FELIX CHEVRIER (64%); WERNER GOSSELS
(62%);

LOAD-DATE: June 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1024 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 11, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK UP CLOSE;
New Bias Frontier: A Council Bill Aims to Protect the Transgendered

BYLINE: By DENNY LEE

SECTION: Section 14; Page 6; Column 1; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 399 words


When Donnie Vargas switched sexes and became Diana, her masculine wardrobe was
not the only thing to go. She lost her job waiting on tables and was evicted
from her apartment in Providence, R.I.

So Ms. Vargas did what many outcasts before had done: she moved to New York in
search of more "diversity and greater opportunities," she said. But two years
and dozens of job interviews later, she is still looking for work.

"Some places chuckled at me," said Ms. Vargas, 30, who now lives in Astoria,
Queens. "Others told me they don't hire my kind," including one restaurant that
advertised itself as owned and operated by gays, she said.

On Monday, members of the City Council introduced legislation to broaden the
city's human rights law to protect Ms. Vargas and others like her. The bill
would insert the words, "gender identity or expression," into existing language
that bars discrimination in employment, public accommodations, housing, credit
and education.

"Transgendered or gender variant people have no protection under city law," said
Pauline Park, legislative coordinator of the New York Association for Gender
Rights Advocacy, a nonprofit group formed in 1998. "Without protection from
discrimination, we can be and are routinely fired or simply denied the
opportunity to work."

The bill has 22 co-sponsors, said Peter Rider, a legislative aide to
Councilwoman Christine Quinn, who is leading the effort along with five other
Council members: Margarita Lopez, Philip Reed, Bill Perkins, Ronnie Eldridge and
Stephen DiBrienza .

If the bill is enacted, New York will join 26 other cities, including San
Francisco, Seattle and Atlanta, with similar laws.

While the bill's supporters say they have not encountered much opposition, they
expect an uphill battle before the Council. The city's gay civil rights bill,
they note, took 15 years before it was passed in 1986 and signed into law. The
Giuliani administration has not taken a position on the new measure.

Meanwhile, transgender advocates have been speaking before community groups to
build support. "People respond to me just as another middle-aged woman," said
Melissa Sklarz, 46, who became the city's first transgendered officeholder last
November when she won a judicial delegate seat.

"I keep forgetting that I'm different," Ms. Sklarz said. "In my own head, I'm no
different at all."   DENNY LEE


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%); RHODE ISLAND, USA (92%);

CITY: PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);

COMPANY: NEW YORK ASSOCIATION (92%);   CITY COUNCIL (92%);

ORGANIZATION: CITY COUNCIL (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (94%); RHODE
ISLAND, USA (92%);   PROVIDENCE, RI, USA (90%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: TRANSSEXUALS; LAW AND LEGISLATION; DISCRIMINATION  EMPLOYMENT (91%);
LEGISLATION (90%); EVICTION (90%); DISMISSALS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%);
TRANSGENDER PERSONS (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%); EMPLOYMENT SEARCH (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); LGBT RIGHTS (88%); GAYS & LESBIANS (88%); GENDER EQUALITY
(78%); RECRUITMENT & HIRING (78%); RESTAURANTS (78%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION
(74%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (74%); EMPLOYMENT INTERVIEWS (73%);
NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (73%); CITIES (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(68%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (74%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (88%);

PERSON: VARGAS, DIANA; LEE, DENNY  DONNIE VARGAS (92%); BILL PERKINS (68%);
MELISSA SKLARZ (63%);

LOAD-DATE: June 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Diana Vargas has found job-hunting tough in New York. (James
Estrin/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1038 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 27, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1228 words



MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: EDITOR SPURNS TRIBUNAL
The head of a reformist daily banned by a religious court is refusing to appear
before the tribunal, the Tehran daily Abrar said. The paper said Ali-Akbar
Mohtashemi, an adviser to President Mohammad Khatami and director of the
newspaper Bayan, rejected the competence of the Special Court for Clergy. Mr.
Mohtashemi, a former interior minister, has already failed to appear before the
court and has been summoned again, Abrar said.
 (Agence France-Presse)

IRAN: P.O.W RELEASE
Iran is to release 450 Iraqi prisoners of war within the next few days, 12 years
after the conflict between the two countries ended, newspapers reported. The
daily Iran quoted Brig. Gen. Mohammad Balar as saying the Iraqis would be freed
as part of a recent accord with the International Committee of the Red Cross.
(Reuters)


IRAN: DISSIDENT JAILED
A hard-line court ordered a leading dissident imprisoned, continuing its
crackdown on journalists and reformists demanding greater freedoms. Ezatollah
Sahabi, left, the editor of a magazine among 19 pro-democracy publications
banned since April, was reportedly detained in connection with a conference he
attended in Berlin. Several journalists and activists were arrested or jailed
after returning from the April conference, at which some delegates criticized
Iran's government. Several have been freed, but Akbar Ganji, a leading
journalist, remains in prison.  (AP)

JORDAN: HAMAS PLEA DISMISSED
Jordan's highest court dismissed an appeal by four exiled anti-Israel militants
to come home, a defense lawyer said. Emad Armouti, a member of the 150-member
team defending the four Jordanian leaders of the group Hamas, said the decision
was made on minor procedural grounds, was clearly political and would be
appealed. The government, saying the four were engaged in illegal activities,
sent them to Qatar last November, closed Hamas offices in Jordan and barred
Hamas activities in the kingdom.  (AP)

UNITED NATIONS

POVERTY ON RISE
The number of people living on less than a dollar a day is rising, the United
Nations General Assembly was told as it began a weeklong meeting in Geneva to
examine poverty. Since 1995 those living in absolute poverty has grown to 1.2
billion from about 1 billion, according to United Nations figures. The United
Nations, the World Bank, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development and the International Monetary Fund issued a report detailing
poverty's spread and urging measures to halve the proportion of those living in
poverty by 2015.
 Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

ASIA

INDONESIA: STATE OF EMERGENCY
President Abdurrahman Wahid declared a civil state of emergency in the eastern
islands of Maluku, where violence between Christians and Muslims has killed
scores of people in the last week and thousands over the last 18 months. "The
situation is out of control," he said. Protesters at the American Embassy in
Jakarta, above, called for international peacekeepers to be sent to the islands.
Seth Mydans (NYT)

KASHMIR: AUTONOMY PLAN APPROVED
The Jammu and Kashmir state provincial assembly approved a contentious
resolution for greater autonomy that seeks to end political discontent in the
region. The resolution provides restoration of pre-1953 relations between the
federal and state government under which the federal government will control
defense, foreign affairs and communications. Members of the Hindu nationalist
Bharatiya Janata Party, which leads the federal coalition government, walked out
in protest.
 P. J. Anthony (NYT)

SOUTH KOREA: DOCTORS BACK AT WORK
Doctors returned to work, ending a six-day strike that paralyzed medical
services. The Korea Medical Association, a lobby for the nation's 65,000
doctors, called off the walkout after members voted to reopen their clinics and
hospitals. The vote was called after political parties agreed to accept one of
the key demands by doctors: new legislation to give them more authority to
prescribe drugs, a major source of income.  (AP)

EUROPE

IRELAND: HAUGHEY TRIAL PUT OFF
A Dublin court indefinitely postponed the criminal trial of former Prime
Minister Charles J. Haughey, 74, ruling that Mr. Haughey, who faces charges of
obstructing a 1997 government inquiry, could not receive a fair trial because of
a rash of negative publicity from politicians and the press. In a newspaper
interview, Deputy Prime Minister Mary Harney said Mr. Haughey should be
convicted, and posters throughout Dublin display his face under the slogan "Jail
the corrupt politicians." Brian Lavery (NYT)

FRANCE: AIR CONTROLLERS STRIKE
French air traffic controllers went on strike to protest privatization,
paralyzing flights in and out of France and affecting all of the country's
airlines and airports. Up to 90 percent of flights were expected to be canceled
at the height of the 24-hour strike, according to the General Direction for
Civil Aviation. The state-run train authority said it provided 5,000 extra seats
over the weekend to help compensate for canceled flights. The air traffic
controllers were protesting what they say are plans by the European Union to
privatize the industry.
 (AP)

AZERBAIJAN: 65 GET AMNESTY
President Heydar Aliyev has granted amnesty to 65 people said to have taken part
in attempted coups in 1994 and 1995. Officials say all those released were tried
and sentenced justly under Azerbaijani law. But the Helsinki Citizens Assembly
said more than half of the prisoners did not receive fair trials and their
amnesty is an attempt to gain favor with the Council of Europe, Europe's main
human rights body. The council is expected to vote on admitting Azerbaijan and
Armenia tomorrow.
 (Agence France-Presse)

YUGOSLAVIA: 5 FACE MILOSEVIC TRIAL
Five men accused of plotting to assassinate President Slobodan Milosevic under
French orders were scheduled to go on trial in Belgrade today. The five, all
Serbs from Yugoslavia and Bosnia, were accused of devising four different plans
to kill Mr. Milosevic, including a sniper attack, a bomb placed in a gutter, a
booby-trapped car and an armed raid on his residence. The accused were arrested
last November.
 (Agence France-Presse)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: U.S. ENVOY'S NEW JOB
Raymond A. J. Chretien, Canada's Ambassador to Washington since 1994, has been
chosen as Ambassador to France. The switch comes less than a month after the
press interpreted a speech by Mr. Chretien as an implicit endorsement of Vice
President Gore in the American presidential race. Aides to the ambassador said
he was merely assessing the two American candidates' familiarity with Canada.
Mr. Chretien, a career diplomat, is a nephew of Prime Minister Jean Chretien.
James Brooke (NYT)

AFRICA

CONGO: PLEA TO U.N. COURT
Congo asked the United Nations' International Court of Justice in The Hague to
rule that Uganda must withdraw its forces from Congolese territory. Congo filed
cases against Uganda, Burundi and Rwanda last year, accusing them of armed
aggression and "massive violations of human rights." In written statements,
Congo said "despite promises and declarations" Uganda has pursued its policy of
"aggression, its brutal armed interventions, its harassment and its looting."
(Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%);

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); JORDAN (94%); INDONESIA (92%); MIDDLE
EAST (92%); IRAQ (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); ASIA (79%); QATAR
(79%); IRAN (73%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (50%);

CITY: BERLIN, GERMANY (79%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (73%); JAKARTA,
INDONESIA (51%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%);   PRISONERS OF WAR  (57%); PRISONERS OF WAR

 (57%); INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS
& RED CRESCENT MOVEMENT (56%); HAMAS (54%);

ORGANIZATION: PRISONERS OF WAR  (57%); PRISONERS OF WAR (57%); INTERNATIONAL
COMMITTEE OF THE RED CROSS (56%); INTERNATIONAL RED CROSS & RED CRESCENT
MOVEMENT (56%); HAMAS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (96%); JORDAN (94%); INDONESIA (92%);
MIDDLE EAST (92%); IRAQ (92%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); ASIA (79%);
QATAR (79%); IRAN (73%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (50%);   BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);
TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (73%); JAKARTA, INDONESIA (51%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); WRITERS
(90%); JOURNALISM (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%);
RELIGION (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS
(87%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (87%); INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (87%);

 APPEALS (86%); HAMAS (86%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (79%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (78%);
SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); PRISONS (75%); LAWYERS (74%); SUPREME COURTS (73%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (73%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (73%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (69%); ARRESTS (68%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (68%); POOR POPULATION (66%);   CORRECTIONS (78%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (77%); STATES OF EMERGENCY (75%); POWS & MIAS (75%);

PERSON: CHARLES J HAUGHEY (67%);

LOAD-DATE: June 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1067 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 14, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Last of Hostages Freed in Fiji As Chiefs Pick New President

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 420 words

DATELINE: SUVA, Fiji, July 13


After two months of national crisis, the leader of a coup here freed the ousted
prime minister and 17 others today.

Later the Great Council of Chiefs, Fiji's traditional power, elected as
president Ratu Josefa Iloilo, who was the choice of the coup leader, George
Speight.

Mr. Speight made clear that three decades of democracy in Fiji were at an end.
His rebels said they had taken the hostages inside Parliament in a effort to
disfranchise Fiji's ethnic Indian minority.

This morning, the former prime minister, Mahendra Chaudhry, shook hands with Mr.
Speight and they hugged. The hostages then were taken to the Red Cross building
for medical checkups.

Later, Mr. Speight walked into a news conference wearing a Western-style suit
jacket, the traditional Fijian sulu skirt and sunglasses in the evening
darkness. A horde of reporters chased him, asking him how he felt. "Excellent,"
he replied.

What was left behind was a vastly different Fiji.

The elected government is gone, ethnic tensions remain inflamed and the tourist
industry is ravaged. The United States and other countries have urged their
citizens to leave, and the tiny nation faces the possibility of sanctions.

The crisis began May 19 when Mr. Speight's rebels stormed Parliament and took
several dozen hostages, including Mr. Chaudhry. The rebels are indigenous
Fijians who said the nation's large ethnic Indian minority had too much power.
They demanded that Fiji's Constitution be scrapped and that Mr. Chaudhry be
deposed.

In the days after the seizure, Speight supporters looted and burned ethnic
Indian homes and businesses, and many Indians made plans to flee the country.
The violence led Fiji's military to declare martial law.

On Sunday, after weeks of negotiations, military leaders and Mr. Speight reached
a deal to free the hostages in exchange for meeting many of Mr. Speight's
demands, including a new government and a new Constitution curtailing Indian
rights.

The Great Council of Chiefs' selection of Mr. Iloilo as president raised hopes
that civil unrest would abate. They were to meet Friday to choose two vice
presidents, endorse the cabinet proposed by Mr. Speight and decide who will
serve on a commission to write a new constitution.

For the most part, the civil disturbances that began sweeping the country a week
ago in support of Mr. Speight began easing shortly after the hostage release.
Roadblocks that had cut off traffic between the international airport and the
capital, Suva, were removed.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: FIJI (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: SUVA, FIJI (94%);

COMPANY: GREAT COUNCIL (57%);

ORGANIZATION: GREAT COUNCIL (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FIJI;   FIJI (99%); UNITED STATES (92%);   SUVA, FIJI (94%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; COUPS D'ETAT AND ATTEMPTED COUPS D'ETAT;
HOSTAGES; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TRAVEL AND VACATIONS; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; SANCTIONS (ECONOMIC)  HOSTAGE TAKING (92%); COUPS
(92%); PRIME MINISTERS (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); POLITICS
(73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); RIOTS (69%); PRESS CONFERENCES (69%); TOURISM (53%);
AIRPORTS (50%);   MARTIAL LAW (78%);

PERSON: SPEIGHT, GEORGE; CHAUDHRY, MAHENDRA (PRIME MIN); ILOILO, RATU JOSEFA
GEORGE SPEIGHT (95%); MAHENDRA CHAUDHRY (70%); JOSEFA ILOILO (57%);

LOAD-DATE: July 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The leader of a coup in Fiji, George Speight, right, escorted
the deposed prime minister, Mahendra Chaudhry, from Parliament yesterday. (News
Limited via Reuters)

Map of Fiji highlighting Suva: In Suva, rebels freed the last of their hostages,
held since May 19.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1069 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Paid Notice: Deaths
KARSKI, JAN

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 1; Classified

LENGTH: 467 words


KARSKI-Jan. The officers, members and staff of the American Jewish Committee
deeply mourn the death of Jan Karski, a courier of courage. Jan Karski was a
diplomat, a Righteous Gentile, a messenger for the Polish underground resistance
during World War II, and an eyewitness to the systematic Nazi extermination of
the Jews in Poland. He risked his own life to report the unimaginable atrocities
he had seen to the Polish, British and American governments and to plead for
help in saving Jewish lives. Modestly referring to himself as a "human tape
recorder", he was, in actuality, a trumpet, heralding the harsh tones of human
indifference and cruelty, while at the same time personifying the indomitable
spirit and inherent goodness that mankind can still possess. He devoted his
postwar life to protecting the memory of the victims of the Holocaust, combating
anti-Semitism and intolerance, and advancing the cause of human rights. In 1993,
the AJC bestowed our highest honor on Jan Karski, and in 1999, he was the first
recipient of the Eternal Light Award from the Center for Catholic/Jewish
Studies, a collaboration of AJC and Saint Leo University. With great sorrow we
now bid farewell to a dear frienda gentleman and a gentle man of enormous
personal courage and profound moral integrity. We will cherish his memory as
near to our hearts as he cradled the souls of the millions of Jews he never knew
but tried to rescue. Bruce M. Ramer, President David A. Harris, Excutive
Director

KARSKI-Jan. The Polish American Congress mourns the passing of Jan Karski and
offers sympathy to his friends and family. Faithful to his Catholic tradition,
Jan Karski was a hero for Poland and for all humanity. He championed the cause
of the victims of the Holocaust and his spirit stands as a shining example of
dedication to the principles of freedom, truth and the dignity of mankind. As a
member of the Polish underground A.K. he came before the Western Allies to plead
for Poland's Jews but was met with indifference. He later witnessed a similar
indifference when the West consigned the freedom of postwar Poland into the
Soviet orbit. May God grant eternal rest to the soul of Jan Karski. Holocaust
Documentation Committee Frank Milewski, Chair Michael Preisler, Auschwitz 22213,
Co-Chair

KARSKI-Jan. The Simon Wiesenthal Center and its 400,000 constituent members
mourn the loss of Jan Karski, one of the most courageous heroes of the Holocaust
and WWII. At great personal risk, he penetrated the ghettos and camps of Poland
and brought that witness to the highest levels of Allied leadership. His
personal commitment serves as an example of a caring individual and stands as a
model for us all. Rabbi Marvin Hier, Dean and Founder Nelson Peltz, Co-Chair,
Board of Trustees & the entire SWC family

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); POLAND (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE  (91%); AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE (84%);

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE  (91%); AMERICAN JEWISH COMMITTEE (84%);



GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); POLAND (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%);

SUBJECT: DEATHS & OBITUARIES (94%); JEWS & JUDAISM (91%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); GENOCIDE (89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); WORLD WAR II (77%);
EYEWITNESSES (77%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (73%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (71%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (72%);

PERSON: KARSKI, JAN  JAN KARSKI (94%);

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Paid Death Notice

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1070 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

THE INNOCENTS/A Special Report;
Jailed Unjustly, Peruvians Try to Rebuild Shattered Lives

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2396 words

DATELINE: LIMA, Peru


Outside his powder-blue shack, Antonio Alejo waits quietly for customers in need
of an oil change or a brake job. He smiles faintly as his youngest child plays
with his two stepchildren, running around some burning trash on the sand dune
that is his front yard. With business slow, he tends a few geraniums and
sunflowers and occasionally fixes a bowl of rice.

Mr. Alejo is slowly picking up the shards of his life.

For five years, he sat in jail serving a 30-year sentence on charges that he was
a Maoist terrorist -- a phony case cobbled together with a forged confession and
the false testimony of a neighbor.

Pardoned two years ago by President Alberto K. Fujimori, Mr. Alejo walked out of
prison, his life in ruins. His wife had presumed him dead and was living with
another man. His wrists were dislocated, his teeth were broken, and his
intestines so badly damaged by kicks from torture sessions that he needed two
operations.

Today, he looks much older than his 43 years. His sleep is interrupted by
strange dreams, he says, no doubt linked to the all-night arguments between the
two terrorist groups that shared his cell block.

Peruvians call Mr. Alejo and more than 1,000 people like him "the innocents,"
mostly poor people who were unfairly imprisoned on charges of terrorism or
treason from 1992 to 1995 by special antiterrorism courts. Most have been
pardoned or absolved of any wrongdoing in the last three years, but their lives
and the lives of their families have been irreparably tattered.

Such injustice was the product of the chaos that gripped Peru in the early
1990's, when Shining Path, a brutal terrorist group bent on creating a radical
Maoist state, was in the final throes of a rampage of bombings and massacres.
The rebels threatened and paid off prosecutors and judges to avert imprisonment
of their own, and their efforts to dominate Peru by coercion appeared close to
fruition.

In a draconian crackdown in 1992, Mr. Fujimori disbanded Congress and the
Supreme Court and established the special antiterrorism courts, which convicted
thousands of people of aiding rebels.

The fates of those accused of cooperating with the guerrillas were decided by
masked judges and prosecutors working anonymously behind one-way mirrors.
Sometimes the trials in those "faceless courts" did not last more than 20
minutes. There were no juries and no cross-examination, lawyers and suspects
said.

Sentences were often based on phony evidence, say the office of the ombudsman
and a government-sponsored commission. Suspects were arrested, tortured -- hung
by their wrists as in Mr. Alejo's case -- and forced to sign pieces of paper
that were turned into confessions of aiding terrorists. Some convictions were
based on testimony provided by rebels, who implicated others rather than give up
a fellow guerrilla.

"It was war justice applied to civilians," said Jorge Santistevan, the
congressionally appointed ombudsman who has investigated the plight of the
innocents. "These people have done nothing. Nothing. Nothing. And their
suffering has been boundless."

As the struggle against terrorism has wound down, 1,089 of the innocents have
been freed, the authorities say, either by pardon or reversals of their
sentences. Under international pressure, Mr. Fujimori set up a review commission
to examine individual cases. But 54 more prisoners deemed innocent by the panel
remain in jail as petitions for their release have sat on Mr. Fujimori's desk
for more than six months. At least 227 others who also have credible claims of
innocence are still sitting in Peru's dank prisons. But those cases had not been
reviewed before Mr. Fujimori allowed the commission's term to expire last year.

Mr. Fujimori, who did not respond to requests for an interview, has turned the
commission's work over to the Justice Ministry, saying Peru has to be careful
not to let potentially guilty people go free. His personal representative on the
commission, the Rev. Hubert Lanssiers, said: "I have no idea how many more
innocent people remain in jail. It is a tragedy."

As he sits at home, Mr. Alejo nearly always folds his arms tightly across his
chest as if to ward off a blow or a kick. His few words come in an
expressionless monotone. "Justice is not justice in this country," he said.
"Only God can explain what happened to us."

Mr. Alejo's imprisonment left his family destitute, forcing them to wander Peru
for work and shelter. Taking him for dead, Mr. Alejo's common-law wife took up
with another man, a violent alcoholic, with whom she had two children. She
finally ran from the violence and back to Mr. Alejo in April, but the
relationship is not the same, they both say.

Still, he is a determined survivor. In prison, he learned to read and write, and
he has begun a business with rudimentary mechanic's skills he learned from
another former prisoner.

The Victims
Railroaded in Court After Mass Arrests

If there is any small comfort in Mr. Alejo's story, it is that he was not alone.
These cases, for instance, are based on human rights and government reports:

*Alicia Zamalloa Caceres, an impoverished widow, was imprisoned after the police
found a raffle ticket she had sold in the house of a terrorist.

*Juan Mallea Tomailla, a taxi driver, was imprisoned after he dropped off a
customer at a house once used to edit the newspaper for Shining Path guerrillas.

*Juana Quispe Rojas, a housekeeper, was mistakenly arrested on a warrant for a
suspected terrorist who happened to have the same name. She was sentenced to 20
years in prison.

All were eventually released. But Genaro Caceres Camones, a day laborer, is
still serving a 10-year sentence for treason. According to a 1995 report by
Human Rights Watch, Mr. Caceres was "tricked into carrying the supplies of a
Shining Path band, and escaped by giving himself up to an army patrol after an
armed clash."

"Nevertheless, he was tried for treason and sentenced," the report said.

Mass arrests were made by soldiers and policemen who earned extra cash based on
the number of people they rounded up. In court, the suspects were railroaded
into convictions and prison sentences.

Alfredo Marquez, a 36-year-old artist pardoned in 1998 after serving three years
in jail, remembers his 1994 hearing in a court in which he was not allowed to
talk to his lawyer. The judge and prosecutor sat behind a one-way mirror
speaking to him through microphones outfitted with equipment to distort their
voices beyond recognition.

"It was like listening to Darth Vader," said Mr. Marquez, who was sentenced to
20 years, accused of being a member of Shining Path after he produced a
silk-screen pop print of Mao. He confessed in exchange for the release of his
girlfriend. "The courtroom was so surreal it made Kafka look like child's play,"
he said.

Not a single military or police officer, prosecutor or judge has been
disciplined for their routine malfeasance.

Once in jail, the prisoners say, they bunked in threes or fours in tiny,
windowless cells outfitted with a hole for a toilet and concrete slabs for beds.
Most were denied anything to read, and the only recreation allowed was a half
hour of daily exercise. Visiting privileges were limited to two adults for 30
minutes a month, and children could visit only for 30 minutes every three
months.

The prisoners were not allowed to touch their visitors. They could see only the
outlines of their loved ones through chicken wire and curtains that were so
tightly woven they were barely translucent.

"They were savage years for these people," said Susana Gonzalez, a social worker
who worked for the review commission. "It was an experience that destroyed the
most intimate corners of a person's psyche." One result, psychologists say, has
been severe depression and lasting rage among most of the people who have been
released. To this day not one has received a penny in reparations from the
government.

The Arrest
Misunderstanding Leads to Torture

All of Mr. Alejo's suffering hinged on a simple mistake made on Dec. 10, 1992,
he recalled.

He had ridden his mule down from the mountains to the market town of Paucartambo
to sell oranges and bananas and to have a bowl of soup at a restaurant.

A group of six soldiers came into the restaurant while on patrol, searching for
Shining Path rebels who were at the time terrorizing the central highlands.

One soldier asked Mr. Alejo a simple question: "Have you seen any tucos?"

Unaware that "tucos" is a slang word for terrorists, the shy, illiterate jungle
farmer said he had. For Mr. Alejo, "tucos" were the little gray birds that fly
in the jungle at night, waking people up with their screeches. The soldiers then
asked for his papers and became more suspicious when they noticed that he had
failed to vote in the most recent election -- a technical violation of the law.

"It seemed like a game," he recalled. "Somebody had to be kidding."

But for that simple misunderstanding, the soldiers hauled Mr. Alejo away. For
three days, he said, he was tied up in an outhouse without food or water, and
left to gag on the odor. Then over eight more days of torture army personnel
hung him from a ceiling by his wrists, dislocating them, and applied electric
currents to his penis.

One night during his capture, he said, he was forced to sleep beside the
mutilated remains of a woman who had been the girlfriend of a terrorist. When he
cried in horror, the soldiers accused him of sympathizing with her.

Mr. Alejo said his military torturers had grilled him for information about the
Shining Path guerrillas, who had recently begun operating in the area.

But Mr. Alejo said he had no information to give. "They said, 'All your
neighbors say you are a terrorist and you won't talk because you are a
terrorist,' " Mr. Alejo said, mixing his flat rendition of events with an
occasional tear.

A lawyer assigned by the review commission to study Mr. Alejo's case said a
neighbor of his, who was picked up by the army in the Paucartambo restaurant the
same day the same soldiers questioned Mr. Alejo, had signed a statement
implicating him and others to avoid torture.

The torturers told Mr. Alejo he could end the torture by signing a confession,
he said. When he said he could not read or write, they had him sign a blank
piece of paper. Someone later filled in the blanks -- with a confession by Mr.
Alejo that he took part in six terrorist activities, including two killings.

According to the pardon request filed by the review commission, which was
eventually approved by Mr. Fujimori, that confession was the basis for his
conviction during a military court trial.

At his trial, Mr. Alejo said, his defense lawyer told him that the only way he
could defend him was if he provided names of other terrorists. The lawyer then
requested a $30 fee.

Mr. Alejo repeatedly tried to tell someone that he could not have possibly
written or understood the confession he supposedly signed because he was
illiterate. But he said his pleas were ignored.

The Release
Trying to Restore A Shattered Family

Mr. Fujimori allowed Mr. Alejo and 27 other pardoned prisoners to leave Castro
Castro prison in Lima on Nov. 28, 1998. Most cheered wildly as they walked
through the gates to freedom. A throng of television and radio reporters
recorded the occasion and noticed that Mr. Alejo was sobbing.

Mr. Alejo explained that he was all alone. In his five years in prison, he had
not seen or heard from his wife and four children, the youngest of whom was only
3 months old when he was arrested. He had heard that they had left their
village, but that the Red Cross could not find them.

Mr. Alejo's wife, Teresa Pareja Gonzalez, a peasant woman with long braided
hair, had heard about his capture but was too frightened to investigate. As the
years passed, she took him for dead. Hungry and scared of the terrorist violence
swelling through the highlands near the farm she shared with her parents, she
and her children first moved to the nearby town of Huanta and finally to the
Apurimac valley, where she found work picking coca plants for drug traffickers.

While she struggled to make ends meet, earning $3 a day in the coca fields, her
3-year-old daughter, Sonia, suddenly fell ill. A traditional healer could not
help, and Sonia died. Then, after Mr. Fujimori began shooting down the planes of
cocaine traffickers in 1995, the price of coca dropped, and Ms. Pareja Gonzalez
was out of work.

Desperate for food, she accepted the advances of a part-time farm hand who
turned out to have a ferocious temper. "He was a bad man," Ms. Pareja Gonzalez
said, "and when he drank with his friends, he came home and kicked me and the
children." Still, she had two sons by him.

Mr. Alejo did not know any of this when he was released, but a sister of Ms.
Pareja Gonzalez heard him interviewed on the radio when he left the prison. She
called her sister and reached Mr. Alejo through a journalist.

Mr. Alejo waited a year to visit his family, which had moved back to Huanta. He
needed time to get his papers in order, he explained, and until he did, he
feared that he would be seized again. At the fateful reunion, Ms. Pareja
Gonzalez said she was happy with her new man. But she let Mr. Alejo return to
Lima with their two eldest children.

Finally she left her abusing mate last spring, and pleaded with Mr. Alejo to
take her back along with the two sons she had while he was prison.

The reunited family now lives in the Villa el Salvador shantytown in Lima in a
cramped shack of thatched bamboo, concrete and plastic sheets. Mr. Alejo said he
and his wife were struggling to rebuild their old intimacy. There are plenty of
disagreements between them.

"Before I went to jail, I accepted things I won't accept anymore," he said. "I
express myself more readily now, and she doesn't always understand."

All of Mr. Alejo's three surviving children are having trouble coping after
their father's long absence and the beatings of their stepfather.

The whole family are squatters who can be thrown off their land at any time. But
Mr. Alejo said he could not return to his old jungle farm because "the memories
are just too painful." A tear begins to roll from an eye before he regains his
control.

"We do the best we can," Mr. Alejo said. "I still have a life to live."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (94%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (90%);

COMPANY: POLICE FOUNDATION  (59%); POLICE FOUNDATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: POLICE FOUNDATION  (59%); POLICE FOUNDATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU (94%);   LIMA, PERU (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   JAIL SENTENCING (90%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); TESTIMONY
(89%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); COUNTERTERRORISM (89%); FAMILY (78%);
SENTENCING (75%); TREASON (75%); WITNESSES (75%); PARDONS (75%); JURY TRIALS
(75%); PRISONS (75%); ARRESTS (75%); JUDGES (75%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (74%);

 CROSS EXAMINATIONS (74%); STEPPARENTS (72%); LAWYERS (72%); BOMBINGS (70%);
SUPREME COURTS (64%);   CORRECTIONS (75%);

PERSON: ANTONIO ALEJO (92%); ALBERTO K FUJIMORI (79%);

LOAD-DATE: July 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Antonio Alejo, one the "innocents," with his wife, Teresa
Pareja, and her son, Jeffrey, at their Lima home. (Ana Cecilia Gonzales-Vigil
for The New York Times)(pg. A1); Antonio Alejo, shown with wife, Teresa, and
sons Jeffrey, Renzo and Felipe at their home, spent five years in jail after
giving a wrong answer to a misunderstood question.; Cesar Aquino was pardoned
after 7 years in jail. He was arrested because he went to watch TV at a friend's
house, which the police said was used for guerrilla organizing.; Alfredo Marquez
was pardoned after serving 3 1/2 years of a 20-year term. At his trial, he was
not allowed to talk to his lawyer, and the judge and prosecutor were concealed.;
Alicia Zamalloa Caceres served 2 1/2 years of a 20-year sentence. She was
arrested because the police found a raffle ticket she had sold in the house of a
terrorist. (Photographs by Ana Cecilia Gonzales-Vigil for The New York
Times)(pg. A8)

Map of Peru highlighting Paucartambo: Antonio Alejo was arrested in Paucartambo,
where he had gone to sell fruit. (pg. A8)

TYPE: Special Report

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1088 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 5, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 911 words



EUROPE

THE HAGUE: SREBRENICA TESTIMONY -- A former Bosnian Serb general, Radislav
Krstic, on trial before the United Nations war crimes tribunal, accused his
former commander in chief, Ratko Mladic, left, of personally overseeing the
massacre of thousands of Muslims at Srebrenica in 1995. The videotaped testimony
was the first time the tribunal had heard evidence directly placing Mr. Mladic,
who is still at large, in charge of the forces that carried out the killings.
(Reuters)


RUSSIA: OFFICERS DECAPITATED -- Russian officials said that two army officers
were killed by Chechen rebels and that their heads were delivered to a military
base. On their Web site (www.kavkaz.org), the rebels said they had offered to
exchange the two men for a Russian soldier they said raped a Chechen girl.
(Reuters)

GERMANY: RIGHTISTS UNDER SCRUTINY -- The government said it would convene a
working group to examine the case for banning the far-right National Democratic
Party after an outcry over a bombing last week that hurt Jewish immigrants.
(Reuters)

SWITZERLAND: BANKS ACCEPT HOLOCAUST DEAL -- Two major banks said they had
formally accepted an amended version of a $1.25 billion settlement with
Holocaust victims and their heirs. Credit Suisse Group and UBS AG said they had
notified United States District Judge Edward Korman in New York of their
acceptance of amendments relating to looted art, the further search for bank
accounts, financing legal costs and the inclusion of insurance companies.
(Reuters)

THE AMERICAS

CHILE: PINOCHET RULING -- The Supreme Court said it will deliver its formal
ruling Tuesday on whether Gen. Augusto Pinochet can retain immunity from
prosecution, which has blocked bids to force him to stand trial for alleged
human rights abuses. The judges voted privately on the case last Tuesday.
(Reuters)

HAITI: O.A.S. MISSION -- The Organization of American States' permanent council
agreed to send a mission to Haiti to explore ways of strengthening democracy.
The action came after an O.A.S. mission concluded that runoff elections on July
9 were flawed because they failed to include races for 10 Senate seats.  (AP)

ASIA

PHILIPPINES: ROADSIDE MASSACRE: -- Armed men suspected of belonging to a Muslim
rebel group shot and killed 16 people, many of them students, in Cotabato
Province after dragging them out of vehicles, officials said. The rebel group,
Moro Islamic Liberation Front, denied involvement.  (Reuters)

JAPAN: U.S. SOLDIER CHARGED -- The United States Marine Corps indicted Lance
Cpl. Kenny Titcomb, 19, on charges that he fondled a 14-year-old girl in
Okinawa, military officials said.  (AP)

INDIA: A STAR'S PLEA -- In a tape cassette sent through an emissary, the
kidnapped movie star Rajkumar asked the police not to try an armed rescue to
free him from the forested redoubt of the bandit Veerappan. He also asked fans
not to use violence to protest his abduction.
 Barry Bearak (NYT)

INDIA: KASHMIR GROUP ACCUSED -- Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee said that
arms found at the scene of massacres this week in Kashmir establish that the
militant group Lashkar-i-Toiba was responsible. The group has denied any role in
the attacks, which killed 98.
 Barry Bearak (NYT)

NORTH, SOUTH KOREA: MEDIA TOUR -- In another sign that North Korea is shedding
its reclusive ways, the heads of South Korean newspapers and broadcast stations
will visit Pyongyang today at the invitation of North Korea's leader, Kim Jong
Il. During a weeklong visit, the delegation plans to meet with North Korean
media representatives to discuss exchanges. Samuel Len (NYT)

AFRICA

NIGERIA: HOSTAGES FREED -- Militant youths demanding jobs in the oil industry
released 165 oil workers, including 7 Americans, held hostage since Monday on
two drilling rigs in southern Nigeria, the oil company Royal Dutch/Shell
reported. Shell has promised to arrange a meeting between the youths and
industry contractors to discuss their grievances.  (Agence France-Presse)

ZIMBABWE: FARMERS SUE -- The Commercial Farmers Union went to court to block the
government's planned acquisition of two million acres of white-owned farmland.
The union, which represents the nation's 4,000 white farmers, had agreed that
underutilized land should be distributed to black peasants but now says the
process is moving too fast.  Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

SIERRA LEONE: PEACEKEEPING HELP -- To counter the rebel threat in Sierra Leone,
the United Nations Security Council voted unanimously to strengthen the
13,000-member peacekeeping force, although the size of the troop increase was
not specified. Rebels reignited the nine-year civil war in the West African
country in May by seizing about 500 peacekeepers.  (AP)

PACIFIC

FIJI: COUP LEADER IN COURT -- George Speight, along with 12 other rebels,
pleaded not guilty in a tightly guarded magistrate's court to minor charges
stemming from their May 19 seizure of Parliament and the ousting of the
country's first ethnic Indian prime minister. Mr. Speight and his supporters,
who requested bail, were remanded for a hearing on Sept. 1.  (Agence
France-Presse)

MIDDLE EAST

LEBANON: U.N. DEPLOYMENT -- United Nations peacekeepers started their final
deployment along the Lebanon-Israel border. Beirut gave approval after ensuring
that Israel had ended its last encroachment.  (Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: CSGN (SWX) (83%); CS (NYSE) (83%); UBSN (SWX) (82%); UBS (NYSE) (82%);
   UBSW (JSE) (82%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (83%); NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK
HOLDING COMPANIES (83%); NAICS524126 DIRECT PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE
CARRIERS (83%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (83%); SIC6029 COMMERCIAL
BANKS, NEC (82%);

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%); HAITI (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%);

 ASIA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); JAPAN (79%);
CHILE (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);

COMPANY: CREDIT SUISSE GROUP AG (83%); UBS AG (82%);   UNITED NATIONS  (84%);
UNITED NATIONS (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(92%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); EUROPE (92%); HAITI (92%); NETHERLANDS (91%);

 ASIA (79%); PHILIPPINES (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); JAPAN (79%);
CHILE (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  HOLOCAUST (90%); TESTIMONY (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); RESCUE OPERATIONS (88%); EVIDENCE (78%); WITNESSES
(78%); GENOCIDE (78%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); ARMIES (78%);
SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); JUDGES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); JEWS & JUDAISM (77%);
RELIGION (77%); BANKING & FINANCE (74%); SUPREME COURTS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (73%); IMMUNITY (73%);
SHOOTINGS (71%); COMMERCIAL BANKING (71%); ELECTIONS (68%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(68%); RUNOFF ELECTIONS (67%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (67%); SETTLEMENT &
COMPROMISE (67%); INSURANCE (64%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (60%); WEB SITES (55%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (74%);

LOAD-DATE: August 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1094 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Pinochet Ruled No Longer Immune From Prosecution

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 960 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile, Aug. 8


The Chilean Supreme Court issued its ruling today to divest Gen. Augusto
Pinochet of his senatorial immunity, removing a giant legal hurdle to charging
the former dictator with involvement in the kidnapping, torture and murder of
thousands of people during his 17-year rule.

The announcement, which was widely expected, was greeted here with the uncorking
of bottles of Champagne by hundreds of cheering demonstrators, who waved
black-and-white photographs of their dead or missing loved ones. It also
provoked some thinly veiled sniping between President Ricardo Lagos -- the first
Socialist to govern Chile since the Pinochet coup overthrew President Salvador
Allende in 1973 -- and the army commander, who strongly defended the former
dictator's place in history.

General Pinochet is still a long way from serving time in prison, or even being
tried. Conservative lawmakers said they would introduce legislation exempting
him from facing a trial because of his health. He has diabetes and circulatory
problems and has had three strokes.

His family also takes the position he should not stand trial because of the
illnesses. The family said today that it would fight a legal battle to prevent
General Pinochet, 84, from being examined to determine if he is mentally fit to
stand trial, which the family considers humiliating.

Because of his status as a retired general, General Pinochet has the right to
choose the location of his interrogation by prosecutors. That privilege could
allow him to specify that his questioning take place within a military building
in an attempt to pit the armed forces against the government.

Nevertheless, the decision today was more than symbolic in importance because it
will likely lead to the prosecution of dozens of other retired military and
police officers for the executions and disappearances of more than 3,000 people.

The decision not only stripped General Pinochet of his immunity, but it also
ratified a legal doctrine that considers anyone who disappeared during the
dictatorship and has not been found to be a kidnapping victim. Since the
kidnapping would be considered still in progress, it could not be covered by an
amnesty decreed while General Pinochet was in power. The amnesty granted
immunity for political crimes committed during the early years of his
government.

Judge Juan Guzman, who is serving as the prosecutor, has based his case against
General Pinochet on the workings of a death squad led by aides close to him in
the first months after the 1973 coup. The death squad has been held responsible
for the disappearance of scores of people, 19 of whom are still missing and
therefore are considered kidnapping victims.

Today's decision provoked a bitter polemic between President Lagos and Gen.
Ricardo Izurieta. Since he replaced General Pinochet as commander in chief of
the army in early 1998, General Izurieta has attempted both to coexist with two
civilian presidents and to keep right-wing elements at bay.

He made a provocative visit to General Pinochet at his home today, saying, "The
Chilean Army wanted to express its support at this difficult time." When asked
by reporters if his visit had the government's approval, he shot back, "As
commander in chief, I do what I have to do."

Without mentioning General Izurieta by name or criticizing his visit, President
Lagos clearly responded to the general's remarks, saying, "The command of our
country rests on what I decide." He added, "Today our obligation is to respect
the judges and guard our own conduct as the world is watching us."

In recent days top military commanders have warned that a ruling against General
Pinochet could inhibit military officials from coming forward with information
about those who had disappeared -- something the military pledged earlier this
year that it would do. But today General Izurieta said the armed forces would
comply with its promise.

General Pinochet's lawyers and other supporters contended that the court
decision was totally political because, they said, everyone knew that the people
who had disappeared were dead and that many could never be found because their
bodies had been dumped into the ocean.

"It's an absurd decision based on a falsehood," said Senator Jorge Martinez
Bush, a conservative ally of the former dictator. "This is a judicial fiction
that will freeze the relationship between the civilian leadership and the
military."

The 14-to-6 Supreme Court vote upholding a lower court ruling was more one-sided
than the tally was reported to be a week ago, when the outcome of the secret
deliberations was reported in some detail in the local press.

"This is an important precedent for the entire world that human rights is a
basic foundation of democracy," said Juan Bustos, one of the lawyers who argued
before the court in favor of stripping the immunity that General Pinochet was
granted when he became a senator for life in 1998, under a provision in the
Constitution written during his rule.

Judge Guzman will now lead a formal criminal investigation against the former
dictator. The prosecutor has not made clear how he will proceed, but he is
expected to order that General Pinochet undergo medical tests to assess his
mental fitness to face trial. Then he will probably demand that the retired
general answer a series of questions.

There have been 157 criminal claims filed against General Pinochet by human
rights groups, families of those who disappeared and torture victims. But the
case against him picked up momentum only after he was arrested in London two
years ago on a Spanish warrant. He has faced legal troubles ever since he was
released by the British authorities for health reasons, and allowed to return
home in March.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE; SANTIAGO (CHILE);   CHILE (94%);   SANTIAGO, CHILE (93%);

SUBJECT: DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; KIDNAPPING; TORTURE; DEMONSTRATIONS AND RIOTS;
AMNESTIES AND PARDONS  IMMUNITY (90%); MURDER (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT

 (90%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (90%); TORTURE (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); AMNESTY (89%); ARMIES (89%); COUPS (89%); VERDICTS (78%); SUPREME COURTS
(78%); RIOTS (76%); ARMED FORCES (74%); JAIL SENTENCING (73%); PARDONS (60%);
LEGISLATION (53%); DIABETES (53%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET UGARTE, AUGUSTO (GEN); LAGOS, RICARDO (PRES);
IZURIETA, RICARDO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (96%); RICARDO IZURIETA (66%); RICARDO
LAGOS (58%);

LOAD-DATE: August 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relatives of Chileans who disappeared during the rule of Gen.
Augusto Pinochet celebrated in Santiago yesterday. (Associated Press)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1103 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Colombia Rebels Release Environmentalists

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 210 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Aug. 11


The country's second-largest guerrilla group freed 25 Colombian
environmentalists and an American professor tonight, two days after kidnapping
them.

Ten members of the National Liberation Army, carrying assault rifles and
covering their faces, handed over the kidnapped group to a delegation of Red
Cross and local government human rights workers on a remote mountainside in
Antioquia Province.

None of those kidnapped -- university students and professors researching plants
and animals -- had been harmed. The group, including John Douglas Lynch, 58, a
reptile expert originally from Collins, Iowa, had been abducted at gunpoint
Wednesday as it prepared to set up camp nearby.

Several hours before the release, Nicolas Rodriguez, a rebel commander, said his
fighters had seized the group as a "preventive measure" and would release the
captives without ransom payments after checking their identities.
 "They treated us very well," said Mr. Lynch, who teaches at National University
in Bogota.

In April the rebel group hijacked an airliner and kidnapped all 41 on board. The
next month, it abducted 160 worshipers during a Mass in the southwest city of
Cali. All but four of those hostages have been released in return for ransom
payments.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: IOWA, USA (79%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (88%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (COLOMBIA)  EJERCITO DE LIBERACION NACIONAL
(90%); EJERCITO DE LIBERACION NACIONAL (90%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (COLOMBIA)  EJERCITO DE LIBERACION
NACIONAL  (90%); EJERCITO DE LIBERACION NACIONAL (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);   IOWA, USA (79%);
   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (88%);

SUBJECT: ENVIRONMENT; KIDNAPPING; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE  KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (93%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(92%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (90%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); NATIONAL LIBERATION ARMY (90%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ENVIRONMENTALISM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); HIJACKING
(78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); FIREARMS (77%); CIVIL WAR (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (76%); STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (70%); ANIMALS (70%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(56%);

PERSON: LYNCH, JOHN DOUGLAS  JOHN LYNCH (75%);

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1105 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

A New Drive Gathers Steam To Avert Trial For Pinochet

BYLINE: By CLIFFORD KRAUSS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 703 words

DATELINE: SANTIAGO, Chile Aug. 10


Since being stripped of his senatorial immunity on Tuesday, Gen. Augusto
Pinochet and supporters have started a campaign to gain support to help him
avert a trial on charges of kidnapping, murder and torture.

The approach represents a shift from what had been a quiet, strictly legalistic
defense before the Supreme Court, with lawyers arguing that the former dictator
was too frail to instruct his lawyers adequately in a long trial.

The effort, which appears to be orchestrated with conservative politicians,
retired military officers and executives, is an attempt to galvanize the support
of an estimated 30 percent of the country that still considers General Pinochet
a hero whose coup in 1973 overthrew President Salvador Allende Gossens, a
Socialist, and saved the country from Communism.

On Wednesday, 60 politicians and other supporters gathered around the general at
his house to offer their support in an event that was carefully choreographed
for Chilean television cameras. The general, smiling and carefully balancing
himself with a cane, spoke for 10 minutes and promised a vigorous defense of his
innocence and honor.

"This is the ultimate obligation that I will assume before my conscience and my
family," he said. "I don't ask for anyone to accompany me. But those who want to
help me can help me."

General Pinochet had kept a low profile since returning here in early March, not
voting in the Senate, where he is a member-for-life under a Constitution written
during his 17-year rule, or otherwise involving himself overtly in politics. He
has stayed home, played with his grandchildren and consulted his lawyers.

Now he says he is preparing "a letter to the Chilean people" that will justify
his role in history. It is bound to be a polemic that may galvanize the right
and surely outrage the left.

A poll published this week by the Center of Studies on Contemporary Reality, a
research center, indicates that 52 percent of Chileans support the Supreme Court
decision to strip his immunity, with 35 percent opposed and the rest giving no
opinion.

Chilean society has been deeply divided on the case since General Pinochet was
arrested two years ago in London on a Spanish warrant that sought to try him for
a variety of serious criminal charges. Demonstrations have gradually decreased
in size and emotion. But Chileans still express concerns that the case could
upset the country's stability.

General Pinochet's new gestures have been accompanied by a more public role in
recent days by his wife, Lucia Hiriart, the grand dame of the Chilean right. At
a public dinner on Thursday night, Mrs. Pinochet criticized the judicial
investigation into her husband's involvement in human rights violations as
"entirely political, unjust and cowardly."

"Why didn't they judge him immediately after he left the presidency?" Mrs.
Pinochet asked. "They waited until now when he is sick, old and without power.
Is that just?"

Commenting on the new campaign, Francisco Javier Cuadra, General Pinochet's
chief of staff from 1984 to 1987 and a lawyer, said: "Until now, the defense has
been strictly juridical and in the hands of lawyers. I think from now on his
defense will be more political."

Conservative business leaders have become more vocal on General Pinochet's
behalf, suggesting that the legal proceedings are having negative effects on
investment. "The ruling will not alter Chile's political stability or social
peace," said Hermann Von Muhlenbrock, president of the Metal Industries
Association. "But it will have an impact on future economic activities and in
the decisions of certain investment groups."

President Ricardo Lagos, a Socialist who is moderate on economic affairs, has
tried to encourage businesses to pump up investment as part of an effort to lift
the country from a lingering recession. He has argued that the Pinochet case
should have no economic repercussions.

Judge Juan Guzman, the prosecuting judge in the case, is preparing a list of
questions to interrogate General Pinochet. The judge is widely expected to draw
up an indictment in October and then order a medical examination to test the
general's mental state before a possible trial can begin.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (96%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SANTIAGO, CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (66%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE;   CHILE (96%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);   SANTIAGO,
CHILE (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (66%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; TORTURE  POLITICS (90%); MURDER (90%); TORTURE

 (90%); LAWYERS (89%); SUPREME COURTS (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); SETTLEMENTS &
DECISIONS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (77%); ARREST WARRANTS (77%);
CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (77%); ARRESTS (77%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (77%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (76%); COUPS (76%); VOTERS & VOTING (74%); APPEALS (72%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); CONSERVATISM (71%); GRANDCHILDREN (66%); RESEARCH
INSTITUTES (62%);

PERSON: KRAUSS, CLIFFORD; PINOCHET, AUGUSTO (GEN)  AUGUSTO PINOCHET (95%);

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1113 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. to Establish a War Crimes Panel to Hear Sierra Leone Atrocity Cases

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 811 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Aug. 14


The Security Council agreed today to set up a war crimes tribunal for Sierra
Leone, where brutal rebel armies have tortured civilians, amputated their hands
and destroyed villages to intimidate innocent civilians.

The measure, passed by a 15-to-0 vote, stopped short, however, of actually
establishing the court or deciding its composition and functions. There are some
lingering questions about how the authority should be shared between Sierra
Leone's judicial system and neutral international legal experts.

Instead, the council asked Secretary General Kofi Annan to address these and
other questions and to produce a detailed blueprint for the court within 30
days. The council had been ready to vote on the court Friday, when the Russians
asked at the last minute for more time to study the resolution.

Richard C. Holbrooke, the American ambassador, said in an interview that the
secretary general would be bound by a council consensus that the court has to
have international input, even if council members were not all in agreement on
details.

"He does not have the option of saying, 'Put it all under Sierra Leone,' " Mr.
Holbrooke said.

The ambassador from Sierra Leone to the United Nations, Ibrahim Kamara, called
the council's action "a very, very bold step" forward for his country.

The tribunal will be the third created over the last decade of increased civil
conflict, following the establishment of war crimes courts for the Balkans and
Rwanda. Plans for a fourth court, to try officials of the Khmer Rouge, who were
responsible for the deaths of more than a million Cambodians in the 1970's, are
in the final stages of negotiation with the Cambodian government.

The newest tribunal is to try "crimes against humanity, war crimes and other
serious violations of international humanitarian law, as well as crimes under
relevant Sierra Leone law committed within the territory of Sierra Leone." It
will draw on precedents, but will at the same time be tailored to Sierra Leone's
particular situation, diplomats said today. The country has a democratically
elected government, which has asked for international help with the court and is
expected to cooperate fully.

The most prominent prisoner to face the Sierra Leone tribunal is expected to be
Foday Sankoh, leader of the rebel Revolutionary United Front, who jettisoned a
1999 agreement with the government of President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah and resumed
attacks on the army. In May, his forces also captured 500 United Nations
peacekeepers. They were all subsequently released, but not without embarrassment
to the United Nations.

Mr. Sankoh is now in Sierra Leone's custody. Some of the concerns about the
composition and functioning of the court rest on the fear that Mr. Sankoh will
try again, as he has in the past, to bargain for amnesty if the country's
weakened judicial system has control of the tribunal.

The council called today for a tribunal based on "impartiality, independence and
credibility" and suggested the possibility that appeals hearings, at least, may
have to be held outside Sierra Leone.

Mr. Holbrooke said that several important steps have now been taken by the
council on Sierra Leone. Last month, the council voted to ban diamond sales from
the country until a certification system is put into place by the government.
Diamonds have been fueling Mr. Sankoh's war and enriching the president of
neighboring Liberia, Charles Taylor.

Last week, the council voted to strengthen the role of the peacekeeping force,
giving it authority to "take down the R.U.F," Mr. Sankoh's rebel army, Mr.
Holbrooke said.

The next move on Sierra Leone will be the expansion of the peacekeeping force,
now limited to 13,000 troops. Council members expect Mr. Annan and the
peacekeeping department to recommend a number between 19,000 and 25,000. The
Clinton administration, usually skittish about approving large peacekeeping
operations because of opposition in Congress, is backing the highest number this
time.

Mr. Holbrooke said that in recent days both Gov. George W. Bush of Texas, the
Republican nominee for president, and his leading foreign policy adviser,
Condoleezza Rice, have given public support to a strong bipartisan policy on
Sierra Leone.

Some differences over the jurisdiction of the tribunal arose between the United
States and Britain, which had taken the lead in responding to the crisis in
Sierra Leone. Mr. Holbrooke said that the disputes were "technical."

"We wanted an international umbrella over the court but we didn't want to create
a third tribunal because they are very expensive and very slow, and we wanted to
move fast," he said. "There was initially some thought among some lawyers in
Washington and New York and London that this ought to all be under Sierra Leone
law." In the end, the council fell somewhere between.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); CAMBODIA (92%); RWANDA (79%);

COMPANY: PUT IT TOGETHER (55%);   UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (91%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (91%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (91%); UNITED NATIONS  (84%); UNITED NATIONS (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE (99%); CAMBODIA (92%); RWANDA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (93%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (89%);

 TORTURE (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%);
PEACEKEEPING (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); HUMAN
RIGHTS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); INTERVIEWS (75%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);   LAW OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (68%);

LOAD-DATE: August 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1115 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Gypsies Still Suffer

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 156 words



To the Editor:

"Gypsies and the Holocaust" (editorial, Aug. 14) points out that the Gypsies of
Eastern Europe have not received adequate compensation for their suffering in
World War II. The issue, however, goes beyond compensation for the injustices of
the past.

Today, too, Gypsies face general insensitivity and discrimination, as well as
serious problems in housing, employment, education and medical treatment in both
Eastern and Western Europe.

Unfortunately, Europe does not have leaders with the moral character, political
authority and commitment to human rights of Konrad Adenauer, the former West
German chancellor, or his sense of responsibility to stand up for the well-being
of the neglected and the disenfranchised of the Continent.

Until such a leader appears, the struggle of the Gypsies will not only be
difficult but possibly fruitless as well.

ISTVAN B. GEREBEN
Rockwood, Pa., Aug. 14, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (95%); EASTERN EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (77%); WESTERN EUROPE
(72%);

COMPANY: WESTERN EUROPE (56%);   GYPSIES OF EASTERN EUROPE (94%);

ORGANIZATION: GYPSIES OF EASTERN EUROPE (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (95%); EASTERN EUROPE (92%); GERMANY (77%); WESTERN EUROPE
(72%);

SUBJECT: NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; GYPSIES  LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); WORLD WAR II (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); JEWS & JUDAISM (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (68%);

PERSON: GEREBEN, ISTVAN B

LOAD-DATE: August 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1117 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 17, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words



THE AMERICAS

DOMINICAN REPUBLIC: PRESIDENT SWORN IN -- Hipolito Mejia was sworn in as
president, promising to spread the benefits of an economic boom to the poor. The
fight against corruption and poverty will be priorities for his center-left
Dominican Revolutionary Party government, he said in his speech. Mr. Mejia won
the May 16 election on a tide of discontent among voters who felt the nation's
economic upturn had sidelined the poor.   (Reuters)


ARGENTINA: DEVALUATION REJECTED -- President Fernando de la Rua told reporters
he had no intention of devaluing the Argentine peso or replacing the currency
with the United States dollar as suggested by former President Carlos Saul
Menem. He criticized his predecessor for warning that Argentina was on the brink
of a devaluation or depression.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

CHILE: NEW RESTRAINTS ON PINOCHET -- Gen. Augusto Pinochet was stripped of his
right to vote or enter the Senate after Parliament was officially notified that
the Supreme Court had removed the former dictator's immunity as a senator for
life to face possible charges of human rights abuses. Conservative senators
promised to open a debate on the causes of 1973 coup that brought the general to
power to show that Marxists were seeking to start a revolution.   Clifford
Krauss (NYT)

COLOMBIA: INQUIRY INTO KILLINGS -- President Andres Pastrana ordered an
investigation into allegations that army troops armed with assault rifles and
grenades ambushed a school group and killed six students.   (Reuters)

CANADA: FISHING CONFLICT -- A government fisheries boat rammed a boat manned by
Quebec Indians who were backing New Brunswick Indians in a dispute over native
fishing rights. The Indian boat was wheeling around the federal boat, trying to
keep fisheries agents from pulling up lobster pots set by the Mi'kmaq natives of
Miramichi, New Brunswick.   James Brooke (NYT)

ASIA

PHILIPPINES: HOSTAGE FREED -- Muslim rebels freed a Philippine woman they had
kidnapped nearly four months ago. Government officials said they expected that
more hostages, mostly foreigners, would be released soon under a deal bankrolled
by Libya.   (AP)

PAKISTAN: OUSTED LEADER'S APPEAL -- A lawyer for the deposed prime minister,
Nawaz Sharif, told an appeals court that his client had a right to divert a
commercial flight carrying Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the army chief he had just
fired, because he feared the general's arrival would destabilize the country.
Mr. Sharif was convicted of hijacking for diverting the flight and was sentenced
to two concurrent life terms.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

KASHMIR: ANTI-INDIA VIOLENCE -- Eight people were killed and 18 injured in
violence in the state of Jammu and Kashmir in incidents involving anti-India
militants, the police said. In one, a grenade tossed at Indian security troops
missed and landed in a crowded market in Bijbehara, south of the summer capital
of Srinagar.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

CHINA: CULTURAL AGENCY IN TIBET BANNED -- Chinese authorities expelled the
directors of the Tibet Heritage Fund, an international agency working in the
Tibetan capital, Lhasa, and ordered the group to halt its activities. The order
came as a surprise to the German-based group, which has been cooperating with
Lhasa's Cultural Relics Bureau since 1997 to restore monasteries and traditional
Tibetan houses dating back as far as the seventh century.   (Agence
France-Presse)

AFRICA

IVORY COAST: GENERAL FOR PRESIDENT -- Ivory Coast's military leader will run as
an independent candidate in the Sept. 17 presidential elections, his aides said.
Gen. Robert Guei, who came to power after a coup last year, will take part in
the vote as a candidate "above all parties," they said. The United States and
France, the former colonial power, have discouraged him from running.   (AP)

MOZAMBIQUE: GOVERNMENT CRITICS HELD -- The police have detained five opposition
party members in the port town of Beira, saying they were planning to incite a
nationwide campaign of civil disobedience, the state news agency reported.
Officials in the opposition party, known as Renamo, denied such a plot. But
Renamo officials said party members were angry after President Joaquim Chissano
declined to appoint any Renamo officials to provincial governorships last month.

   Rachel Swarns (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAN: HELICOPTER RESCUE -- An American ship rescued two crew members from an
Iranian helicopter that crashed near an oil rig in the Persian Gulf, state-run
radio reported. Iran does not have relations with the United States, which
conservative elements of the Iranian government regard with great suspicion.
(AP)

IRAQ: KUWAIT, TURKEY CRITICIZED -- Iraq criticized Turkey and Kuwait for
assisting American and British air patrols, and said its ground-to-air missiles
had again driven the planes back. American and British warplanes patrol
air-exclusion zones over northern and southern Iraq and take off from bases in
Turkey, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Baghdad does not recognize the no-fly zones.
(Agence France-Presse)

EUROPE

YUGOSLAVIA: OPPOSITION COMPLAINT -- Vojislav Kostunica, chosen by 15 Serbian
opposition parties to challenge President Slobodan Milosevic in the election
next month, criticized a United States move to open an office in Budapest to
help the democratic opposition in Serbia, calling it interference in
Yugoslavia's internal affairs. The State Department had said it was opening an
Office of Yugoslav Affairs in the American Embassy in Hungary to "support the
full range of democratic forces in Serbia."   (Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: APAGF (NASDAQ) (56%);

COUNTRY: INDIA (93%); ASIA (92%); ARGENTINA (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%); DOMINICAN
REPUBLIC (92%); CANADA (86%); UNITED STATES (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); CHILE (79%);

STATE: KASHMIR (92%); NEW BRUNSWICK, CANADA (86%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (79%);

 QUEBEC, CANADA (54%);

COMPANY: APCO ARGENTINA INC (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDIA (93%); ASIA (92%); ARGENTINA (92%); PHILIPPINES (92%);
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (92%); CANADA (86%); UNITED STATES (79%); PAKISTAN (79%);
CHILE (79%);   KASHMIR (92%); NEW BRUNSWICK, CANADA (86%); JAMMU & KASHMIR,
INDIA (79%); QUEBEC, CANADA (54%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  CORRUPTION (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%);
DEVALUATION (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%);
HOSTAGE TAKING (87%); MILITARY WEAPONS (86%); FISHERIES (86%); POLITICS (78%);
ECONOMIC RECOVERY (78%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (77%); COUPS (77%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (75%); US
DOLLAR (75%); ARMIES (73%); SENTENCING (72%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (72%);
APPEALS COURTS (72%); LITIGATION (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%); FISHERIES
ADMINISTRATION (69%); ARMED FORCES (69%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (69%);
HIJACKING (69%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (69%); FISHING TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(69%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (69%); LAWYERS (68%); SUPREME COURTS (67%);
DEPOSITIONS (67%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (66%); NATIVE AMERICANS (58%); FIREARMS
(50%);

PERSON: PERVEZ MUSHARRAF (58%); NAWAZ SHARIF (50%);

LOAD-DATE: August 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1128 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 29, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Scouts' Successful Ban on Gays Is Followed by Loss in Support

BYLINE: By KATE ZERNIKE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1528 words


In the two months since the United States Supreme Court ruled that the Boy
Scouts of America have a constitutional right to exclude gays, corporate and
governmental support for the organization has slipped markedly.

Chicago, San Francisco and San Jose, Calif., have told local Scout troops that
they can no longer use parks, schools and other municipal sites. Companies like
Chase Manhattan Bank and Textron Inc., have withdrawn hundreds of thousands of
dollars in support to local and national scouting groups nationwide. Dozens of
United Ways from Massachusetts to San Francisco have cut off money amounting to
millions of dollars each year.

And Connecticut, in what may become a test case, has banned contributions to the
Scouts by state employees through a state-run charity. The state is also
considering whether to block the Scouts from using public campgrounds or
buildings.

"It's a watershed issue," said C. Joan Parker, assistant counsel to the
Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities, which must issue a
ruling by Nov. 8 on whether the Scouts violate state antidiscrimination laws.

If the commission rules that the group does violate those laws, the Boy Scouts
would be prevented from using any public facilities.

"We have to decide, are we aiding and abetting someone that discriminates?" Ms.
Parker said. "Clearly, any public entity needs to have clean hands."

Gregg Shields, a national spokesman for the Scouts, said the organization
respected the right of private companies to donate only to groups of their
choice. But the organization is suing the State of Connecticut to restore state
employees' ability to donate to the Scouts, and Mr. Shields said his group would
fight to maintain access to public schools and public places in other states as
well.

"The Boy Scouts of America since 1910 have taught traditional family values,"
Mr. Shields said. "We feel that an avowed homosexual isn't a role model for
those values."

For public and private officials around the country, the problem is a complex
and painful one. On the one hand, they do not want to cut off valuable
opportunities for the young or run afoul of First Amendment principles. On the
other hand, by allowing a group that bans gays to use public facilities and
supporting it, they violate their anti discrimination statutes.

The trim uniform of the Boy Scouts has become almost a cherished national
symbol. But at a time when same-sex benefits, diversity training and
nondiscrimination policies have become routine, some companies and organizations
say the Scouts' refusal to admit gays has come to seem almost un-American.

"Their position is, on the face of it, in conflict with our commitment and our
values on diversity," said Jim Finn, a spokesman for Chase, which had
contributed about $200,000 annually to the Boy Scouts until stopping it last
month.

The Supreme Court ruled in June by a 5-to-4 vote that the organization had a
constitutional right to exclude gays because opposition to homosexuality is part
of the organization's "expressive message."

The decision overturned a ruling last year by the New Jersey Supreme Court that
applied the state's law against discrimination in public accommodations to
require a New Jersey Scout troop to readmit a longtime member and assistant
scoutmaster, James Dale, whom it had dismissed after learning he is gay.  But
the ruling did not address the merits of the ban on gays, only whether the Boy
Scouts is a private group, and so has the right to set its own membership rules.

The Scouts, whose membership has grown to 6.2 million, said that the group's
charter since 1910 had promoted "family values," and that its oath pledged a
"morally straight" life. A homosexual, the organization said, is not the proper
role model for those values.

While the decisions to withhold support will not seriously dent the $125 million
raised annually by the Scouts national organization, the growing effort to block
local chapters from meeting in places like public schools and state campgrounds
raises practical problems for the Scouts. Since the ruling, many public bodies,
charities and companies, including Merrill Lynch, are beginning the discussion
that has taken place in Hartford. The options, they say, are equally unpleasant:
hurting children who are benefiting from scouting, or supporting a position they
find ethically untenable.

"Do we just cut off funding, and so hundreds of kids in Hartford aren't getting
a program they so desperately need?" asked Susan Dunn, senior vice president of
the United Way of the Capital Area. "Our mission is to serve our community,
especially children. But it's also in our mission that we don't discriminate.
That's where it becomes difficult."

The American Civil Liberties Union filed a lawsuit against the city of San Diego
on Monday asking a federal court to revoke a 50-year-old agreement that lets the
Scouts lease 18 acres of parkland for $1 a year. The lease is set to expire in
2007.

In Fall River, Mass., the executive director of the local United Way, Bob Horne,
said he was stunned at how swiftly and strongly his board had acted to cut
support to any Scout troops that did not sign a form saying they would not
endorse the Scouts' ban on gays.

"I thought that some people would try to skirt the issue," Mr. Horne said. "But
attendance was unbelievable, the best attendance we've had all year. It could
not have been a more unanimous, enthusiastic vote. Obviously, there was concern
for the kids, but it all came down to we really have an obligation to do the
right thing."

More than half the population of Fall River, an old mill city, has Portuguese
immigrants in its background, and an influx of Cambodians has arrived in the
past few years.

"With those growing groups," Mr. Horne said, "people are being more aware of
diversity and doing things right and being fair and not setting up separate
views, the idea that people are people. "People felt very strongly that we
should take this step." Those who are eliminating or reconsidering their support
are trying to respect, as the Supreme Court affirmed, the Scouts' right to set
its own mission.

And cutting off money or access to one private group raises more questions,
officials say. Do those same charities then cut off financing to groups
chartered to serve, say, Latinos? Do states stop allowing Roman Catholic youth
groups to use public campgrounds or school meeting rooms because the church does
not ordain gays?

Among those debating whether to end support, some are reluctant to do so because
they believe the local Scout chapters do not agree with the ban on gays, which
was put into effect by the national organization.

"Everyone knows their work with kids is good, and it's a policy that's not
commonly enforced," said Marty Milkovic, executive director of the United Way of
Northern Fairfield County, in Connecticut.

Like chapters in many other cities, the Southeastern New England United Way in
Providence, R.I., has said it will require any Scout council to sign a form
saying it will not discriminate. But the Boy Scouts' Narragansett Council, which
receives $200,000 from the United Way, has said it must abide by the national
policy. And Mr. Shields, the spokesman for the national group, said local
councils were not allowed to disavow any part of the national charter, so the
councils are not allowed to sign any nondiscrimination policy that would require
them to admit gays. Troops that disobey the national charter could face
eviction.

Within the local councils, though, there is increasing dissent from the policy.
Scouting for All, a group started by a 15-year-old scout in California, that
advocates opening up the organization to gays, held a national protest day
outside Boy Scout headquarters in several cities last week. In Montclair, N.J.,
parents in a local Cub Scout troop are signing a petition saying they do not
endorse the national policy.

In New Milford, Conn., Gale Alexander said he and his wife were torn about
whether to allow their 9-year-old son to remain in the Boy Scouts. They like the
skills and self-confidence the program has taught but, Mr. Alexander said, "I
couldn't look at my friends if I couldn't stand up and say this is not right."

So as a compromise, the Alexanders are letting their son continue scouting, but
they have decided to become vocal in their opposition to the policy. In
conversations, they have discovered that other parents do not agree with it,
either.

"The idea that all the rank and file is just fine with this is just a bunch of
malarkey," Mr. Alexander said. "It's time now for parents to speak up and say, I
don't agree with it. It's time for people to start fighting from within."

The article also misstated the number of United Way organizations that have
stopped raising funds for the Scouts. It is about a dozen, not dozens.

In addition, the article misstated the Roman Catholic Church's stance on the
ordination of gays. Ordination requires a promise to live a celibate life. While
the church condemns homosexual activity, it does not have a policy against
ordaining gay men.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: TXT (NYSE) (72%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS336411 AIRCRAFT MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS333996 FLUID POWER PUMP
& MOTOR MANUFACTURING (72%); NAICS333611 TURBINE & TURBINE GENERATOR SET UNITS
MANUFACTURING (72%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); CONNECTICUT, USA (93%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SAN
JOSE, CA, USA (90%);

COMPANY: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US); TEXTRON INC; CHASE MANHATTAN BANK;
UNITED WAY  TEXTRON INC (72%);   SCOUT ASSOCIATION  (93%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION
(93%); BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA  (91%); BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA (91%); SUPREME COURT
OF THE UNITED STATES  (90%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (90%);

ORGANIZATION: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US); TEXTRON INC; CHASE MANHATTAN BANK;
UNITED WAY  SCOUT ASSOCIATION  (93%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION (93%); BOY SCOUTS OF
AMERICA  (91%); BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA (91%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES

 (90%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CONNECTICUT; CHICAGO (ILL); SAN FRANCISCO (CALIF); SAN JOSE (CALIF);

 ;  UNITED STATES (95%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); CONNECTICUT, USA (93%);   SAN
FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (92%); SAN JOSE, CA,
USA (90%);

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION; HOMOSEXUALITY; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; ETHICS  GAYS &
LESBIANS (91%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); YOUTH CLUBS &
ACTIVITIES (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
LITIGATION (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); VERDICTS
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); ETHICS (78%); CIVIL SERVICES (78%);
SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); WORKPLACE DIVERSITY (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS &
INSTITUTIONS (78%); CORPORATE GIVING (76%); HUMAN RESOURCES (74%); RV PARKS &
CAMPGROUNDS (71%); COHABITATION (67%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (88%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);

PERSON: ZERNIKE, KATE  GREGG SHIELDS (56%);

LOAD-DATE: August 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: September 6, 2000, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

A front-page article on Aug. 29 and an editorial on Sunday about a falloff in
support for the Boy Scouts because of their exclusion of gays misstated two
cities' reactions to the ban. Chicago no longer lets the Boy Scouts use parks,
city buildings and schools without charge. The public schools of San Francisco
no longer sponsor Scout recruitment drives or other programs during school
hours. The Scouts are not barred from using parks, schools and other sites.

The article also misstated the timing of those restrictions. They began before
the Supreme Court upheld the ban in June, not afterward.

The article also cited one city erroneously among those that bar the Scouts from
their facilities. Although one San Jose elementary school district, Alum Rock
Union, does not permit recruiting or other Scout programs during school hours,
the ban is attributed to demands on instructional time, not to the Scouts'
policy.

The article also misstated the number of United Way organizations that have
stopped raising funds for the Scouts. It is about a dozen, not dozens.

In addition, the article misstated the Roman Catholic Church's stance on the
ordination of gays. Ordination requires a promise to live a celibate life. While
the church condemns homosexual activity, it does not have a policy against
ordaining gay men.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1130 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Does Religion Have a Public Role?

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 164 words



To the Editor:

Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's assertion, in a speech in Detroit, that morality
cannot be maintained without religion and a belief in God not only threatens the
freedom of religion of atheists, it is also demonstrably untrue (news article,
Aug. 28).

For generations in this country, some Southerners who believed in God and
devoutly attended church went out during the week and lynched African-Americans.
Many who didn't participate directly in lynching nonetheless helped maintain Jim
Crow laws that subjugated and brutalized black citizens for more than a century
after slavery was abolished.

Many who worked tirelessly to end racial segregation did not believe in God or
kept their religious beliefs to themselves.

There is no easy correlation between public piety and civic morality, and Mr.
Lieberman does us all a disservice when he suggests otherwise.

IRA GLASSER
Executive Director
American Civil Liberties Union
New York, Aug. 28, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (73%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  (83%);
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%);

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(83%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   DETROIT, MI, USA (73%);

SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000; ELECTION ISSUES; CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS

 RELIGION (96%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (90%);
LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CHURCH & STATE (90%); ELECTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (88%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); SLAVERY (72%); RACE & RACISM (69%);   HEADS OF
GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (74%);

PERSON: LIEBERMAN, JOSEPH I (SEN); GLASSER, IRA  JOE LIEBERMAN (90%);

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1132 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 31, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Waiting for Justice in Peru

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 315 words


Peru has taken a step in the right direction by revoking the life sentence that
a military tribunal imposed on Lori Berenson four and a half years ago after a
sham trial. Now it must ensure that the civilian court that will retry the
Berenson case observes the basic standards of justice that the military court
ignored.

Ms. Berenson was originally charged with helping terrorists of the Tupac Amaru
Revolutionary Movement plan an attack on Peru's Congress. At her trial she was
not allowed to challenge the prosecution's evidence or cross-examine its
witnesses. Neither could she call witnesses in her own behalf. Now Peru says it
has uncovered new evidence suggesting that Ms. Berenson never played a
leadership role in the guerrilla organization, something that might have been
discovered much earlier had she not been denied a fair trial.

The exact nature of her relationship with Tupac Amaru has yet to be established.
A fair trial could help clarify it. She openly supports the group's political
aims, but claims she was unaware of its violent methods. A year after her trial,
Tupac Amaru guerrillas invaded the Japanese ambassador's residence in Lima,
seizing hostages.

Like Ms. Berenson, thousands of Peruvians arrested in President Alberto
Fujimori's anti-terrorist sweeps of the mid-1990's were denied due process and
subjected to years of harsh imprisonment. Many of those Peruvians have now been
released. Ms. Berenson's fate depends on the outcome of her second trial.

The Clinton administration has been rightly critical of President Fujimori for
rigging his own re-election earlier this year. By assuring a fair trial for Ms.
Berenson, he can help make relations with Washington somewhat less frosty. But
until Peru is again a democracy and its judicial system fully independent, there
can be no return to the traditional cordiality between the two countries.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PERU (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);

CITY: LIMA, PERU (59%);

COMPANY: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

ORGANIZATION: TUPAC AMARU REVOLUTIONARY MOVEMENT

GEOGRAPHIC: PERU;   PERU (96%); UNITED STATES (92%);   LIMA, PERU (59%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; SENTENCES (CRIMINAL); CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
PERU-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; TERRORISM; EDITORIALS  EVIDENCE (90%);
SENTENCING (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); MILITARY COURTS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (86%); DUE PROCESS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); CROSS EXAMINATIONS (78%);
TESTIMONY (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); HOSTAGE TAKING
(71%); COUNTERTERRORISM (71%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (66%); HUMAN RIGHTS (65%);



PERSON: BERENSON, LORI  HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON  (54%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON
(54%);

LOAD-DATE: August 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1138 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 5, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: By Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 932 words



EUROPE

BRITAIN: LAWMAKER TO QUIT -- Mo Mowlam, the former Northern Ireland secretary
whose popularity among the Labor Party faithful and with the public has
regularly exceeded that of Prime Minister Tony Blair, said she would not run for
re-election to Parliament in the vote expected later this year. Reported to be
unhappy at being replaced in the Ulster job in 1999 and given a marginal cabinet
position, she said, "I have several years of my working life left and want to do
something different before I finally retire." Warren Hoge (NYT)


KOSOVO: PENALTIES FOR ESCAPE -- Bernard Kouchner, the chief United Nations
administrator for Kosovo, the Serbian province, suspended the director of a
detention center after 15 Kosovo Serbs facing charges of genocide escaped, and
warned that other United Nations personnel could be disciplined. Two of the
Serbs who fled the prison were recaptured.  (AP)

RUSSIA: BOMB BLASTS -- Bomb attacks ascribed to criminal turf battles hit two
cities, killing three people. The police said there was no apparent link between
the two explosions, in an outdoor market in the industrial city of Ryazan and a
boutique in St. Petersburg.  (AP)

SWITZERLAND: BANKS CRITICIZED FOR ABACHA LINK -- The country's banking watchdog
rebuked six of the country's banks, including Credit Suisse Group, for accepting
some of the $670 million in deposits linked to the late Nigerian dictator Sani
Abacha. However, it imposed no penalties; they are not allowed under current
Swiss law. The Nigerian government is trying to recover an estimated $3 billion
in suspected embezzled state funds sent abroad during General Abacha's 1993-98
rule.

Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

COLOMBIA: WORDS OF PEACE, ACTS OF WAR -- Fierce clashes between government
troops and FARC rebels continued, despite the announcement on Sunday that the
government and FARC had agreed to begin cease-fire talks on Sept. 22. More than
100 people have died since the FARC launched an offensive after President
Clinton's visit on Aug. 30.  (Agence France-Presse)

CANADA: PLEA FOR FORGIVENESS -- The Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian and
United churches plan to make a public apology today to Eskimos and Indians who
suffered from decades of abuse by white church officials. Several churches,
including those making the apology, have been sued in recent years for the
physical and sexual abuse of children who attended church-run schools mainly in
western Canada that were abolished in the early 1970's.  (Reuters)

ASIA

CHINA: CHRISTIANS CHARGED -- Formal criminal charges were brought against 85 of
the 130 evangelical Christians arrested during an illegal worship service two
weeks ago in central China, a human rights monitor in Hong Kong said. The
large-scale prosecutions could not be independently verified but, if they
proceed, they would represent a stepping-up of the government's longtime
struggle against defiant Christian groups. In recent years, while fines and
temporary detention have been used to harass underground churches, relatively
few leaders are known to have been formally charged and jailed.  Erik Eckholm
(NYT)

MYANMAR: DISSIDENT UNDER WRAPS -- The opposition leader Daw Aung San Suu Kyi was
kept confined to her home in the capital, Yangon, as the military government
mounted a crackdown against its opponents. Diplomats said the gate to Mrs. Aung
San Suu Kyi's residence had been padlocked since she was forcibly returned
Saturday after a nine-day stand-off with the authorities in her car outside
Yangon. The government denied that she and other leaders of her party were under
house arrest, but said they had been asked to stay home while it investigated
reports that some opposition members were involved in "terrorist activity."
(Reuters)

JAPAN, RUSSIA: NO TREATY SOON -- President Vladimir V. Putin, in Tokyo for talks
with Prime Minister Yoshiro Mori, rejected the latest Japanese call for
sovereignty over four disputed islands, dimming hope for a peace treaty this
year. The islands, which are known to Russians as the southern Kurils and to
Japanese as the Northern Territories and lie north of Japan near Russia's Far
East, were occupied by Soviet troops toward the end of World War II. The two
sides had agreed three years ago to write a treaty by the end of 2000, but
progress has been stymied by the deadlock over the islands.  (Agence
France-Presse)

INDIA: 'WEEPING' GODDESS -- Worshipers, hungry to witness a miracle, have been
flocking to temples in the city of Hyderabad after reports that statues of the
goddess Durga have been shedding tears. The crowds have snarled traffic in the
capital of Andhra Pradesh, the scene of recent heavy flooding and political
unrest.
 Barry Bearak (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: SCHOOL FEES -- Iraq's government, which had formerly offered free
education from kindergarten through university, has begun charging students to
attend classes at public schools. The economy has been undermined by
international sanctions imposed to punish Iraq for invading Kuwait in 1990.
(AP)

AFRICA

BURUNDI: POST-ACCORD FIGHTING -- At least 60 people have died in fighting
between Hutu rebels and government soldiers in the week since the signing of a
peace agreement to end Burundi's seven-year civil war, officials said. At least
200,000 people, most of them civilians, have been killed in a conflict that
erupted in 1993 after the assassination of Burundi's first democratically
elected president, of the Hutu ethnic majority.  (AP)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: CSGN (SWX) (83%); CS (NYSE) (83%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS551111 OFFICES OF BANK HOLDING COMPANIES (83%); NAICS524126
DIRECT PROPERTY & CASUALTY INSURANCE CARRIERS (83%); NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO
MANAGEMENT (83%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (83%); SIC7375 INFORMATION
RETRIEVAL SERVICES (52%);

COUNTRY: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO (93%); CANADA (92%);
NIGERIA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%); CHINA (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND

 (92%); COLOMBIA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ASIA (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);

 HONG KONG (79%);

STATE: CENTRAL CHINA (79%);

CITY: SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

COMPANY: CREDIT SUISSE GROUP AG (83%); AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (52%);   UNITED
NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); KOSOVO (93%); CANADA (92%);

 NIGERIA (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%); CHINA (92%); NORTHERN
IRELAND (92%); COLOMBIA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ASIA (79%); SWITZERLAND

 (79%); HONG KONG (79%);   CENTRAL CHINA (79%);   SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  BOMBINGS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (89%); RELIGION (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); TERRORIST
ATTACKS (88%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (86%); ELECTIONS (78%);
BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (78%); POLITICAL PARTIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); BANKING & FINANCE
AGENCIES (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (75%); GENOCIDE (74%); SEX
OFFENSES (74%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (74%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (72%); BANKING & FINANCE (71%); BANKING & FINANCE REGULATION (71%);

 EMBEZZLEMENT (68%); LITIGATION (68%); SUITS & CLAIMS (61%); CHILD ABUSE (60%);
CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (60%); CHILD SEXUAL ABUSE (50%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (78%); TONY BLAIR (73%); BERNARD KOUCHNER (57%);

LOAD-DATE: September 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1143 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Rights Report Faults China For Harassing Religious Groups

BYLINE: By CHRISTOPHER MARQUIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 470 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 5


As more and more Chinese seek to practice faiths including Tibetan Buddhism,
Christianity and Islam, government officials there have increasingly responded
with harassment, extortion, detention and even torture, the State Department
said today.

As a result, a "marked deterioration" in religious freedom has occurred in China
during the last year, enabled by a new law granting state and local officials
broad authority to suppress 14 minority religions, including the Falun Gong
movement, the State Department said in its second annual report on religious
freedom around the world.

"The China government is concerned about things they don't understand, things
they can't control and things that have an external influence," said Robert
Seiple, the department's ambassador at large for religious freedom. "They'll
talk about it in terms of stability, but it's basically control."

The Congressionally mandated report's blunt assessment of conditions in China
could add to tensions with Beijing as President Clinton prepares to meet with
President Jiang Zemin on Friday in New York during a summit meeting of world
leaders at the United Nations. Mr. Clinton hopes to persuade China to halt the
export of missile technology to Pakistan, even as he seeks to place relations on
a friendlier footing based on Senate approval of normal trade relations,
American officials say.

Mr. Seiple said the president would raise concerns about religious persecution
with Mr. Jiang. The ambassador highlighted the "brutal treatment" of members of
Falun Gong, a growing spiritual movement that is widely perceived as benign in
the West but has prompted mass arrests and lengthy sentences in China.

In its analysis of religious freedom elsewhere, the report faulted Taliban
authorities in Afghanistan for continuing to persecute religious minorities by
enforcing a strict interpretation of Islamic law that has resulted in public
executions, floggings and amputations, and has systematically stigmatized
non-Muslim Afghans.

It also said that Iraq, under President Saddam Hussein, has continued to ply a
"brutal campaign" of murder and arbitrary arrests against followers of the
majority Shiite Muslim population, the report said. Meanwhile, in Serbia,
President Slobodan Milosevic has marginalized other faiths by favoring the
Serbian Orthodox Church, the report said.

Russia's move to replace a landmark 1990 law protecting religious freedom with
"ambiguous, unpredictable" legislation in 1997, constituted "a giant step
backward," Mr. Seiple said.

Some close American allies were also singled out for criticism. The report
faulted Israel for subjecting Arab Muslims to "various forms of discrimination,"
and for depriving them of the same quality of education, job opportunities and
social services as Jews.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); TIBET (92%); AFGHANISTAN (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SERBIA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ISRAEL (79%);

 PAKISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (78%); XIZANG, CHINA (73%);

CITY: BEIJING, CHINA (58%);

COMPANY: FALUN GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)  UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS
(55%);

ORGANIZATION: FALUN GONG (SPIRITUAL MOVEMENT)  UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED
NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA;   CHINA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); TIBET (92%); AFGHANISTAN
(92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); SERBIA (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); ISRAEL

 (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); IRAQ (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA
(78%); XIZANG, CHINA (73%);   BEIJING, CHINA (58%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM OF RELIGION; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CHINA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  RELIGION (97%);
FREEDOM OF RELIGION (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);

 CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (90%);
CULTS & SECTS (90%); TORTURE (90%); LEGISLATION (89%); TALIBAN (78%); JEWS &
JUDAISM (78%); BUDDHISTS & BUDDHISM (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); DISCRIMINATION (78%); ANNUAL REPORTS (77%);
FOREIGN POLICY (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (74%);
APPROVALS (73%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (72%); US PRESIDENTS (72%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (72%); MOST FAVORED NATION STATUS (71%); EXPORT TRADE (71%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (69%); MURDER (69%);

PERSON: MARQUIS, CHRISTOPHER  BILL CLINTON (79%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (51%);

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1153 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 950 words



ASIA

SRI LANKA: CENSORSHIP EASED
With a general election due next month, the government has temporarily eased
some of its restrictions on the news media and the holding of public meetings.
Only war news will still face the heavy censorship put in place by President
Chandrika Kumaratunga. Under her rules, virtually any criticism of the
government was illegal.  Barry Bearak (NYT)

KYRGYZSTAN: ANTI-TERRORISM ACCORD
The interior ministers of 11 former Soviet states meeting in Kyrgyzstan agreed
to work together to combat militant Islamic groups that have been attacking
southern Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. The ministers approved an anti-terrorism
program through 2003. "Terrorism and extremism are common problems for
post-Communist countries and we have come to the opinion that such problems are
easier to solve through joint efforts," said Russia's first deputy interior
minister, Valery Federov.  (Agence France-Presse)


JAPAN: NAVY OFFICER HELD AS SPY
The police arrested a senior Japanese naval officer suspected of passing secrets
to a Russian Embassy official -- a move that comes just three days after Japan
and Russia pledged to cooperate in regional security. The 38-year-old officer,
Lt. Cmdr. Shigehiro Hagisaki, left, a researcher at the National Institute for
Defense Studies, is accused of giving classified documents to a Russian military
attache in Tokyo on several occasions.  (AP)

INDONESIA: NEW ACEH VIOLENCE
At least 12 people, including three police officers, were killed in an upsurge
of violence in Aceh Province, the police and rebels said. The officers were shot
when about 10 gunmen attacked a police van in central Aceh. Separatists in Aceh,
a province rich in gas and oil deposits, have been fighting since 1975 for
independence from Indonesia. At least 5,000 people have been killed in the past
decade.  (AP)

CHINA: MEDITATION GROUP'S ASSETS SEIZED
Authorities in northern China have confiscated assets worth millions of dollars
from a banned meditation group, including schools, businesses and a sanitarium,
a rights group based in Hong Kong said. Shaanxi Province's government
appropriated 123 Zhong Gong properties and land worth $36.5 million, the
Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy said. China cracked down on
Zhong Gong soon after banning the better-known Falun Gong sect in July 1999.
(AP)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: OIL PRICE REBATE
With oil prices at their highest levels in a decade, Ralph Klein, premier of
Alberta, Canada's largest oil-producing province, has announced that his
government will mail each taxpayer two rebate checks for $100, one in November
and one in April. Noting that his province is to take in a record $5.7 billion
from oil and gas royalties, Mr. Klein challenged other oil-rich jurisdictions in
North America, like Texas, to follow his lead.  James Brooke (NYT)

ECUADOR: DOLLAR DAY
Hit by political and economic disorder for years, Ecuador completes a six-month
transition to making the United States dollar its official currency at midnight
tonight. Ecuador will join Panama and nine other countries in which the dollar
is legal tender. Officials hope the switchover will end record inflation, now
running at 104 percent a year, Latin America's highest. The step is intended to
prevent the government from printing money to meet its budgetary needs.  (AP)

MIDDLE EAST

CYPRUS: WARNING ON TALKS
Britain's envoy to Cyprus said both sides on the divided island were poised to
break new ground at United Nations-brokered talks in New York City next week,
but he warned against expecting a quick breakthrough. Sir David Hannay called
the talks a "long and complex and difficult process" but said three previous
rounds had made it "quite realistic to hope for progress." Cyprus has been
partitioned since 1974, when Turkey occupied northern Cyprus after a coup
engineered by the junta then ruling Greece.  (Reuters)

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: FREEDOM FOR 11,000
In a move to reduce crowding in the country's prisons, the ministry of
corrections plans to release about 11,000 people accused of petty crimes who
have been unable to make bail while awaiting trial. The prison system, which has
been plagued by escapes and mismanagement, has a capacity of about 100,000
inmates but has been holding as many as 170,000 in recent months.  Henri E.
Cauvin (NYT)

ETHIOPIA: AID PLEA
Ethiopia appealed for its mainly Western donors to release over $1 billion in
frozen development aid that was suspended during Ethiopia's violent border war
with Eritrea. The two countries signed a cease-fire in June, and Ethiopian
officials said the aid money should be unblocked.  (Reuters)

EUROPE

RUSSIA: TROOP CUT PROPOSED
Defense Minister Igor D. Sergeyev, left, said a high-level decision had been
made to reduce the size of the armed forces by about 30 percent, or 350,000
troops, in the next three years. "Decisions to that effect have been made and
proposals on how to proceed are being drafted for the president," Mr. Sergeyev
said, according to the news agency Interfax. Last month President Vladimir V.
Putin pressed his commanders for a major restructuring of the 1.2 million-member
armed forces.  Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)

SPAIN: BASQUE CRACKDOWN PLANNED
The cabinet approved measures to crack down on separatist violence in the Basque
region. Under the proposed laws, which require Parliament's approval, youths
engaged in separatist street violence would be tried as adults and subject to
longer sentences. In addition, trials of terrorist suspects would be held in
Madrid instead of in the Basque region.  Benjamin Jones (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (56%);

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CHINA (94%); KYRGYZSTAN
(94%); CANADA (92%); ASIA (92%); JAPAN (92%); SRI LANKA (92%); NORTH AMERICA
(79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); HONG KONG (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (53%);

STATE: NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (90%); SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%); ALBERTA, CANADA
(69%); SHAANXI, CHINA (79%);

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (56%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); CHINA (94%); KYRGYZSTAN
(94%); CANADA (92%); ASIA (92%); JAPAN (92%); SRI LANKA (92%); NORTH AMERICA
(79%); UZBEKISTAN (79%); HONG KONG (79%); NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (53%);   NORTH
CENTRAL CHINA (90%); SUMATRA, INDONESIA (79%); ALBERTA, CANADA (69%); SHAANXI,
CHINA (79%);   TOKYO, JAPAN (56%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  CENSORSHIP (90%); TERRORISM (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ASSET FORFEITURE (88%); ELECTIONS (78%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (77%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS (76%); CULTS & SECTS (76%); COUNTERTERRORISM (76%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM

 (75%); SHOOTINGS (75%); RELIGION (75%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (74%); OIL & GAS
PRICES (68%); ROYALTIES (68%); ARRESTS (67%); RESEARCH INSTITUTES (66%); MINERAL
ROYALTIES (63%); OIL & GAS ROYALTIES (63%); MEDITATION (62%); SALES REBATES
(60%);   EMERGENCY VEHICLES (67%);

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1158 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

15 Reported Killed by Bomb at Jakarta Stock Exchange

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 657 words

DATELINE: JAKARTA, Indonesia, Thursday, Sept. 14


A car bomb exploded in the parking garage of the Indonesian Stock Exchange
building yesterday, killing 15 people and wounding dozens in this troubled
country's newest brush with violence.

The unexplained explosion was the latest of a series in recent weeks in Jakarta
and other cities.

It came hours before a high-profile corruption trial against Indonesia's former
president, Suharto, resumed today. He failed to appear in court, citing ill
health, as he did on Aug. 31.

A Jakarta police detective said anecdotal evidence linked the car bomb to the
case against Mr. Suharto.

The night before the trial opened on Aug. 31, a car bomb exploded 300 yards from
a south Jakarta building where the case was being tried.

The detective, Harry Montolalu, told reporters at the scene, "This is being done
to create instability."

But the national police chief, Gen. Rusdihardjo, refused to theorize about the
involvement of anyone linked to Mr. Suharto or his trial.

"As long as we haven't caught the suspects yet and the motive is still not
clear, we shouldn't conclude that way," the general said.

President Abdurrahman Wahid has accused Suharto-affiliated military and
political extremists of planting bombs and inciting unrest across the country to
discredit him and destabilize his democratically elected government.

Mr. Wahid said elements within the army were responsible for an attack last week
that killed three foreign aid workers at a United Nations refugee agency office
in West Timor.

The country's attorney general, Marzuki Darusman, who spent eight months
investigating the Suharto family, has gone further. He contends that Suharto
supporters were instigating violence in order to derail the corruption trial and
undermine inquiries into rights abuses by the military, in East Timor and
elsewhere.

Mr. Darusman said those incidents included an explosion at his office building
in July, one hour after Mr. Suharto's youngest son was questioned in connection
with the corruption case against his father. No one was injured in that blast.

Indonesia's short-staffed and poorly equipped police force has failed to name a
single suspect in any of the incidents, and the explosion yesterday was expected
to increase international pressure on Mr. Wahid to restore order in his country
of 210 million people.

General Rusdihardjo (who like many Indonesians goes by one name) said, "I
apologize for not being able to solve the previous explosion cases, but trust
me, the Indonesian police are doing our best and we will guarantee an
improvement of security."

The explosion occurred at 3:17 p.m. on the second basement level of the 36-story
building's underground parking garage in Jakarta's central business district.

More than 1,000 people fled the building as the blast reverberated and black
smoke billowed from the parking garage entrance.

At least 27 people were treated at a nearby hospital, which soon overflowed with
casualties. The police and other officials gave conflicting reports on the
number of deaths.

Firefighters battled an underground blaze in the garage that was apparently
started by a power generator damaged in the explosion.

Smoke inhalation caused at least five of the deaths. Some people had apparently
hidden in their cars in hopes of escaping the fire. Rescue workers pulled at
least three burned bodies from car wreckage.

"It is confirmed that the explosion came from a bomb in a car," the police
spokesman, Nur Usman, said.

The bombing appeared to further erode public faith in the country's security
forces, reinforcing the perception that the government is losing control of
Indonesia, the world's fourth-largest nation.

"I think what has happened is that the capacity of the security forces to
control this has really broken down," said Andi Mallarangeng, a leading
political analyst, who added that he had been in the stock exchange building two
hours before the explosion.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%);

CITY: JAKARTA, INDONESIA (94%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: INDONESIA; JAKARTA (INDONESIA);   INDONESIA (96%); TIMOR-LESTE
(79%);   JAKARTA, INDONESIA (94%);

SUBJECT: BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; ETHICS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND
HUMAN RIGHTS  BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (92%); BOMBINGS (92%); TERRORISM (90%);
STOCK EXCHANGES (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); CORRUPTION (89%); WOUNDS &
INJURIES (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); PARKING SPACES & FACILITIES (89%); CITY
GOVERNMENT (77%); POLITICS (76%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (75%); POLICE
FORCES (75%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%);
REFUGEES (71%); ETHICS (71%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS (64%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (64%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (64%);

PERSON: SUHARTO; WAHID, ABDURRAHMAN (PRES)

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Rescuers flanked a man trapped in the Indonesia Stock Exchange
yesterday by a blast in the basement. (Reuters)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1163 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 16, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Endless War Again Laps at Sri Lankan City

BYLINE: By CELIA W. DUGGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1685 words

DATELINE: JAFFNA, Sri Lanka, Sept. 9


The dull, explosive thud of mortar fire and the roar of MIG-27's are the white
noise of this war-weary city. Separatist rebels have advanced to near the
outskirts of this, the imagined capital of the Tamil homeland that they have
fought, killed and died for. The ethnic conflict that has tormented Sri Lanka
for 17 years is once again knocking on Jaffna's door.

A plaintive, unsigned poster, pasted to walls all over town, asks, "Can't we
stop this madness?" It seems, as it has for so long, that the answer is a
melancholy "no."

In recent months, death has plucked people and other creatures from life here on
the Jaffna peninsula with the errant whimsy of a child picking flowers in a
garden.

A young woman riding a bicycle near her home was struck by shrapnel that severed
her femoral artery. A cow, lazily chewing its cud, was taken out by a stray
shell. A 5-year-old boy, whose grandmother had sent him to the store to buy
fruit juice, was struck in the spine by shrapnel from a shell that had crashed
into a drumstick tree. Two people died when incoming fire hit a home for elderly
residents.

The Sri Lankan security forces and the rebels are now locked in a military
stalemate for control of Jaffna, a city of 150,000, and the small peninsula upon
which it sits at the northern tip of this island nation. Sri Lanka has been torn
apart by civil war as the Tamil Tigers have fought for a separate nation in the
north and east, areas the Tamils regard as their traditional homelands.

In April, people here believed the flag of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam
would soon be flying over Jaffna, as it had before the government retook the
city in 1995. But the military stopped the rebels just short of the city. And on
the first weekend of September, the army opened an earsplitting offensive to
push the Tigers back farther. It produced some gains at a heavy cost in lives.
Pounded by mortar and artillery fire as they ran across open, scrubby terrain,
more than 100 soldiers were killed and more than 400 wounded. Many rebels were
also killed.

Both sides are armed with increasingly devastating weaponry. Humiliated by a
string of defeats at the hands of the rebels, Sri Lanka has spent more than $360
million on military hardware in just the last four months, a stunning sum for a
country of only 19 million people with a per capita income of just $810 a year.

A third of the peninsula's 470,000 residents have been forced to leave their
homes since last spring as a direct result of the fighting, according to
international relief organizations.

But their suffering has been muted to the rest of Sri Lanka. The government has
imposed strict censorship on military news and has not allowed any Sri Lankan
journalists to venture to the Jaffna peninsula since January.

Recently, though, the army has begun allowing a few foreign correspondents to
roam Jaffna and its environs unfettered by minders.

Residents are trying to maintain a semblance of normalcy in a city that could be
engulfed by war at any time. Locals have to be off the streets by 7 p.m. under
the curfew. One morning, children in blue shorts and white shirts walked to
school. A woman in a flowing dress sat perched on a bicycle, daintily holding a
parasol in one hand as she steered around a tank that lumbered through a narrow
lane. Homemakers shopped in thatched-roof shops where steel pots, straw baskets
and stalks of bananas dangled from the ceiling.

But beneath the surface, there is fear among people like Sarojini Sri
Somasegaram, a bank stenographer who came to the ornate Nallur temple to join
Friday morning worshipers offering buttercup and hibiscus blossoms at a shrine
to Lord Shiva's son. She said the shells were falling just a quarter mile from
her home.

Like most residents of Jaffna, she is an ethnic Tamil and a Hindu. She feels
discriminated against by the country's majority, which is ethnically Sinhalese
and Buddhist.

"We are going for work, but always in tension," she said. "Anytime, shelling or
bombing comes from all directions. We are frightened, but what are we to do?"

She has stayed put in her home, but many people have sought shelter in
high-ceiling Roman Catholic schools, refugee camps and the homes of family and
friends. Farmers are cut off from their land, fisherman from the sea -- and
reduced to surviving on dry rations from the government.

Janita Irene, 28, her husband and her three daughters, ages 8, 5 and 3, sleep at
night on the cement floor of St. Patrick's College in Jaffna with 45 other
families. Her husband used to make a good living catching prawns, cuttlefish,
crab and shark, but he now earns little more than $1 a day in a tea shop.

"We used to be rich," she said wistfully.

Just outside the city, 30 families live in a small refugee camp built with
financial help from the United Nations high commissioner for refugees. The huts
are made of coconut fronds, mud, dung, plastic sheeting, twine and sugar sacks.

Anthonyquinn Sril, 31, said he was napping on a bench in the sun at his home
east of Jaffna in May when shrapnel struck him under the arm and in the hip. He
staggered up only to discover that his 6-year-old nephew, playing in the yard,
had been killed by a shell.

Like most refugees on the peninsula, he did not move to the Wanni, a
Tiger-controlled area in the northern part of the mainland. Though he is Tamil,
he feels safer here near Jaffna in an area controlled by Sinhalese troops of the
army.

"We don't want to live in war places," he said. "We want to live in a peace
place."

The University Teachers for Human Rights in Jaffna, a Tamil rights organization,
said in a bulletin issued this month that Tamil refugees had been voting with
their feet for the army over the Tigers, also known as the L.T.T.E.

"After listening to propaganda speeches, the L.T.T.E. cadre had come there
expecting the people to be grateful for being liberated," the group wrote. "It
came as a shock to them to find that the people were trying all available ruses
to get away from them."

But while Tamils may vote with their feet for the army, it is doubtful that they
will vote for Tamil parties that back the current government when parliamentary
elections are held on Oct. 10.

Tamil disillusionment with the governing coalition, headed by President
Chandrika Kumaratunga, runs deep. In her six years in office, she has not been
able to deliver what they yearn for most: peace.

Jaffna is now plastered with political posters, but an eerie quiet has settled
over the campaigning here. Many candidates are afraid to speak out -- afraid for
their lives. Through the years, the Tigers have systematically killed rivals for
the loyalty of the Tamil people in their crusade for a Tamil homeland in the
country's north and east.

Democratically elected Tamils have been particularly vulnerable. In 1998, the
Tigers assassinated two mayors of Jaffna -- a man, and then his wife, who
succeeded him. Both were members of the Tamil United Liberation Front, a party
committed to a nonviolent, political settlement of the country's ethnic problem.
The party decided not to replace its slain mayors. The city now has none.

At the party's headquarters here, tucked behind an armed police guard and a row
of rusty barrels, V. Anandasangaree, a parliamentary candidate, said his
greatest fear now was of violence not from the Tigers but from other thuggish
Tamil groups who are former militants now backed by the government.

He has no plans to do what politicians normally do: speak at rallies and press
the flesh at public functions. Instead, he will run what he called "almost a
silent campaign."

Some here still expect the Tigers' hit squads to go into action soon. "We don't
know when they'll start killing the candidates," said the Rev. J. Fernando, an
English teacher at St. Patrick's. "Wait and see."

The tragedy of Jaffna, once the vibrant heart of erudition and culture for the
Tamil people, is written in the blasted ruins of some of its greatest
institutions. They are a ghostly, open-air museum of war.

The stately library is a gutted hulk, its thousands of volumes up in smoke and
its dome cracked open like an eggshell. There is nothing left of the grand old
post office but a bullet-pocked facade. Blue sky and wheeling birds are visible
through the gaping holes that used to be windows. All that remains of the city's
museum is a single stone wall in a weedy, overgrown park.

But it is not only the Tamils who have suffered here in the battle zones of
northern Sri Lanka, but also the young Sinhalese soldiers, most of them from
poor, rural backgrounds, who have died by the thousands in recent years.

Some in the Sri Lankan security forces have committed human rights violations.
About 500 people disappeared from the Jaffna area in 1996, and the army is
believed to have slain many of them. But few people interviewed here seemed to
hate the troops, whom they described as generally polite.

Soldiers with machine guns slung over their shoulders shopped for manioc, onions
and potatoes at a vegetable market a few miles from Jaffna one recent afternoon.

"The soldiers are very friendly," said S. Tharamaratam, a vegetable seller.
"They pay the money honestly."

Vijaratne Vasanta, a 28-year-old soldier with a wife and 3-year-old son at home
in his village, said he was fighting to keep the country united. "We Tamils,
Muslims and Sinhalese are all Sri Lankans," he said.

At the Palali air force base here on the peninsula today, soldiers snapped
smartly to attention and saluted as stretcher-bearers passed by, carrying two
dead comrades in white plastic bags. The bodies were loaded onto a dank troop
carrier for the hourlong flight to Colombo, the capital.

Soldiers, some of them bandaged and hobbling on crutches, sat on benches that
ran the length of the plane with the body bags laid out on the floor between
them. The grinding roar of the engines made conversation impossible, so the men
sat in silence, napping and looking out the windows or at the ceiling --
anywhere but at the fallen men who lay at their feet.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (96%); INDIA (94%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%);

COMPANY: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (59%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL
EELAM (59%);

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (59%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA (96%); INDIA (94%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); ARMIES (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); SENIOR CITIZENS (67%); ARMED FORCES (65%); DEFENSE
SPENDING (65%); CENSORSHIP (61%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (50%); RELIEF
ORGANIZATIONS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (50%);

LOAD-DATE: September 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Sinhalese soldiers in Jaffna "are very friendly," a vegetable
vendor says. Few Tamil residents seem to hate the soldiers, who fight Tamil
rebels. (Celia W. Dugger/The New York Times)(pg. A6)

Map of Sri Lanka shows the location of Jaffna: The rebels want Jaffna to be the
capital of a separate Tamil nation. (pg. A6)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1169 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 21, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Taliban Open A Campaign To Gain Status At the U.N.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 746 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Sept. 20


Four years after taking control of most of Afghanistan, the Islamic Taliban
movement sent a high-level team to New York this week to lobby for the Afghan
United Nations seat.

"We're here to challenge the United Nations on their reason for not recognizing
us," the delegaton leader, Deputy Foreign Minister Abdur Rahman Zahid, said in
an interview. "How can they recognize that band of thugs sitting beyond our
borders?"

Mr. Zahid, taking the Taliban on the diplomatic offensive for the first time,
was referring to the loose coalition of mostly exiled holy warriors whom the
United States once supported in their war against the Soviet Union. For the last
few weeks, in a succession of speeches and in important meetings affecting
Afghanistan here, the mujahedeen have been the sole representatives of a country
that they no longer rule.

The mujahedeen alliance controls less than 10 percent of Afghanistan. Its
president, Burhanuddin Rabbani, is in exile, and its legacy to the country,
United Nations officials say, was the destruction of the capital, Kabul, and
much of the nation's public works in interfactional war.

Throughout the recent summit meeting here, the Taliban have had no opportunity
to speak officially, even though they have been excoriated from the General
Assembly podium for supporting terrorism, exporting opium and abusing human
rights, especially those of women. Yet the United Nations is the organization,
Mr. Zahid said, that is trying to teach the Taliban cooperation, tolerance and
democracy.

"This is the world that we live in," he said. "A government is recognized that
does not exist. Its president does not have an address. But they have the U.N.
seat, all the Afghanistan embassies, everything."

The Taliban government -- largely isolated at the behest of Iran, Russia and the
United States, if for different reasons -- is recognized by three nations:
Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates.

Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, speaking on Monday at a program
sponsored by the White House Project, an organization that supports women in
politics, repeated Clinton administration demands that the Taliban agree to a
broad-based democratic government. To the Taliban, that amounts to giving part
of the country back to the armed opposition and rekindling the war, Mr. Zahid
said, adding, "If the U.N. at least vacated the seat, the opposition would have
an incentive to talk."

Meanwhile, weapons flow in. "We are up to our necks in arms," Mr. Zahid said.
"What we need are pencils and books."

The Taliban recently banned the cultivation of opium poppies. Echoing warnings
last week from Pino Arlacchi, the top anticrime official for the United Nations,
he said that crop-substitution projects were failing because help in building
sugar and cotton mills had not materialized and that the Taliban have no other
incentives to offer poppy growers.

Mr. Zahid said outsiders often forgot that some opium trade originated in the
opposition-controlled areas, where Russian and Central Asian crime figures
operate. Gemstones -- rubies, emeralds and lapis lazuli -- are also smuggled and
sold in Europe by the opposition, including diplomats of the defunct government,
who still control embassies, he said.

Although the Taliban government is not recognized by United Nations members who
will again consider what do with the Afghanistan next month, it is treated as
the de facto government by United Nations agencies, which run programs there.
Afghanistan is also under Security Council sanctions for refusing to turn over
Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born militant, to American courts.

On human rights, Mr. Zahid, who is meeting United Nations officials and other
diplomats, said Taliban officials now let women work in health services, the
Interior Ministry, at airports and for certain United Nations agencies like the
World Food Program. But he said demands for a representative government and
elections were unrealistic in a country destroyed by two decades of war, a
drought and almost no foreign aid.

"How do they expect us to be in a position to hold elections?" he asked.  "In
all of Afghan history, there has never been an election. After 20 years of war,
when we are only beginning to create institutions, when we are the first Afghan
government to try to stop opium production, how can they expect us to do this
now? They are demanding of us what they never before expected of this country."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED ARAB EMIRATES (79%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%);

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);

COMPANY: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED ARAB STEVEDORING (53%);
   UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN;   AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); SAUDI
ARABIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%);   KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; DIPLOMATIC RECOGNITION  TALIBAN (92%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); LOBBYING (90%); POLITICS (89%); RELIGION (78%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%);
TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (75%); WOMEN (75%); ARMS TRADE (70%); OPIUM (70%); TERRORISM (67%);
DRUG TRAFFICKING (65%); COTTON & COTTONSEED (65%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (74%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; ZAHID, ABDUR RAHMAN (DEPUTY MIN)  HILLARY RODHAM
CLINTON  (52%); HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (52%);

LOAD-DATE: September 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Abdur Rahman Zahid


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1179 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Jury in New York Orders Bosnian Serb to Pay Billions

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


A jury in federal court in Manhattan yesterday ordered Radovan Karadzic, the
former Bosnian Serb wartime leader, to pay $4.5 billion in damages to victims of
rape, torture and genocide.

The award was the largest to come from a series of similar lawsuits against
foreign leaders that have been filed in United States courts in the last 20
years. Several have resulted in orders to pay damages, but the judgments have
been symbolic, because victims have been unable to collect in nearly all cases.

Both the jury foreman and the judge in the case took the unusual step yesterday
of making statements after the verdict. Bill Walters, the foreman, conceded that
it was unlikely that Dr. Karadzic, who remains at large in Bosnia, would be
forced to pay.

But Mr. Walters, a retired stage hand, said he and other members of the jury
felt that they had a duty to express their outrage over the conduct of Bosnian
Serb soldiers under the political leadership of Dr. Karadzic, who did not appear
in court. "I hope the world gets the message," he said. "What happened was
reprehensible."

The United States district judge, Peter K. Leisure, praised the jury for its
work. "It's very important that the United States of America rises to the
occasion when these things happen, and we not just wait for the United Nations
war crimes tribunal," the judge said.

The verdict came just weeks after another jury in New York returned a $745
million verdict against Dr. Karadzic in a civil case focusing on women who were
raped during the war in the early 1990's.

After contesting the jurisdiction of an American court, Dr. Karadzic declined to
defend himself. In a 1997 letter to Judge Leisure, he questioned the court's
right to sit in judgment of him.

"Can you really hope to find truth, or do justice, or protect rights of people
in distant nations?" Dr. Karadzic asked. "Do you really believe that attaching a
U.S. dollar sign to human tragedy around the world by empty judgments in
uncontested lawsuits is a step toward peace or justice?"

The lawsuit, initially filed in 1993, is one of a series brought by the Center
for Constitutional Rights based on an 18th-century law. The law allowed people,
American or foreign, to file suit for violations of international law in
American courts.

Mirza Hirkic, one of about 20 plaintiffs in the suit, said yesterday that the
verdict was not about monetary damages, but about gaining recognition of the
acts committed by Bosnian Serb ultra-nationalists. A widow who moved to Grand
Rapids, Mich., in 1993 with her two teenage children, Ms. Hirkic described in
her testimony how she last saw her husband when he and other Bosnian Muslim
prisoners were led away by Bosnian Serb soldiers.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); GRAND RAPIDS, MI, USA (72%);

COMPANY: GRAND RAPIDS DIECRAFTS (50%);   UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS
(54%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (54%); UNITED NATIONS (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;   UNITED STATES (97%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (93%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);
NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%); GRAND RAPIDS, MI, USA (72%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; BIOGRAPHICAL
INFORMATION; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; SUITS AND LITIGATION  LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (91%); LITIGATION (91%); JURY TRIALS (91%); DAMAGES (90%); VERDICTS
(90%); JUDGES (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); GENOCIDE (89%); SEX OFFENSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); SUITS
& CLAIMS (89%); TORTURE (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (88%); JURISDICTION
(78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); CIVIL WAR (77%); US DOLLAR (68%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (65%);

PERSON: KARADZIC, RADOVAN; ROHDE, DAVID  RADOVAN KARADZIC (94%); BILL WALTERS
(60%); MIRZA HIRKIC (58%); PETER K LEISURE (58%);

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1181 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 26, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

The Death Penalty Is Beyond Repair

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 182 words



To the Editor:

The application of the death penalty in the United States is biased against the
poor and people of color, and characterized by a shocking number of erroneous
convictions. And as you report (front page, Sept. 22), the presence of a death
penalty does not decrease homicides in a state.

Earlier this month, the Justice Department issued a study showing that the
application of the death penalty at both the federal and state levels depends
more on race and geography than on the nature of the alleged crime. A recent
Columbia Law School report concluded that capital sentences are "persistently
and systematically fraught with alarming amounts of error."

What these studies show and what the American people are realizing is that the
death penalty is unnecessary and beyond repair. There should be a moratorium on
state and federal executions. Let's call the death penalty what it is: a human
rights violation that must end once and for all.

WILLIAM F. SCHULZ
Washington, Sept. 25, 2000

The writer is executive director of Amnesty International U.S.A.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL USA TELECOM (55%);   US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE  (57%); US
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL

 (55%);

ORGANIZATION: US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE  (57%); US DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE (57%);
AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (55%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);

SUBJECT: MURDERS AND ATTEMPTED MURDERS; CAPITAL PUNISHMENT  CAPITAL PUNISHMENT
(94%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (88%);
HOMICIDE (88%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); GRADUATE &
PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (73%); WRITERS (73%);

PERSON: SCHULZ, WILLIAM F

LOAD-DATE: September 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1182 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 28, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Courage on Rights

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 77 words



To the Editor:

A Sept. 23 letter writer argues that we should begin trade relations with Cuba
as well as China. But both countries are notorious human rights violators, and
both sentence political protesters to jail.

Thus, the real point is that if we are going to discuss human rights
transgressions, neither country should be trading with us. That, I believe, is
the real "courage" we should have.

ELEANOR LEVINE
New York, Sept. 23, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (72%); ASIA (72%); NORTH AMERICA (57%); CUBA (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (72%); ASIA (72%); NORTH AMERICA (57%); CUBA (57%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); POLITICAL PROTESTS (84%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS
(84%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: ELEANOR LEVINE NEW YORK (59%);

LOAD-DATE: September 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1191 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 10, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Belgrade, a Fateful Moment

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 160 words



To the Editor:

Re "The Tenacity of Madeleine Albright" (editorial, Oct. 7):

If the price of democracy in Yugoslavia is permitting Slobodan Milosevic to
remain, then it is a small price indeed. Prosecutors in criminal cases routinely
grant plea bargains either to assure some conviction, speed up the wheels of
justice or to gain evidence against another person or persons.

It is to Dr. Albright's credit that she demonstrated the tenacity and acuteness
that resulted in the overthrow of a dictator and his eventually being criminally
charged at The Hague. But to insist on extraditing Mr. Milosevic would delay the
democratic process.

Let us accept that the greater good has been served, the voice of the Yugoslav
people has been heard and obeyed, and that as much as we might like another
outcome, Yugoslavia has now joined the democratic countries of the world,
peacefully.

RICHARD M. FRAUENGLASS
Huntington, N.Y., Oct. 7, 2000




http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (90%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA;   SERBIA (90%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);   NEW YORK, USA
(90%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (90%);

SUBJECT: EXTRADITION; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM
AND HUMAN RIGHTS  LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); EXTRADITION (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%);

 HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS (74%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(74%); PLEA AGREEMENTS (71%); POLITICS (67%);

PERSON: FRAUENGLASS, RICHARD M; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)  SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC
(92%); MADELEINE ALBRIGHT  (74%);

LOAD-DATE: October 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1202 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 17, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

YEMENIS NOW SAY THAT SHIP BLAST WAS CRIMINAL ACT

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1588 words

DATELINE: ADEN, Yemen, Oct. 16


After days of denying that the United States destroyer Cole had been the target
of a terrorist attack, Yemen's government publicly reversed its position today,
denouncing the attack as "a premeditated criminal act."

Yemeni officials said they had intensified a police sweep, questioning at least
1,500 people, including most of the work force in Aden harbor, Yemenis with past
links to Islamic terrorist groups, and visitors to Yemen from neighboring Arab
nations that have been havens for Islamic radicals in the past.

The new Yemeni attitude was ordered by President Ali Abdullah Saleh, the former
army general who seized power in a coup in north Yemen in 1976. He was for years
a fervent ally of the Soviet Union and Iraq before he shifted his stance in the
late 1990's to seek closer relations with the United States.

In the immediate aftermath of the blast on Thursday that killed 17 sailors, 10
of whose bodies remained unrecovered this evening, Mr. Saleh had angered
Washington by saying he considered the explosion to have been an "accident" set
off by a detonation on board the guided-missile destroyer.

Mr. Saleh announced his switch in a meeting in Aden with Lt. Gen. Tommy Franks,
commander in chief of the United States Central Command, whose headquarters in
Tampa, Fla., oversees naval operations in the Persian Gulf. United States
officials said that the visit of General Franks, the highest-ranking American
officer to visit here since the attack, signified Washington's sense of urgency
in assuring that everything possible is done to track down those responsible.

Mr. Saleh shifted as American lawmakers demanded that Yemen cooperate fully with
the investigation. Representative C. W. Bill Young of Florida, the chairman of
the House Appropriations Committee, urged the Clinton administration today to
withhold a proposed $4 million package of aid to Yemen until it is assured that
the government will assist the investigation and do noth ing to harbor
terrorists. Mr. Young said he would seek to make Yemen's cooperation a condition
of the foreign aid bill now before Congress.

So far, American and Yemeni investigators appear to have made little progress in
establishing the identities or motives of those behind the attack, which
occurred when the Cole was rammed by what witnesses said was a small boat
carrying two men who used the cover of a refueling operation to detonate a cargo
of at least a third of a ton of high explosives against the side of the Cole as
it lay moored in an inner channel of the Aden harbor. The resulting explosion
was the worst terrorist attack on American forces anywhere since the 1996 truck
bombing of the Khobar Towers military barracks outside Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, in
which 19 were killed.

SABA, Yemen's official news agency, said President Saleh had told General Franks
that "preliminary results and important evidence reached by security forces in
Yemen indicate that the explosion was a premeditated criminal act." The
statement said Mr. Saleh expressed "his regret and strong condemnation for this
shameful act, which was aimed at harming the relations of friendship and
cooperation between Yemen and the United States."

The statement did not say what the "important evidence" referred to by Mr. Saleh
was, but Yemeni officials said it did not mean that Yemen had any strong leads,
despite its police sweep and what the officials described as "several dozen"
arrests of people being held for questioning. Yemen's official position in the
last year has been that Islamic terrorist organizations that the State
Department once described as having "safe haven" in Yemen, including groups
linked to Osama bin Laden, the Saudi Arabian-born millionaire who is the
F.B.I.'s most-wanted terrorist suspect, have been crushed by crackdowns after
previous terrorist incidents. Those included a hotel bombing in 1992 and
numerous kidnappings of tourists, diplomats and others.

One Yemeni official said security forces would be questioning port workers,
particularly those who had access to operations of the Arab Investment,
Manufacturing and Trading Company Ltd., the Yemeni-owned organization that had a
Navy contract for refueling, watering and supplying Navy ships stopping in Aden.
Arabs of non-Yemeni nationality from countries like Algeria, Egypt, Sudan and
Jordan, that, like Yemen itself, have been favored bases for terrorist groups,
would also be questioned, the official said.

Within hours of Mr. Saleh's statement, United States commanders in Aden issued a
statement praising the Yemenis for their cooperation, saying they were receiving
"superb support from the Yemeni government and its citizens" as they pressed
efforts to save the stricken Cole from flooding, recover bodies of the dead
sailors and patch the gaping hole at the ship's waterline enough to travel back
to the United States for repair.

Because of delays in recovering the missing sailors' bodies, and the need for a
team of more than 100 F.B.I., C.I.A. and Navy investigators to scout the Cole
for evidence, the homebound trip looked at least 10 days away. Even then, the
Navy has said that loading the destroyer aboard a Norwegian-owned flatbed vessel
specially chartered for the purpose and piggybacking it to the United States
will take 25 to 30 days, indicating that the ship's return could still be six
weeks or more away.

The recovery efforts continued cautiously today. Divers and steel-cutters
working in the dark spaces inside the blast-shattered area of the ship were
unable to reach any of the 12 crew members' bodies believed to be trapped within
the tangle of steel, cables and buckled equipment that is all that was left of
the ship's engine room, drive shaft and lower-deck mess halls.

Although the Navy has said that it has already spotted and identified two of the
bodies, and has a "good idea" where the other 10 are, apparently in a messhall
or engineering space that was crushed when a deck head collapsed, the recovery
operation has been forced to proceed with painstaking care. Navy officials were
reluctant to give details of the operation, but noted in another context that
one factor governing the recovery operation has been the large stockpile of
missiles, shells and other ordnance that was in the ship's arsenal when the
bombing occurred.

The fact that the arsenal did not explode emerged today as one factor that saved
the Cole from a worse disaster, one that Navy officials now concede could have
sunk the ship and endangered far larger numbers of the ship's crew of 293.

As it was, the damage caused by the bombing caused severe flooding that
threatened to send the ship to the harbor floor in the aftermath of the attack,
and again on Sunday when water pressure caused a seam in a bulkhead surrounding
the ship's driveshaft to separate, causing tons of seawater to flood into
compartments that had already been pumped out.

The United States task force that has flown in here aboard a shuttle of military
transport planes has grown to a force of several hundred. They include the
F.B.I.-led investigative team, a specially trained corps of Marine
anti-terrorism specialists deployed to guard against any further attacks, divers
who specialize in cutting through the tangled mass of steel, explosives experts,
and psychological counselors who have helped the surviving members of the Cole
crew cope with the aftermath of the attack. Thirty-nine crew members were
wounded in the attack, at least six of them critically.

Yemeni officials, under pressure from the Americans, appointed a top official to
act as coordinator with the American investigators on Sunday, but the Americans
and Yemenis have so far declined to disclose the official's identity. Yemenis
familiar with the workings of Mr. Saleh's government said the principal role in
conducting the Yemeni investigation would almost certainly be assigned to the
Political Security Organization, Yemen's shadowy secret police, which has a
reputation for ruthless efficiency and for mistreating those it seizes for
interrogation.

In recent years, numerous human rights reports on Yemen, including those issued
annually by the State Department, have singled out the Political Security
Organization for criticism. While American anti-terrorism specialists say it has
played a valuable role in cracking down on Islamic terrorist groups, and thus in
helping Yemen improve its relations with the United States and other Western
countries, the human rights dossiers have described an organization that has
tortured, and even caused to disappear, political detainees as well as terrorist
suspects.

Aboard the Cole, conditions appeared to be slowly improving for the men and
women working to stabilize the ship, recover the bodies and gather forensic
evidence. Rear Adm. Mark Fitzgerald, commander of the task force of several
hundred Americans who have flown in here aboard a continuous shuttle of military
transports since the bombing, said repair teams succeeded today in restoring
electrical power and running water to the ship.

Parts of the destroyer now have air-conditioning for the first time since the
blast, a relief for crew members who have had to work in blazing 100-degree
heat. On Sunday, after the arrival off Aden of three Navy ships deployed to
assist in the recovery operations, the Cole began rotating its crew to sleeping
quarters on the other ships, and replacing them during their furloughs away from
the Cole with substitute crew members from the other vessels.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); YEMEN (99%); IRAQ (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); GULF
STATES (79%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (92%); INDIAN OCEAN (79%);

CITY: TAMPA, FL, USA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: YEMEN; ADEN (YEMEN);   UNITED STATES (99%); YEMEN (99%); IRAQ (79%);

 SAUDI ARABIA (79%); GULF STATES (79%);   FLORIDA, USA (92%); INDIAN OCEAN
(79%);   TAMPA, FL, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: COLE (USS); UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-YEMEN; TERRORISM;
BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; ISLAM; NAVIES  ARMED FORCES (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
MILITARY VESSELS (90%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (90%); NAVIES (90%); RELIGION (90%);
INVESTIGATIONS (89%); BOMBINGS (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); US
PRESIDENTS (78%); COUPS (78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); NAVAL VESSELS (78%);
EYEWITNESSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (76%); ARMIES (76%); MILITARY BASES

 (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (68%); EXPLOSIVES (68%);

PERSON: BURNS, JOHN F; SALEH, ALI ABDULLAH (PRES); FRANKS, TOMMY (LIEUT GEN)  C
W BILL YOUNG (50%);

LOAD-DATE: October 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: President Ali Abdullah Saleh as he visited wounded sailors after
the Cole was attacked on Thursday. (Agence France-Presse)(pg. A8)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1203 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               October 18, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

An African Dispute

SECTION: Section A; Page 30; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 149 words



To the Editor:

Uganda rejects Sudan's claim that its defeat for a Security Council seat
occurred because the United States browbeat or paid off African delegates (World
Briefing item, Oct. 13).

Uganda does not need to be bought to oppose Sudan-based terrorists who are
killing innocent people in our capital. Nor does it need to be bought to oppose
a country that harbors terrorist groups that have abducted thousands of Ugandan
children. The presidents of Iran, Malawi and Kenya, as well as former President
Jimmy Carter, have brokered peace agreements that Sudan never observed.

In September, Sudan signed an agreement committing itself to return Uganda's
children. Let Sudan adopt a policy of good-neighborliness. Let the Sudanese
improve their human rights record.

SEMAKULA KIWANUKA
Permanent Representative
Ugandan Mission to United Nations
New York, Oct. 13, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UGANDA (95%); SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); KENYA (79%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); MALAWI (79%); AFRICA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS  (83%); UNITED NATIONS (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SUDAN; UGANDA; AFRICA;   UGANDA (95%); SUDAN (95%); UNITED STATES
(92%); KENYA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%); MALAWI (79%); AFRICA (79%);



SUBJECT: LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (88%); TERRORISM (87%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (87%); PEACE PROCESS
(83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS
(51%);

PERSON: KIWANUKA, SEMAKULA  JIMMY CARTER (54%);

LOAD-DATE: October 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1204 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A;Page 14;Column 3;Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1250 words



EUROPE

ITALY: VOTING ABROAD -- A constitutional amendment was approved to allow
Italians overseas to elect their own legislators, including candidates who live
abroad. Twelve seats in the 630-seat lower house and six in the 315-seat Senate
are to be allocated to representatives of Italians abroad, of whom there are
about 4 million, with more than 300,000 in the United States and Canada. First,
however, a law must be passed setting up candidates' procedural rules. Voting by
absentee ballot is not allowed.  Alessandra Stanley (NYT)

FRANCE: CABINET RESIGNATION -- Martine Aubry, the cabinet minister who
shepherded the introduction of the government's 35-hour workweek policy, has
quit her cabinet post to run for mayor of Lille. The widely expected move is
seen as a steppingstone to run for higher office in 2002. If Prime Minister
Lionel Jospin, who is expected to run for president in 2002, were to win, Mrs.
Aubry could well replace him as prime minister. Mr. Jospin named his justice
minister, Elisabeth Guigou, to take over Mrs. Aubry's portfolio.  Suzanne Daley
(NYT)


RUSSIA: AMERICAN'S TRIAL DELAYED -- A Moscow court granted a one-day delay in
the espionage trial of Edmond Pope, the American businessman accused of trying
to buy secret plans for a torpedo, so lawyers could draft specifications for an
evaluation of Mr. Pope's bone cancer. Lawyers argue that Mr. Pope, in jail since
April, has been denied proper medical care. Judges denied other requests in the
closed-door trial, including a plea for a jury.  Michael Wines (NYT)

BRITAIN: TORTURE REPORT -- Amnesty International said torture is increasing
around the world, in dictatorships and democracies. At a news conference, Pierre
Sane, secretary general of the London-based rights group, said it had uncovered
evidence of beatings, rape, electric shock and other forms of torture in more
than 150 countries, including Britain and the United States. Between 1997 and
2000 there was evidence of widespread torture by state agents in more than 70
countries, the group said.  Sarah Lyall (NYT)

AUSTRIA: TALKS ON NUCLEAR PLANT -- Chancellor Wolfgang Schussel and Prime
Minister Milos Zeman of the Czech Republic plan to meet on Oct. 31 in the Czech
city of Brno to try to resolve a dispute over a nuclear plant in Temelin, some
35 miles from the Austrian border. The Czech foreign minister, Jan Kavan, said
the meeting would take place only if a suspended blockade of the border by
antinuclear protesters was officially called off.  Victor Homola (NYT)

SWITZERLAND: PRESIDENT TO QUIT -- President Adolf Ogi said he would resign this
year, leading to speculation of a change in the traditional coalition-style
government. Mr. Ogi was at odds with the rightward turn of his Swiss People's
Party, which did well in last year's elections on an anti-refugee platform. The
anti-Europe views of a leading party figure, Christoph Blocher, differed from
Mr. Ogi's. With Mr. Ogi gone, Mr. Blocher may again try to win a seat on the
country's governing council.  Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

EGYPT: VOTING BEGINS -- Elections for the 444-seat People's Assembly got under
way, with scattered reports of harassment or arrests of people supporting
independent candidates. The governing National Democratic Party was expected to
maintain its overwhelming majority in the Parliament, where a handful of small
opposition parties together control only 6 percent of the seats. Voting will
also take place on Oct. 29 and Nov. 8.  Abeer Allam (NYT)

IRAN: KHATAMI HITS OUT -- President Mohammad Khatami denounced the "sick"
campaign against his reform movement and warned of an explosion of popular anger
if his rivals continue to ignore the will of the people, the state news agency
said. In an emotional defense before an audience of students, Mr. Khatami made a
rare direct attack on conservatives who have hobbled his efforts to liberalize
Iran's social and political life.
 (Agence France-Presse)

AFRICA

NIGERIA: RIOTS SPREAD -- Soldiers joined the police in patrolling the streets of
Lagos after riots that have already led to more than 100 deaths spread
throughout the commercial capital. The security forces fired shots in the air to
disperse rioters, many of whom appeared to be unemployed youths known as area
boys. The violence began with clashes between a Yoruba group and Hausa
merchants.  Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

ZIMBABWE: PROTESTS IN THIRD DAY -- Protesters angered by soaring food prices
clashed with the police in the townships near Harare for a third day. Police
officers and soldiers patrolled several townships, searched houses and sprayed
tear gas when protesters tried to block roads. With the economy unraveling,
inflation is soaring, and the price of bread and sugar surged by 30 percent this
month.  Rachel L. Swarns (NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: BACKTRACKING ON MOUNTAIN -- Bowing to western pressure, the government
is backtracking on a decision to rename the nation's highest peak, Mount Logan,
after Pierre Elliott Trudeau, the former prime minister who died on Sept. 28.
With sympathy for Mr. Trudeau low in the west, Prime Minister Jean Chretien, who
is expected to call an election for Nov. 27, has indicated that he now supports
a Yukon Territory proposal to name a sub-peak of Mount Logan after the French
Canadian.  James Brooke (NYT)

MEXICO: TABASCO VOTE IN DOUBT -- With two rivals claiming victory, and the
leadership of Mexico's long-governing political party in the balance, results of
Sunday's election for governor in the state of Tabasco will not be known before
the weekend, election overseers said. Preliminary results gave a 1 percent lead
to Manuel Andrade, the hand-picked successor to Gov. Roberto Madrazo, who wants
to be the next national leader of the Institutional Revolutionary Party. His
opponent, Raul Ojeda, of the left-leaning Party of the Democratic Revolution,
says the lead was built by fraud.
 Tim Weiner (NYT)

CHILE: TRUCK STRIKE CONTINUES -- Striking truckers obstructed roads throughout
the country for a second day, and concern grew over possible food and fuel
shortages. Leaders of the National Confederation of Truck Owners, who transport
92 percent of the freight hauled in Chile, said more than 7,500 vehicles were
involved in the protest against a tax on diesel fuel. The government put the
figure at 2,000 vehicles.  (Reuters)

ASIA

CHINA: FALUN GONG DEATHS -- Three more followers of the outlawed Falun Gong
spiritual movement have died in police custody, bringing the known total to 57
since the group was banned last year, according the Information Center for Human
Rights and Democracy, based in Hong Kong. A 61-year-old man in Shandong Province
died last week after he was arrested for distributing Falun Gong literature, the
group said. Another follower jumped from a train and died while being
repatriated to Shandong, while a third follower died after he fell from a
building during police questioning.  Erik Eckholm (NYT)

SRI LANKA: PRESIDENT'S BROTHER IS SPEAKER -- President Chandrika Kumaratunga's
estranged brother, Anura Bandaranaike, was elected speaker of Parliament. The
sister and brother come from the country's leading political dynasty. Both their
parents served as prime minister. Mrs. Kumaratunga heads the ruling coalition,
which has just returned to power. Her brother is a leader of the opposition
United National Party.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); CZECH REPUBLIC (93%); CANADA (92%); NORTH AMERICA
(92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); SWITZERLAND (79%);
AUSTRIA (72%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND (76%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); CZECH REPUBLIC (93%); CANADA (92%); NORTH
AMERICA (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (79%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); SWITZERLAND

 (79%); AUSTRIA (72%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); LONDON, ENGLAND
(76%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  VOTERS & VOTING (90%); APPROVALS (90%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); PRIME MINISTERS
(89%); TORTURE (88%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (85%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%);
LAWYERS (76%); RESIGNATIONS (75%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (74%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(73%); MAYORS (73%); BALLOTS (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%); JURY TRIALS (71%); WORK WEEK (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (68%); POWER PLANTS (67%); DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (66%); ESPIONAGE
(65%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (64%); CANCER (50%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT
ELECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: MILOS ZEMAN (79%);

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: October 23, 2000, Monday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, a report in the World Briefing column on Thursday
about an Italian constitutional amendment that allows citizens living abroad to
elect their own legislators referred incorrectly in some copies to the voting
method. Absentee balloting is not allowed.


GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1207 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 19, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fighting in Colombia Stops Commerce and Creates Refugees

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 555 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Oct. 18


Fierce fighting in southern Colombia has halted commerce and made hundreds of
people seek refuge in Ecuador and elsewhere in Colombia, officials said today.

Guerrillas of the largest rebel organization here, the Revolutionary Armed
Forces of Colombia, are controlling roads throughout the area. As a result,
isolated towns and hamlets have seen supplies of food, gasoline and drinking
water dwindle.

More than 1,000 people have left their houses this month, said Gloria Echeverry,
a spokeswoman for the Network of Social Solidarity, a government agency that is
shipping food to the region.

Of the refugees, 225 have reportedly crossed the San Miguel and Putumayo Rivers
into Ecuador, fleeing the chaos that has gripped the Putumayo Province since
heavy fighting began last month. Several hundred Ecuadoreans who work in
Putumayo are reportedly stranded in its capital, Mocoa.

The people who remain are said to subsist on whatever food and water they had
stored since roadblocks all but ended the deliveries.

"Now the people are hungry," said Francisco Segura, director of the Association
of Municipalities of Putumayo, a nongovernment group that has been in contact
with elected officials. "They are not allowing any food in or out through any
route, not through Ecuador or anywhere else. What the government is doing is not
much. They are helping people in the cities. But what about the people in the
little communities and farms?"

The confrontations between left-wing guerrillas and right-wing paramilitary
forces are in a region the size of New Hampshire, an area of steamy jungles and
coca fields where an ambitious American-backed effort at eradicating 135,000
acres of coca fields is widely expected to go into high gear by early next year.
Two counternarcotics battalions trained by American soldiers are beginning
operations.

The training, along with helicopters and other assistance to help them operate,
is part of $1.3 billion in United States aid that is meant to curtail the
northbound flow of cocaine.

Critics have said the program, which is top-heavy with military spending, will
lead to increased fighting and displaced farmers.

The rebel group, known as FARC, has long been involved in the cocaine trade in
the region, where half the Colombian coca is grown, American officials say. The
paramilitary groups, privately financed groups that human rights workers say
have often operated with tacit support from elements of the military, have in
recent weeks engaged the guerrillas for control of the lucrative business.

One result, Colombian officials say, has been a series of skirmishes that has
left scores of guerrillas, paramilitaries and farmers dead.

A spokesman for the Interior Ministry here, Raul Gutierrez, said: "In these
zones, 50 percent of Colombian coca is produced. And now there is a dispute
between the paramilitaries and the guerrillas for the territory, for the
business."

Mr. Gutierrez said the government had not foreseen "the blockade and the
isolation of the people and, much less, that the blockade would stop the flow of
food."

The government has flown 120 tons of rice, milk, beans, cooking oil and other
food items to the region. A 100-ton shipment is to be sent beginning on
Thursday.

Mr. Gutierrez said, "We have only gotten the food to the big towns."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); ECUADOR (94%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (78%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (84%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; PUTUMAYO PROVINCE (COLOMBIA);   COLOMBIA (99%); UNITED
STATES (94%); ECUADOR (94%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (78%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (91%); WAR &
CONFLICT (91%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); REFUGEES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED
FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%);
COCAINE (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DISPLACED PERSONS

 (78%); FOOD CHARITIES (77%); NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (75%); DEFENSE SPENDING (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS (70%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (64%); HELICOPTERS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);



PERSON: FORERO, JUAN  RAUL GUTIERREZ (74%);

LOAD-DATE: October 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1210 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 20, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

House Backs Off on Condemning Turks' Killing of Armenians

BYLINE: By ERIC SCHMITT

SECTION: Section A; Page 11; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 586 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 19


Minutes before the House was to vote on a measure condemning the mass killings
of Armenians in Turkey 85 years ago as genocide, J. Dennis Hastert, the speaker,
withdrew the resolution tonight, citing President Clinton's warnings that a vote
could harm national security and hurt relations with Turkey, a NATO ally.

In a telephone call late Wednesday and in a letter today, Mr. Clinton urged Mr.
Hastert to withdraw the measure, saying it could inflame tensions in the Middle
East, embolden President Saddam Hussein of Iraq and interfere with American
efforts to stabilize the Balkans.

In addition, Turkey had threatened to ground American warplanes that fly out of
Turkish air bases to patrol northern Iraq, and cancel a $4.5 billion deal to buy
145 attack helicopters made in Texas. Angry crowds have protested outside the
United States Embassy in Ankara.

"The president believes that passage of this resolution may adversely impact the
situation in the Middle East and risk the lives of Americans," Mr. Hastert said.
"This is not an idle request," Mr. Hastert continued. "We all know that the
situation in the Middle East is unusually tense.  The cease-fire now in place
between Israel and the Palestinians is fragile.  The Congress, while it has a
right to express its opinions on critical issues of the day, also must be
cognizant of the consequences of the expressions of those opinions."

The contentious resolution had languished in Congress for a decade.  But this
year, Mr. Hastert promised Representative James E. Rogan of California, a House
impeachment manager and his party's most vulnerable incumbent in the House, that
he would bring it to a floor vote.

Even though the measure is non-binding and does not go to the Senate or to
President Clinton for approval, it is a top priority in Mr. Rogan's Southern
California district, which has the largest Armenian-American constituency in the
country.

Armenians have maintained that as many as 1.5 million of their people were
killed from 1915 to 1923 as part of a campaign by the Ottoman Empire to force
Armenians out of eastern Turkey. The Turks have acknowledged that some 300,000
people were killed, but have said that the deaths occurred when the Ottomans
tried to quell civil unrest. The Ottoman Empire became Turkey in 1923.

A spokesman for the Turkish Embassy, Namik Tan, praised Mr. Hastert's decision,
saying, "This is what should have happened."

So did the White House, which marshaled an all-out campaign to kill the measure,
enlisting the president's top foreign and military advisers, the joint chiefs of
staff and various national security experts.

"We applaud the speaker's decision," said P. J. Crowley, a spokesman for the
National Security Council. "It was the right thing to do for America's national
interests, the right thing to do for stability in a volatile region, and the
right thing to do for both Turkey and Armenia."

Supporters of the measure, who said they had the votes to pass it, expressed
disappointment. "While I am personally saddened by this change, I remain pleased
with our historic success to enact this resolution," Mr. Rogan said in a
statement.  "Never before has this legislation earned even a hearing."

Representative David E. Bonior of Michigan, the second-ranking House Democrat
and sponsor of the resolution, said in an interview: "It will never be the right
time to do this for those who disagree with us. Countries need to own up for
their own inadequacies."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); ARMENIA (93%); IRAQ (92%); MIDDLE
EAST (91%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%);

CITY: ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (58%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY;   TURKEY (98%); UNITED STATES (97%); ARMENIA (93%); IRAQ
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (91%); ISRAEL (79%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (79%);
   CALIFORNIA, USA (92%);   ANKARA, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
TURKEY-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US  GENOCIDE (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);
NATIONAL SECURITY (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); MILITARY AIRCRAFT (75%);
IMPEACHMENT (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); RIOTS
(69%); MILITARY HELICOPTERS (69%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (68%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (65%); FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION (65%); ARMED FORCES (60%); HELICOPTERS
(54%);

PERSON: SCHMITT, ERIC; HASTERT, DENNIS (REPR); CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL
CLINTON (93%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (72%);

LOAD-DATE: October 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1224 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Justice Is Better Than Revenge

BYLINE: By Chuck Sudetic; Chuck Sudetic, the author of "Blood and Vengeance: One
Family's Story of the War in Bosnia," is a contributing editor at Rolling Stone.

SECTION: Section 7; Page 29; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1463 words



 Stay the Hand of Vengeance
 The Politics of War Crimes Tribunals.
 By Gary Jonathan Bass.
 402 pp. Princeton, N.J.:
 Princeton University Press. $29.95.

 For Humanity
 Reflections of a War Crimes Investigator.
 By Richard J. Goldstone.
 152 pp. New Haven:
 Yale University Press. $18.50.


Polite discourse has a weak arsenal of adjectives to describe crimes of war.
These words -- inhuman, unspeakable, heinous, and a few others -- fail to evoke
the personal and societal fury that such crimes provoke. And comprehending this
fury is a prerequisite to understanding the importance of war crimes tribunals.
So imagine a gang of soldiers shooting a young woman in the head, nailing her
hand and foot to a four-by-eight, and setting her adrift on a river. Picture
bullets puncturing the chests of bound prisoners, and listen for the gurgle of
their last breaths. Smell the corpses of chemical-weapons and gas-chamber
victims. Hear the bleating of a skinned man whose tongue has been cut out. See
the ooze from the bodies of children run over by tanks. Now multiply these
horrors a thousandfold and a thousandfold again.

What should be done with people who commit such acts? And what is to be done
with the political and military leaders who launch wars of aggression that lead
to these crimes? Both Gary Jonathan Bass and Richard J. Goldstone argue
compellingly that they should be tried before a court that has the authority to
find them not guilty.

Bass's book, "Stay the Hand of Vengeance," is a timely and exhaustive survey of
how political leaders have wrestled with the problem of war criminals since
1815, when Napoleon was banished from Europe without a trial. The subsequent
record contains more failures than successes. The Weimar Republic's trials of
German war criminals after World War I produced one acquittal after another but
still triggered a nationalist reaction that Hitler was only too happy to
exploit. Britain imprisoned dozens of Turks implicated in the Armenian genocide;
but it exchanged them for a few captured British soldiers, and to this day
Armenians have taken revenge while the Turkish government continues to deny that
Armenians were ever slaughtered. Next came Nuremberg, which afforded Nazi
leaders fair trials; but for obvious reasons the justice it administered had
blind spots, and the bombing of Dresden and other crimes against humanity were
ignored. Now we have the current trials of mostly minor war criminals from the
former Yugoslavia and Rwanda while the major culprits -- Radovan Karadzic, Ratko
Mladic, and Slobodan Milosevic -- remain at large because the political will to
arrest them is lacking.

Despite this grim inventory, Bass, an assistant professor of politics and
international affairs at Princeton, argues convincingly that trying war
criminals is a better option than its alternative: vengeance. His adversaries in
the debate are the so-called realists in the field of international relations:
diplomats, political leaders, and philosophers who oppose using moral standards
to restrict the behavior of states outside their borders, not to mention
applying the principle of due process to war crimes. Serious talk about war
crimes trials, they argue, can prolong wars and thwart postwar efforts to build
peace. "To realists," Bass writes, "a war crimes tribunal is simply something
that the countries that decisively win a war inflict on the helpless country
that loses it. It is punishment, revenge, spectacle -- anything but justice." He
cites the patriarch of American realism, Hans Morgenthau, discussing the
prospects for Nuremberg: "I am doubtful of the whole setup under which these
trials will be conducted. What, in my opinion, they should have done is to set
up summary courts-martial. Then they should have placed these criminals on trial
before them within 24 hours after they were caught, sentenced them to death, and
shot them in the morning."

Bass relates how realists in the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt, led by
the secretary of the treasury, Henry Morgenthau Jr., almost prevailed after
World War II. Their plan included a spate of summary executions and the
reduction of Germany to a country of peasants and herders. It was thwarted by
Henry Stimson, the secretary of war, and other American leaders, who persuaded
President Roosevelt that even the worst Nazi criminals should be afforded due
process because to do anything less would cheapen the liberal set of values for
which the country fought. "Liberal states," Bass observes, "are unlikely to
shoot war criminals, although they can be tempted by that prospect. Rather, even
when liberal decision makers are painfully aware of the risks of acquittal,
delay, and embarrassment posed by a war crimes tribunal, domestic norms push
them to apply due process beyond their own borders." A young colonel, Murray
Bernays, drew up the plan for the Nuremberg trials. In it, he argued that not
providing the defendants due process "would do violence to the very principles
for which the United Nations have taken up arms, and furnish apparent
justification for what the Nazis themselves have taught and done."

Bass is careful not to buy some of the arguments cited by supporters of war
crimes tribunals. These advocates say tribunals can fortify peace, rehabilitate
former enemy countries, purge threatening enemy leaders, and strip them of their
charisma and strength. In fact, trials can also spark a nationalist backlash in
a defeated country, especially if the victors delay the legal process and cut
and run in the way they did from Turkey after World War I. Tribunal advocates
also argue that trials can deter war criminals, place the blame for atrocities
on individuals rather than on whole ethnic groups, and establish the truth about
wartime atrocities. But there is, for now anyway, insufficient evidence to prove
that they can.

"At a minimum," Bass concludes, "long-run deterrence of war crimes would require
a relatively credible threat of prosecution: that is, a series of successful war
crimes tribunals that became so much an expected part of international affairs
that no potential mass murderer could confidently say that he would avoid
punishment." These tribunals, he adds, would have to be more robust than the
courts set up for Yugoslavia and Rwanda.

As the first prosecutor at the United Nations criminal tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, Richard J. Goldstone saw how little the international
community was willing to do to bring war criminals to the dock and how reluctant
liberal governments are to put their own soldiers at risk in order to arrest war
criminals. Goldstone's book, "For Humanity," is a brief memoir that begins with
his experiences leading the investigations into criminal attempts to stymie the
transition from apartheid in his native South Africa. In the end, however, his
book is a plea for the United States to support the creation of an international
criminal justice system "sufficiently empowered to cause would-be war criminals
to reconsider their ambitions, knowing that they might otherwise be hunted for
the rest of their days and eventually be brought to justice."

Goldstone says the Clinton administration's deference to the Pentagon lies
behind its decision to oppose a treaty, drafted in Rome in July 1998, that would
create an international criminal court. "The stated fear of the United States
was that some renegade or malicious prosecutor might some day initiate unfounded
political prosecutions against United States citizens," Goldstone writes. "The
prospect of such conduct was made virtually impossible by the terms of the draft
treaty. . . . These protective devices were sufficient to satisfy 120 members of
the international community, including three permanent members of the Security
Council, the United Kingdom, Russia, and France."

Since the extralegal exile of Napoleon, we have witnessed the world wars, the
gassings, the Holocaust and the shame of Bosnia and Rwanda as well as the
invention of the World Wide Web, the creation of the European Union, the lifting
of trade barriers and other developments that are erasing borders and redefining
international relations. Watchdog organizations and advocates like Human Rights
Watch, Amnesty International, George Soros's Open Society Institute and others
have come up with facts and funds to goad governments to do justice in
situations in which revenge was once the only "remedy" available. These two
books present important reminders that if our world is to become more globalized
and humane, governments, including our own, must keep step by prosecuting war
criminals. Vengeance cannot remain the only outlet for the fury of the kith and
kin and countrymen of their victims.

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS611310 COLLEGES, UNIVERSITIES & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (58%);
SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (58%);

COUNTRY: ARMENIA (93%); TURKEY (92%); GERMANY (90%); UNITED STATES (88%); SERBIA

 (79%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (88%); CONNECTICUT, USA (73%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%);

CITY: NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (73%);

COMPANY: YALE UNIVERSITY PRESS (58%);   PRINCETON UNIVERSITY  (93%); PRINCETON
UNIVERSITY (93%); YALE UNIVERSITY  (58%);

ORGANIZATION: PRINCETON UNIVERSITY  (93%); PRINCETON UNIVERSITY (93%); YALE
UNIVERSITY  (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ARMENIA (93%); TURKEY (92%); GERMANY (90%); UNITED STATES (88%);
SERBIA (79%); RWANDA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (88%);
CONNECTICUT, USA (73%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (58%);   NEW HAVEN, CT, USA (73%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (92%); BOOK REVIEWS
(90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES
(89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); WORLD WAR
II (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (78%); JAIL SENTENCING (78%); ARMED FORCES (74%); COLLEGE &
UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (73%); WORLD WAR I (73%); BOMBINGS (73%); POLITICAL
SCIENCE (73%); ARRESTS (73%); ACQUITTAL (69%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (60%);
   CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: GARY JONATHAN BASS (94%);

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1233 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 6, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

The Ambitions of Hugo Chavez

SECTION: Section A; Page 38; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 566 words


President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela clearly means to be an influential symbol of
resistance to American influence, not just in Latin America but around the
world. Whether he can succeed remains to be seen, though he is backed by one of
the world's largest petroleum reserves at a time of high oil prices. Washington
will have to watch him warily, though it should avoid unnecessary
confrontations.

Since winning election to Venezuela's presidency nearly two years ago, the
former paratrooper has quickly established himself as one of the more outspoken
leaders of the developing world. At home, through a series of constitutional
changes and national ballots, he has consolidated near-dictatorial power and now
seeks authority to rule by decree. Abroad, he has helped revitalize the
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries as a price-setting force, embraced
Saddam Hussein and reached out to Marxist rebels in neighboring Colombia. He
recently received Fidel Castro in Caracas and agreed to supply Cuba with
subsidized oil in exchange for Cuba's dispatch of medical and other specialists
to Venezuela. These are not constructive steps. But the rise of a demagogic
leftist leader in Latin America need no longer be considered the threat it was
during the cold war.

It is disturbing to see Mr. Chavez extend an economic lifeline to the Cuban
dictatorship, particularly when so many Venezuelans remain mired in poverty. But
concessionary oil sales are a familiar tradition in Latin America. Cuba, even
with Venezuelan oil, presents little threat to the United States today. The
spectacle of Mr. Castro and Mr. Chavez happily bantering in Caracas will not
change that.

By reaching for a leadership role in OPEC, Mr. Chavez is clearly hoping to gain
Washington's attention and respect. Certainly, prolonged high oil prices could
weaken America's economy. But the real power in OPEC is Saudi Arabia, which, for
its own reasons, responds positively to American requests to increase supply.
Caracas and Washington both have a strong interest in continuing Venezuelan oil
sales to the United States. America is by far Venezuela's biggest international
customer.

Mr. Chavez's courtship of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known as
the FARC, has added an unhelpful new complication to Colombia's long and
murderous civil war. He is unlikely to heed American advice on this issue. But
other Latin American leaders, like Brazil's president, Fernando Henrique
Cardoso, should urge Mr. Chavez to put his influence with the FARC to more
positive use by encouraging it to take part in meaningful peace talks with the
Colombian government.

Mr. Chavez's vague "Bolivarian" ideology -- inspired by the achievement of
Venezuela's national liberator, Simon Bolivar, in briefly uniting present-day
Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador -- understandably worries neighboring
governments. But Washington can reinforce the political stability of Venezuela's
troubled Andean neighbors by helping them strengthen their judicial systems,
combat official corruption and develop new export industries.

The biggest challenge to Mr. Chavez's grandiose ambitions lies at home. He has
repeatedly promised to revive Venezuela's depressed economy and raise the
depressed living standards of the country's poor majority. So far, even with
this year's oil price windfall, he has not been able to deliver.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); COLOMBIA
(95%); LATIN AMERICA (94%); CUBA (93%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); BRAZIL (79%);
ECUADOR (79%);   VENEZUELA (88%);

CITY: CARACAS, VENEZUELA (88%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPEC)  ORGANIZATION OF
THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (91%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (OPEC)  ORGANIZATION
OF THE PETROLEUM EXPORTING COUNTRIES (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: VENEZUELA; SAUDI ARABIA; COLOMBIA;   VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC
OF (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); COLOMBIA (95%); LATIN AMERICA (94%); CUBA (93%);
SAUDI ARABIA (92%); BRAZIL (79%); ECUADOR (79%);   VENEZUELA (88%);   CARACAS,
VENEZUELA (88%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; OIL
(PETROLEUM) AND GASOLINE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE; ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS; PRICES (FARES, FEES AND
RATES)  PETROLEUM PRODUCTS (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); OIL & GAS PRICES (89%);
REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); CIVIL WAR (88%); INTERNATIONAL
ECONOMIC ORGANIZATIONS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); POLITICS (79%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (79%); EMERGING MARKETS (78%); COLD WAR (78%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(75%); TALKS & MEETINGS (74%); EXPORT TRADE (73%); LIBERALISM (71%); PEACE
PROCESS (71%); TRENDS (70%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS (59%);

PERSON: CHAVEZ, HUGO (PRES)  HUGO CHAVEZ (90%); SADDAM HUSSEIN (59%); FIDEL
CASTRO (52%);

LOAD-DATE: November 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1240 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 10, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Iranian Journalist, in Court, Says Security Forces Tortured Him

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 558 words

DATELINE: TEHRAN, Nov. 9


Iran's top investigative journalist today accused security forces of torturing
him while he was in detention and showed reporters bruises on his face and body
in a court appearance.

The journalist, Akbar Ganji, walked into the courtroom, which was packed with
reporters, escorted by two policemen.

"I was tortured!" he shouted. "They kicked me in the head because I refused to
wear the prison uniform," he said, pointing to bruises on his forehead.

Mr. Ganji then tore the top of his gray prison uniform, placing it under his
seat, and sat shirtless in Tehran's Revolutionary Court in front of the judge.

Mr. Ganji is accused of harming Iranian security by taking part in a conference
on Iran in Berlin in April. He is one of 17 people on trial on charges stemming
from the conference, which hard-liners condemned as hostile to Iran and its
Islamic principles.

Judge Hassan Moqaddas asked Mr. Ganji to file a complaint on the torture and
promised to take action.

Mr. Ganji, 40, said he would begin a hunger strike to protest his mistreatment.
He opposes wearing a prison uniform because he says he is a political prisoner
and not a common criminal. He also said he had been tortured throughout his
seven-month detention, placed in solitary confinement for more than three months
and not allowed basic rights.

Mr. Ganji angered hard-liners when he accused top officials of involvement in a
spate of killings of reformists in 1998. The Intelligence Ministry later
admitted that some of its agents were involved, but said they were rogue
operatives.

The reformists won control of Iran's Parliament in legislative elections in
February, but hard-liners still run the judiciary, the military and the
broadcast network.

The conservative judiciary has closed about 30 reformist newspapers and jailed
more than 25 reformist writers and political activists over the last six months.


                             --------------------


Iranians at Baghdad Fair

BAGHDAD, Iraq, Nov. 9, (Agence France-Presse) -- As further proof that Iran and
Iraq, former foes, are improving relations, around 50 Iranian companies are
taking part in the Baghdad International Trade Fair with a view to getting a
hold on the Iraqi market.

"We are in Baghdad to test out the Iraq market," said Ali Hatami, export manager
for Govah, which supplies spare parts for Mercedes. "Our Iraqi neighbors need
Iranian products which, instead of being exported via Saudi Arabia, Syria or
Lebanon, could be taken straight to Iraq at a lower cost."

Asghar Azidehak, sales manager for Sepahan Lifter, which services plants, asked,
"Why should Iraqis go to far-off countries such as Japan, China or Korea to find
products available in Iran?"

It is the third successive year Iran has taken part in the Baghdad fair, with
around 50 companies from the automobile, mechanical, agricultural, paint,
chemical, food and medicine sectors.

Iran's transport minister, Mahmud Hojati, visited Baghdad last week and Foreign
Minister Kamal Kharazi was here in mid-October, the first trip to Iraq by
Tehran's top diplomat in 10 years.

Mr. Hojati signed a bilateral agreement in Baghdad on transport and
communications on Monday, focusing mainly on "cooperation in the domain of road,
maritime and railway transportation between the two countries, as well as the
flow of goods."

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (52%);

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); IRAQ (96%); IRAN (90%); SAUDI ARABIA
(79%); GERMANY (79%); CHINA (79%); JAPAN (79%); LEBANON (79%); SYRIA (79%);
NORTHERN ASIA (79%);

CITY: BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (90%); BERLIN,
GERMANY (79%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (52%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN;   IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (97%); IRAQ (96%); IRAN (90%);
SAUDI ARABIA (79%); GERMANY (79%); CHINA (79%); JAPAN (79%); LEBANON (79%);
SYRIA (79%); NORTHERN ASIA (79%);   BAGHDAD, IRAQ (92%); TEHRAN, IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (90%); BERLIN, GERMANY (79%);

SUBJECT: TORTURE; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; HUNGER STRIKES; POLITICS AND
GOVERNMENT  TORTURE (91%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS (90%);
WRITERS (90%); FACIAL INJURIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); PRISONS (89%);
JOURNALISM (89%); EXPORT TRADE (84%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(77%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); CONSERVATISM (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (71%); POLITICS (71%); HEAD INJURIES (71%); ELECTIONS
(69%); TRADE SHOWS (69%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (68%); INTERNATIONAL TRADE (60%);
RELIGION (53%);   CORRECTIONS (77%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (63%);

PERSON: GANJI, AKBAR  AKBAR GANJI (93%); MAHMUD HOJATI (55%);

LOAD-DATE: November 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1243 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 16, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Faizabad Journal;
Afghan TV's Last Stand (Taliban Are at the Gates)

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: FAIZABAD, Afghanistan


And so it carries on, nobly if feebly, within the rocky peaks of the remote
Hindu Kush, high atop this city on a steep hill and inside a small yellow
building with green trim: the last surviving television station in Afghanistan.

Badakhshan TV broadcasts nightly, two to four hours in prime time. Its offerings
are dependable: old serials, old movies, old music, old nature shows, old
prayers.

The signal may be weak, reaching only half of Faizabad, but few citizens
complain. Most don't have TV's anyway, and of those who do, most don't have
electricity.

"Yes, we have some technological limitations," said the station manager,
Muhammad Din Khahani, as the light from a single bulb in his office faded in and
out. "But many people in our city do love television, even the reruns we have
been showing for 16 years. If they can afford it, they hook up their TV's to
large batteries. Some of it is very clever."

Television may be pulsing through human consciousness in the rest of the planet,
but in Afghanistan it is facing extinction. The Taliban mullahs, who control 90
to 95 percent of the country, have grievances against the medium that go far
beyond the usual complaints about rotten shows. They contend that living beings
should not be photographed, whether in still life or moving pictures, and this
has led to rather unforgiving censorship. Television stations have been
shuttered, television sets have been broken, television watchers have been
thrashed.

Faizabad, however, is in the nation's far northeast, a smidgen of territory that
has held out against Taliban rule. Badakhshan TV, like the opposition government
that owns it, has defiantly made a stand, getting by on an unsure supply of fuel
to run its generator and an aged video recorder that has outlived all known
spare parts.

"It is quite a shame that we have fallen behind because Afghanistan is truly the
heart of Asia," said Mr. Khahani, 38, a thin man with the quiet bearing of a
scholar. "If it hadn't been for the war, this would be one of the most developed
countries in the world."

The combat he speaks of is actually a series of hostilities that escalated
sharply after an invasion by the Soviets in 1979. It has since become a civil
war that is complicated by ethnic rivalries from within and geopolitical
connivance from without. Faizabad, the biggest city in Badakhshan Province, is
the latest refuge of President Burhanuddin Rabbani, who heads the feckless
government that is recognized as legitimate by most of the world. Reporters from
Badakhshan TV use every opportunity to interview the president -- and at times
they even interview others who have come to do the same interviewing. News
gathering is a costly enterprise, and not much can be accomplished on an annual
budget of $15,000. Mr. Khahani himself earns only $40 a month.

Anyway, Faizabad is what the moguls of television would call a small market. It
is a city of 100,000 with a river running through it and a serene wrap of
mountains in the distance. The many bumps in the unpaved roads are interspersed
with out-and-out craters.

Donkeys seem as plentiful as people and both serve as beasts of burden, carrying
huge bundles, their necks hunched over from the weight. Men customarily wear
long-tailed turbans and woolen waistcoats. Women are less commonly observed and,
when they are, their bodies are surrounded by the head-to-toe encasement of the
burka.

There is a telephone company, offering service at the very reasonable price of
50 cents a year. But it too has antiquated equipment. Phones still operate with
a hand crank and there are no numbers. An operator at a central switchboard
plugs lines into one of 420 round openings, working from memory as to what
person belongs to what hole.

Television, then, is actually at the cutting edge of Faizabad's information age.
By Mr. Khahani's estimate, there are 5,000 sets in the city, though many may
well be broken. The phenomenon of the couch potato has been avoided because most
people sit on the floor.

While choice is limited to use of the on-off switch, viewers do state
preferences. They are especially fond of movies, and Badakhshan TV has a
fair-sized archive of videos, many of them rescued from a sister station in
Kabul before the Taliban arrived.

Movies are broadcast with subtitles in Dari. Indian films seem to be the most
popular, with their simple plots of boy-meets-girl and boy-loves-girl. Another
favorite is the American action flick "First Blood," in which Sylvester Stallone
(as Rambo) strides about violently with a machine gun at his side, a practice
shared by many Afghan men.

The blockbuster "Titanic" is known to many -- available in a bootleg edition in
the main bazaar. But the video has been recopied so many times that the quality
is poor, and Mr. Khahani has decided to forgo the film rather than broadcast a
washed-out version.

Even if "Titanic" were shown, viewers would not get to see Leonardo DiCaprio
getting friendlier with Kate Winslet in the back seat of that car in the ship's
hold. On Badakhshan TV, sex scenes are edited out in accordance with Islamic
propriety.

"We will show lips that are touching, but we will not allow nakedness," the
station manager said.

Mr. Khahani, while calm in demeanor and patient with questions, was actually
quite busy. He was about to go out with a camera crew to interview the
president. Some further preparation was necessary, and his job was being made no
easier by a darkness that had overtaken the small television station on the
hill.

Once again, the electricity was out.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (94%); ASIA (79%);

COMPANY: BADAKHSHAN TV (72%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; FAIZABAD (AFGHANISTAN);   AFGHANISTAN (94%); ASIA
(79%);

SUBJECT: TELEVISION; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (91%); TALIBAN (90%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (90%);
INTERVIEWS (89%); RELIGION (78%); BROADCASTING INDUSTRY (77%); CENSORSHIP (72%);

 POLITICS (68%); CIVIL WAR (65%); NEWS REPORTING (60%); HUMAN RIGHTS (60%);
BUDGETS (50%);

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY; RABBANI, BURHANUDDIN (PRES)  MUHAMMAD DIN KHAHANI (82%);

LOAD-DATE: November 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Faizabad, where Afghanistan's last television station operates,
is in territory that is holding out against the Taliban. Donkeys are plentiful
there. (Barry Bearak/The New York Times)

Map of Afghanistan highlighting Faizabad: Faizabad is in a corner of Afghanistan
holding out against Taliban.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1260 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 28, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1338 words



INTERNATIONAL   A3-14

Chretien's Liberals Retain Hold on Canada Parliament
Jean Chretien won a bold gamble, becoming the first Canadian Prime Minister to
win a third consecutive majority government since World War II. Defying
forecasters, Mr. Chretien's Liberals swept Ontario and picked up several seats
in Quebec, reducing the parliamentary delegation of the separatist Bloc
Quebecois.   A6


Gaza Boy's Death Re-examined
The Israeli Army said Palestinian bullets, rather than Israeli gunfire, might
have killed the 12-year-old Palestinian boy whose death on Sept. 30 was
videotaped and widely televised. Palestinians, including the cameraman, assailed
the report.   A8

Call for Middle East Monitors
Mary Robinson, the top United Nations human rights official, said international
monitors should be considered for the West Bank and Gaza, where she called the
conditions of Palestinian civilian life "bleak."   A8

No Victory Claim in Haiti Yet
Former President Jean-Bertrand Aristide acted very much the chief of state as he
emphasized the need to unite Haitians to work for his program of national peace
and development, but he did not declare himself the winner of the election on
Sunday, pending official results.   A6

Mexican Cabinet Complete
President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada chose his security and justice ministers,
completing his cabinet four days before his inauguration.   A6

Spy Trial in Moscow
A lawyer for Edward Pope, an American businessman charged with espionage, said
the judge had allowed an important piece of evidence that could help exonerate
him.   A5

Sri Lanka Rebel Talks of Peace
Velupillai Prabhakaran, leader of the separatist Tamil Tiger rebels and known as
a ruthless guerrilla strategist, said his group was ready for unconditional
talks with the government on ending the 17-year conflict.   A11

Yugoslav Criticizes U.N.
President Vojislav Kostunica said the United Nations and Western powers had
"failed to do their part of the job" and stop Albanian attacks on Serbian police
and citizens. But Mr. Kostunica and his government lifted threats that Serbian
forces might move into a three-mile security zone to deal with armed Albanians.
   A14

Ex-Leader Adjusts to New Life
Former President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru seems weary but defiant as he
adjusts to a new life as a private citizen in Japan, after a decade in which he
governed Peru as an authoritarian ruler. In an interview, he expressed no
regrets about his most fateful decisions in a life of politics that apparently
ended last week when he resigned from office.   A14

World Briefing   A12

NATIONAL   A16-26

Gore Asks for Patience As Bush Pushes Ahead
Vice President Al Gore, in a brief televised prime-time address, urged patience
while he contests Florida's decision to award its decisive 25 electoral votes to
Gov. George W. Bush. Mr. Gore asserted that he was not engaged in a struggle for
power but in an effort to preserve the "integrity of democracy." Mr. Bush
pressed forward with transition planning, meeting in Austin with his designated
White House chief of staff, former Transportation Secretary Andrew Card. Mr.
Bush, despite his claim to victory, told aides to continue calling him governor,
rather than president-elect. Dick Cheney, his vice presidential nominee and
transition director, said he was opening a full-scale transition operation in
rented space in Washington, using donations.   A1

In Tallahassee, lawyers for Mr. Gore asked a state judge to declare him the
winner and award him the state's 25 electoral votes.   A1

The Florida Senate's president, a Republican, said Gov. Jeb Bush had indicated
he was willing to sign special legislation intended to award Florida's electoral
votes to Mr. Bush.   A25

The Clinton administration said it would not release $5.3 million in transition
funds or turn over an office "until a final winner" emerged.   A19

The Democrats' two Congressional leaders, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and
Senator Tom Daschle, went to Florida to participate in a televised conference
call with Mr. Gore and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman to demonstrate Congressional
support for Mr. Gore's efforts.   A19

Texas Death Case Review
The Supreme Court agreed to review the case of a Texas death row inmate, Johnny
Paul Penry, whom state authorities have classified as mentally retarded. Mr.
Penry, 44, was convicted in 1979 of the rape and murder of a 22-year-old woman.
   A16

The court met for the fourth time since 1993 to consider whether a skinny
Congressional district in North Carolina is the product of an unconstitutional
racial gerrymander.   A18

The justices agreed to decide whether "medical necessity" can justify
distributing marijuana, in violation of federal law, to people who use it to
relieve pain or medical symptoms that cannot be effectively treated by
conventional means.   A18

NEW YORK/REGION   B1-8

State Data Shows Extent Of Profiling in New Jersey
At least 8 of every 10 state trooper searches of automobiles on the New Jersey
Turnpike in the last decade involved minority drivers, according to state
documents. The state attorney general said the figures showed that a systematic
process of racial profiling had become a routine part of state police
operations.   A1

Judge Faults Officer's Firing
A federal judge ruled that the New York Police Department had violated the First
Amendment rights of Officer Yvette Walton, who was dismissed after she
criticized the tactics of the Street Crime Unit.   B1

An F.D.R. Home for Sale
An 18-room mansion in Hyde Park, N.Y., that once belonged to Franklin Delano
Roosevelt is priced at $599,500, and the National Park Service and some
preservationist groups are none too pleased.   B1

ARTS   E1-10

City Backing Museum Project
Officials said City Hall would provide land and a subsidy for the Solomon R.
Guggenheim Museum's $678 million plan to build a 40-story curvilinear outpost on
the East River.   B1

SCIENCE TIMES   F1-12

Health & Fitness   F7

EDUCATION

Dismissal Is Rescinded
The New York State education commissioner overturned the dismissal of Robert E.
Riccobono, one of the five superintendents removed for poor performance by
former city Schools Chancellor Rudy Crew. Mr. Riccobono was ordered reinstated
as a Board of Education employee.   B3

OBITUARIES   A27

Louis S. Goodman
The pharmacologist, a discoverer of an effective anticancer chemotherapy and a
creator of a textbook used by generations of doctors, was 94.   A27

BUSINESS DAY   C1-22

Microsoft Antitrust Appeal
Microsoft told a federal appeals court that Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson had
committed a host of procedural and substantive errors and that his antitrust
finding and remedies should be overruled.   A1

G.E. Designates Welch Heir
G.E. said Jeffrey R. Immelt, the 44-year-old head of GE Medical Systems, would
succeed John F. Welch Jr. as chairman and chief executive at the end of next
year.   C1

Raider Sues Over Rival Merger
Kirk Kerkorian, who tried to buy Chrysler in 1995, sued DaimlerChrysler and
three officials, saying they gained control of the automaker under false
pretenses in 1998.   C1

New Seed Standards Sought
The American Seed Trade Association said a small amount of genetically
engineered material should be allowed in seeds considered free of modification
because it is becoming impossible to ensure that a bag of seeds will not have
some mixed in.   C1

Business Digest   C1

World Business   W1

SPORTS   D1-8

FASHION   B9

EDITORIAL   A28-29

Editorials: A plea for patience; falling short on global warming; Haiti's
disappearing democracy.
Columns: Thomas L. Friedman.

Crossword   E7
TV Listings   E9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   D8


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CANADA (95%); ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
SERBIA (92%); ALBANIA (92%); HAITI (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); UNITED
STATES (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); MEXICO (79%); JAPAN (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);

STATE: QUEBEC, CANADA (90%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (73%);

COMPANY: NEW LIFE CLINICS (52%);   UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CANADA (95%); ISRAEL (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (94%);
SERBIA (92%); ALBANIA (92%); HAITI (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (89%); UNITED
STATES (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); MEXICO (79%); JAPAN (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);
QUEBEC, CANADA (90%); FLORIDA, USA (79%); ONTARIO, CANADA (73%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); POLITICS (78%); WORLD WAR II (77%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%);

 SEPARATISM & SECESSION (77%); SHOOTINGS (76%); VOTERS & VOTING (73%); ARMIES
(73%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (72%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (71%); ESPIONAGE
(70%); HUMAN RIGHTS (69%); EVIDENCE (65%); US ELECTORAL COLLEGE (58%);

PERSON: JEAN CHRETIEN (91%); AL GORE (71%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%); VICENTE FOX
QUESADA (52%);

LOAD-DATE: November 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1263 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 2, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Army Orders Peacekeepers To Sessions On Rights

BYLINE: By JAMES DAO

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 700 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Dec. 1


The Army has ordered that all fighting units based in the United States undergo
specialized training intended to prevent the possibility of human rights abuses
by soldiers sent overseas on peacekeeping missions, Pentagon officials announced
today.

The general in charge of training for all Army units based in the United States
said in a memorandum released today that the lack of rigorous peacekeeping
preparation for nearly 900 soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division who were
stationed in Kosovo contributed to "a failure in leadership" in at least one
company that was later linked with using excessive force and, in one case,
murder.

The Army inquiry was prompted by the murder of an 11-year-old Albanian girl by
Staff Sgt. Frank J. Ronghi, who pleaded guilty to the murder and sodomy of
Merita Shabiu. Sergeant Ronghi was a member of the cited unit, Company A, which
was part of the Third Battalion, 504th Parachute Infantry Regiment of the 82nd
Airborne. He was sentenced to life in prison by a military court in August.

The memo by Gen. John W. Hendrix, commander of the U.S. Army Forces Command,
also recommended that the Army review the promotions or favorable assignments
given to other soldiers and officers from the 82nd Airborne who were accused of
misconduct, or of condoning misconduct, in Kosovo.

Four officers and five enlisted soldiers from the 82nd Airborne have been
punished, including the battalion commander, Lt. Col. Michael D. Ellerbe.
Colonel Ellerbe has since been selected to attend the Army War College, which is
typically a steppingstone to promotion.

While not directly recommending that those soldiers lose their promotions,
General Hendrix sharply criticized them for the "crimes and abuses" within
Company A.

"In their actions, these leaders clearly failed to set the proper moral and
ethical tone for the unit," General Hendrix wrote.

Though General Hendrix's memorandum does not offer sweeping assessments of
America's peacekeeping operations around the world, it could provide some fodder
for a debate, which came into sharp focus during the presidential campaign, over
the proper role for the military in such missions.

Gov. George W. Bush argued that American troops are overextended and that the
nation should scale back its global peacekeeping efforts. Vice President Al Gore
has articulated a broader vision for using American military might around the
world.

The 82nd Airborne was among the first American-based units sent to Kosovo for
peacekeeping purposes, arriving for a six-month tour in September 1999. General
Hendrix said in his report that because of late notification of the deployment,
the battalion underwent an abbreviated training schedule, which did not include
what the Army calls a mission rehearsal exercise.

Such exercises attempt to simulate conditions that troops are likely to
encounter: in this case, dealing not so much with enemy soldiers, but with
confrontations with angry civilians, demonstrators and feuding ethnic groups.
Such exercises use mock villages and role-playing, last several days and can be
as stressful as combat training, Army officials say.

The lack of that rigorous training made it difficult for the Army to weed out
weak leaders or identify bad soldiers in Company A, General Hendrix asserted in
his memo.

To ensure that all peacekeeping troops experience the rehearsal exercises in the
future, General Hendrix said he has ordered all commanders to submit their
training plans to his office for review.

General Hendrix's orders apply only to troops based in the United States. Those
represent a majority of service personnel, and will include Army Reserve and
National Guard units. Pentagon officials said no decision has been made on
expanding his orders to units in Europe or Asia.

In his memorandum as well as in recent remarks to reporters, General Hendrix has
been careful to emphasize that he did not think that there were broad, systemic
problems with the training of American peacekeeping forces. He has also insisted
that he does not believe that there are deep cultural problems with the 82nd
Airborne that might have contributed to many forms of misconduct in Kosovo.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SERBIA (95%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(92%); ALBANIA (79%);

COMPANY: ARMY WAR COLLEGE (96%);

ORGANIZATION: ARMY WAR COLLEGE (96%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   UNITED STATES (99%); SERBIA (95%); KOSOVO

 (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); ALBANIA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS  ARMIES (92%); ARMED FORCES (91%); PEACEKEEPING (91%); MISCONDUCT
(90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MURDER (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW
(90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT
(78%); GUILTY PLEAS (77%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (73%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(73%); MILITARY COURTS (73%); SENTENCING (72%); LITIGATION (72%); JAIL
SENTENCING (69%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (63%); ETHNICITY (50%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(50%);

PERSON: DAO, JAMES; HENDRIX, JOHN W (GEN)  AL GORE (58%);

LOAD-DATE: December 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1266 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Critics Calling U.S. Supplier In Nicaragua A 'Sweatshop'

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 781 words


An arm of the Pentagon has come under fire for procuring large quantities of
apparel from a Nicaraguan factory that labor rights groups say is a sweatshop
and that the United States trade representative has voiced serious concerns
about.

Several members of Congress say it is wrong for the Pentagon agency, which runs
1,400 stores at military bases and made $7.3 billion in sales last year, to
obtain apparel from the Chentex factory, which a Nicaraguan union has accused of
firing more than 150 union supporters.

In an unusually stern letter, The United States trade representative, Charlene
Barshefsky, warned the Nicaraguan government in October that the United States
might rescind some trade benefits unless it moved to ensure that Chentex
complied with labor laws.

Labor rights groups in the United States have mounted an intense campaign
against Chentex, a factory with 1,800 workers that is owned by the Nien Hsing
Textile Company, after Nicaraguan workers accused the company of illegal
firings. Many workers also complain about low pay, monitored bathroom visits,
large amounts of mandatory overtime and being screamed at and occasionally hit
by managers.

Cynthia A. McKinney, Democrat of Georgia, who sits on the procurement
subcommittee of the House Armed Services Committee, said it was wrong for one
federal agency, the Pentagon, to buy large amounts of apparel from Chentex while
another, the trade representative's office, had singled out the factory for
criticism.

Representative McKinney and several other House members are working closely with
a labor rights group that has obtained shipping documents showing that the Army
and Air Force Exchange Service, a nonprofit Pentagon arm that runs the post
exchanges, is one of the Chentex's largest customers. Other major customers have
included the retailers Wal-Mart and Kohl's.

"The United States government is the last place that should be supporting and
coddling sweatshop labor and the violation of human rights," Ms. McKinney said.

Labor rights groups and several House members say the Chentex battle is
important because it seeks to upgrade wages and working conditions in poor
nations at a time when the American economy is importing more goods than ever
and American companies are relocating operations to low-wage countries.

Fred Bluhm, a spokesman for the Army and Air Force Exchange Service, said that
in light of the many criticisms of Chentex the exchange service sent officials
to Nicaragua to examine the Chentex operation. "Our representative who went
there found no problems," he said.

Carlos Yin, the general manager of Chentex, said in a telephone interview that
his company treats its workers well. He accused the union of exagerating
problems and he insisted that only 12 union supporters had been fired, all of
them union leaders. He said they were dismissed legally, asserting that it was
the union leaders who had broken the law by calling a one-hour work stoppage and
two-day strike without the workers' approval.

"We didn't do anything wrong," Mr. Yin said. "Nicaraguan law protects the
workers very strong, and we can't go against the law."

But Charles Kernaghan, executive director of the National Labor Committee, a New
York-based labor rights group, said the company dismissed far more than 100
union supporters after they went on strike demanding a 40 percent wage increase.

At a factory that sews 35,000 pair of jeans a day, employees earn about 20 cents
for the work they put into a pair of jeans that often sell retail for $30 in the
United States. The workers, in effect, demanded to be paid 8 cents more per
pair.

Mr. Yin, the factory manager, said all of his workers earn at least the minimum
wage, which union leaders say is set unrealistically low in developing countries
in order to attract foreign investment.

Last summer, Representative Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, visited Nicaragua
and met mother who worked at Chentex 60 hours a week, while her husband worked
at another Nien Hsing factory for 70 hours a week, and yet they lived in a hut
with a dirt floor. "The couple had a 3-year-old daughter with discolored tips of
her hair, probably from a protein deficiency," he said. "These are people who
work 60, 70 hours a week, and their standard of living is just abysmal."

Mr. Brown, who got 67 House members to sign a letter to President Clinton last
July about conditions at Chentex and another Nicaraguan factory, Mil Colores,
said he would hold a news conference this week criticizing the Army and Air
Force Exchange Service.

"I'm outraged that American taxpayers are being made part of this sweatshop
global economy in this way," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: 1451 (TAIEX) (69%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS315210 CUT & SEW APPAREL CONTRACTORS (69%); SIC2325 MEN'S & BOYS'
SEPARATE TROUSERS & SLACKS (69%);

COUNTRY: NICARAGUA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (94%);

COMPANY: CHENTEX (CO); NIEN HSING TEXTILE CO  NIEN HSING TEXTILE CO LTD (69%);
   ARMY&AIR FORCE EXCHANGE (60%);

ORGANIZATION: CHENTEX (CO); NIEN HSING TEXTILE CO  ARMY&AIR FORCE EXCHANGE
(60%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NICARAGUA;   NICARAGUA (98%); UNITED STATES (95%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: APPAREL; SWEATSHOPS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; LABOR;
INTERNATIONAL TRADE AND WORLD MARKET; FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL PLANTS
SWEATSHOPS (90%); TRADE DEVELOPMENT (90%); GARMENT WORKERS (90%); ARMIES (90%);
WAGES & SALARIES (89%); LABOR UNIONS (89%); TEXTILE MFG (78%); TEXTILES (78%);
WRONGFUL TERMINATION (78%); OVERTIME (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (78%); AIR FORCES (78%); STRIKES (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
(77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); ARMED FORCES (76%); RETAILERS

 (76%); EMPLOYMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(72%); SALES FIGURES (71%); COMPANY RELOCATIONS (69%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW
(54%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (78%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; BARSHEFSKY, CHARLENE (US TRADE REPR)  CYNTHIA
MCKINNEY  (54%);

LOAD-DATE: December 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1269 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

West Africa's Widening Conflict

SECTION: Section A;  Page 32;  Column 1;  Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 532 words


Sierra Leone's agony is sadly familiar by now. In a decade of war the notorious
Revolutionary United Front has terrorized the West African country, killing and
maiming tens of thousands of people and looting the nation's diamonds. The
rebels' leader, Foday Sankoh, was arrested last May and remains in custody
awaiting trial for war crimes. A tenuous cease-fire has prevailed since early
last month. But the rebels still control two-thirds of the country, and the
lethal malignancy they represent is spreading. The threat of a regional war
seems to be growing, with potentially ruinous consequences.

In the last two months the rebels and their Liberian allies have engaged in a
series of border clashes with the armed forces of neighboring Guinea, and they
have massacred hundreds of Guinean civilians. Some 60,000 Guineans have been
scattered from their homes. Guinea already shelters 500,000 refugees from Sierra
Leone and neighboring Liberia, and many of these could be uprooted. This would
create yet another African humanitarian emergency, and it raises fears of an
expanding circle of conflict akin to the intractable wars now consuming Congo.

The primary source of instability throughout the region is President Charles
Taylor of Liberia. He helped create the Sierra Leone rebel front in 1991 as a
means of destabilizing that country and exploiting its diamonds, and few doubt
he is using the fighters for the same purpose in Guinea. Richard Holbrooke,
Washington's representative to the United Nations, has aptly described Mr.
Taylor as "Milosevic in Africa with diamonds," a reference to former President
Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia. Like Mr. Milosevic, Mr. Taylor has brought
misery and destruction to his own country.

The United States has maintained a special relationship with Liberia since the
country was founded by freed American slaves in 1847. Throughout the cold war,
Washington supported a succession of authoritarian regimes. But the Clinton
administration has wisely distanced itself from Mr. Taylor. In October,
Washington imposed a ban on visas to the United States for Liberian government
officials and their families. It is now seeking international support for a
broader regime of sanctions that might include a ban on all diamond exports from
Liberia, the seizure of Mr. Taylor's financial deposits overseas and a ban on
logging exports. This plan deserves support. The U.N. imposed an arms embargo on
Liberia in the early 1990's, but it needs tightening.

The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, visited Sierra Leone last
weekend and appealed to the rebels to open areas under their control to
government and U.N. peacekeepers. The U.N.'s shaky peacekeeping force, which now
numbers 12,000, will be shored up later this month with the planned arrival of
West African battalions, mostly Nigerians. American military advisers have been
training these battalions in more aggressive tactics that may enable them to
begin reclaiming the country from the rebels. Their arrival will be welcome. But
it is difficult to imagine a lasting peace for Sierra Leone or its neighbors as
long as Charles Taylor continues to destabilize the region.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); LIBERIA (96%); SIERRA LEONE (95%); WESTERN AFRICA
(94%); GUINEA (94%); AFRICA (93%); NIGERIA (79%);

CITY: MONROVIA, LIBERIA (69%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (82%); UNITED NATIONS (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: LIBERIA; SIERRA LEONE; GUINEA;   UNITED STATES (97%); LIBERIA (96%);

 SIERRA LEONE (95%); WESTERN AFRICA (94%); GUINEA (94%); AFRICA (93%); NIGERIA
(79%);   MONROVIA, LIBERIA (69%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; ETHICS; FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA
WARFARE; DIAMONDS; EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); WAR
CRIMES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS
(89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); COLD WAR (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
ARRESTS (77%); DIAMOND MARKETS (77%); ETHICS (74%); EMERGENCY SHELTERS (73%);
REFUGEES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (71%); US PRESIDENTS (71%); SLAVERY (71%); ARMS
TRADE (70%); ARMS EMBARGOES (60%);

PERSON: TAYLOR, CHARLES (PRES); CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  RICHARD HOLBROOKE (50%);

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1271 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Meanwhile, in Mexico

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 127 words



To the Editor:

Re "Mexico President Installed, Vowing to Share Power" (front page, Dec. 2):

President Vicente Fox's inaugural address to Mexico was more inspirational than
any of the pablum served up by the candidates in the United States.

It's refreshing to see someone gain authority who actually believes that the
government should be, as you report, "one that would serve the interests of the
poor before those of the rich; and one that would fight discrimination,
corruption and human rights abuses."

President Fox's statement that "I am the guardian of the power, not its owner,"
made me think two things. First, he sounds like Ralph Nader, and second, can we
have him for our president?

ERIC MOSS
Mountain View, Calif., Dec. 2, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: MEXICO (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: MOUNTAIN VIEW HEALTHCARE (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MEXICO;   MEXICO (94%); UNITED STATES (92%);   CALIFORNIA, USA
(79%);   SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: INAUGURATIONS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; ELECTIONS  LETTERS & COMMENTS
(90%); ELECTIONS (88%); POLITICS (88%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (87%); EDITORIALS
& OPINIONS (74%); CORRUPTION (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (68%);

PERSON: MOSS, ERIC; FOX QUESADA, VICENTE (PRES)  VICENTE FOX QUESADA (90%);
RALPH NADER (79%);

LOAD-DATE: December 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1272 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 7, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Rebel Control Of Large Zone In Colombia Is Extended

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A;  Page 17;  Column 1;  Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 478 words

DATELINE: BOGOTA, Colombia, Dec. 6


Despite flagging support for his peace efforts, President Andres Pastrana opted
today to give the nation's largest rebel group an eight-week extension on the
demilitarized zone that the government ceded to the rebels two years ago.

Mr. Pastrana had until midnight to decide whether to let the rebels keep control
of the zone -- totaling 16,000 square miles in southern Colombia, the size of
Switzerland -- or retake it by force. With the extension, Mr. Pastrana is
banking that government negotiators will be able to restart peace talks that
have been all but dead since mid-November, when the rebels froze the talks to
protest what they said was the government's inability to control right-wing
paramilitary forces.

The extension will last until January 31, said Camilo Gomez, the government's
lead negotiator. "It is clear the extension is aimed at resolving the frozen
dialogues and to advance humanitarian accords that we had been working on," he
said.

Mr. Gomez cautioned, however, that the extension came with conditions, namely
restrictions on the entry of people and supplies into the demilitarized zone.

News of the extension was made public about 15 minutes before midnight, after
Mr. Pastrana met with members of the Colombian Congress, government ministers
and foreign ambassadors, including Anne Patterson of the United States.

"It's not an easy decision, but the president has a strong commitment to the
peace process," Ms. Patterson said. "We all agree that a negotiated peace is the
only way for Colombia."

Mr. Pastrana's decision comes two years after his government, hopeful that the
36-year war could be ended, created the zone for the Revolutionary Armed Forces
of Colombia, or FARC. In November 1998, the government pulled 2,500 troops out
of the area in Caqueta Province.

But that area has become a political liability for Mr. Pastrana. As peace talks
sputtered, rebel attacks across the country mounted, many of them started from
inside the territory, the government has said.

The rebels are also accused of forcefully recruiting teenage fighters who lived
in the zone and using the territory as a safe place to hold kidnapping victims.
This week, a Colombian newsmagazine reported that Venezuelan military officials
visited FARC leaders inside the zone, without Colombian government approval.
Colombian and United States government officials have also accused the FARC of
reaping millions of dollars inside the zone by taxing coca farmers and drug
traffickers and running coca-processing labs.

During his visit to Colombia last month, Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, the United
States drug policy coordinator, said that what happened in the FARC-controlled
area was predictable.

"It has been turned into an armed bastion of the FARC," Mr. McCaffrey said.
"They're building roads, airfields. They're processing cocaine."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: 002235 (SZSE) (54%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS322121 PAPER (EXCEPT NEWSPRINT) MILLS (54%); SIC2621 PAPER MILLS

 (54%);

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); SWITZERLAND (92%); VENEZUELA,
BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (72%);

COMPANY: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  XIAMEN ANNE CORP LTD  (54%); XIAMEN
ANNE CORP LTD (54%);   ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  (59%); ORGANIZATION OF
AMERICAN STATES (59%);

ORGANIZATION: ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES  ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
(59%); ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GUATEMALA;   COLOMBIA (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); SWITZERLAND (92%);

 VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF (79%);   BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (72%);

SUBJECT: FREEDOM AND HUMAN RIGHTS; TORTURE; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE;
HUNGER STRIKES; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND
MILITARY FORCES  PEACE PROCESS (92%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TALKS &
MEETINGS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (88%); COCAINE (84%); CIVIL WAR (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (77%); ROAD & BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%);
PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (69%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (69%); ARMED FORCES
(68%); MILITARY WEAPONS (68%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (65%); TORTURE (65%);
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (63%); ILLEGAL DRUGS (63%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (60%);
DRUG POLICY (60%); APPROVALS (60%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION (50%); HIGHWAYS &
STREETS (50%);

PERSON: BAMACA VELASQUEZ, EFRAIN; HARBURY, JENNIFER K  ANDRES PASTRANA (94%);
ANNE PATTERSON (64%); BARRY R MCCAFFREY (59%); CAMILO GOMEZ (59%);

LOAD-DATE: December 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1279 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

METRO BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Anthony Ramirez

SECTION: Section B; Page 8; Column 4; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1013 words



NEW YORK

BROOKLYN: SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION INQUIRY
A state commission is investigating allegations of shoddy construction by a
Brooklyn company at three city schools, officials said yesterday, confirming a
report by New York 1 News. The Moreland Commission has been investigating
construction practices in the New York City school system for more than a year.
A commission spokesman said the agency was also looking into whether the School
Construction Authority had maintained proper oversight of the company, Trataros
Construction Inc., during its work on three Brooklyn schools: P.S. 24 in Sunset
Park and P.S. 152 and Erasmus Hall High School, both in Flatbush. Officials of
Trataros did not respond to a message seeking comment yesterday.  Edward Wyatt
(NYT)

MANHATTAN: DOMESTIC-VIOLENCE BILL ENDORSED
Two City Council committees yesterday endorsed a bill intended to protect
victims of domestic violence from retaliation at work. The Giuliani
administration opposes the bill, saying it unfairly extends special protections
to domestic-violence victims. Backers of the plan, including Council Speaker
Peter F. Vallone, said women would be less likely to leave abusive relationships
if they knew they might lose their jobs. The bill is expected to be approved by
the full Council on Dec. 19.  Eric Lipton (NYT)


BRONX: HOSPITAL TO PAY DAMAGES
A jury in State Supreme Court in the Bronx has ordered the New York Health and
Hospitals Corporation to pay $10 million in damages to the mother of a child who
suffered severe brain damage during birth at North Central Bronx Hospital.
According to a 1997 lawsuit, the infant, Alexandria Ramos, showed signs of
distress during the 1996 delivery and could not fit through the birth canal of
her mother, Liana Morales. The baby was not breathing when she was born, and a
pediatrician did not arrive until five minutes later, the suit said. The baby
died Jan. 7, 1998. The verdict is one of the highest involving the wrongful
death of a child.  Jennifer Steinhauer (NYT)

MINEOLA: GAY-DISCRIMINATION BILL
The Nassau County Legislature, voting 19 to 0, passed a bill yesterday making it
illegal to discriminate against gay people. The measure amends the county's
human rights law to include sexual orientation with its age, gender and
disability provisions. The amendment would protect 100,000 gays in the county
from being denied an apartment, job or service in public facilities.  (AP)

MANHATTAN: BARTENDER SHOT
A Manhattan bartender was critically injured yesterday after a patron he had
been fighting with shot him in the chest, the police said. Less than an hour
later, the police arrested a 59-year-old man, identified in court papers as
Irving Muniz, who lives near the bar, Keenan's Bar & Grill in Inwood. Officials
said an argument between Mr. Muniz and the bartender, David Pattison, 42, had
escalated into a fistfight. Mr. Muniz returned at 2:45 a.m. with a gun. Mr.
Muniz was scheduled to be arraigned on attempted murder and weapons possession
charges, officials said. Mr. Pattison was admitted to Harlem Hospital Center,
the police said.  Elissa Gootman (NYT)

NEW JERSEY

TRENTON: DEATH-PENALTY PROTEST
A coalition representing more than 3,000 Christian, Jewish and Muslim
congregations across New Jersey called yesterday for a moratorium on capital
punishment, saying the death penalty was "immoral in principle and unjust in
application." In a private meeting with Gov. Christie Whitman, leaders of the
coalition urged her to endorse a two-year pause in executions and to conduct a
study of the costs, risks and fairness of the death penalty.  (NYT)

TRENTON: LATINO REDISTRICTING
Two Latino members of the Assembly urged lawmakers to combine heavily Latino
communities into fewer legislative districts where possible, rather than diffuse
their electoral power. The Assembly members, Wilfredo Caraballo of South Orange
and Nellie Pou of Paterson, both Democrats, stopped short of calling for
majority-Latino districts. Latinos make up about 10 percent of the state's
population but do not hold a single seat in the State Senate. Redrawing
legislative district lines could be so complicated that next year's primaries
may be postponed to September from June, Assembly Speaker Jack Collins said
yesterday.  David M. Halbfinger (NYT)

TRENTON: CHALLENGE TO JUDICIAL REVIEW
Two conservative lawmakers, unhappy with what they called the activism of the
New Jersey Supreme Court, proposed a constitutional amendment intended to give
the Legislature the power, by a two-thirds vote, to invalidate any court
decision that orders the Legislature to spend money, or is otherwise
inconsistent with the intent of lawmakers. The lawmakers, Assemblymen Michael
Patrick Carroll of Morristown and Guy F. Talarico of Paramus, said their measure
would make it possible for lawmakers to set aside the court's rejection of a law
requiring parental notification for minors seeking abortions.  David M.
Halbfinger (NYT)

NEWARK: TEACHERS UNION SETTLES
The union representing Newark's 5,000 public-school teachers and the Newark
School District have agreed on a new contract after talks that both sides said
were smoother than those in 1997. The new deal, which the Newark Teachers Union
is scheduled to consider on Monday, calls for raises totaling 14.67 percent over
three years, plus tuition reimbursement for up to half a year's course work for
faculty members seeking advanced degrees, said Joseph Del Grosso, the union
president. A spokesman for the state education commissioner confirmed that an
agreement was reached.  Steve Strunsky (NYT)

CONNECTICUT

HARTFORD: REGISTRATION LAW CHANGES
State officials will revise the "motor voter" law after a few people were not
able to cast ballots last month, even though they registered while renewing
their driver's licenses. New Department of Motor Vehicles forms will include
three places reminding drivers to contact local officials if they do not receive
a confirmation of registration within three weeks.  (AP)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: NYT (AMEX) (93%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING (58%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (99%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (99%);

COMPANY: NEW YORK 1 NEWS INC (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%);   NEW YORK, USA (99%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA
(99%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  SCHOOL BUILDINGS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(91%); INFRASTRUCTURE (90%); INSTITUTIONAL CONSTRUCTION (90%); DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

 (90%); CONSTRUCTION (90%); DOMESTIC OFFENSES (90%); EDUCATION ADMINISTRATION
(90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); COUNTIES (89%);

 GAYS & LESBIANS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); DAMAGES (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(88%); INFANTS & TODDLERS (86%); LITIGATION (78%); CHILDREN (78%); COUNTY
GOVERNMENT (78%); APPROVALS (78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (78%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (78%); VICTIMS RIGHTS (75%);

 SHOOTINGS (74%); SUITS & CLAIMS (74%); LAYOFFS (73%); GENDER & SEX
DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (73%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (73%); ARRESTS (73%);
CITIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS (72%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (70%); WRONGFUL DEATH & SURVIVAL (70%); BIRTH INJURIES (70%); JURY
TRIALS (70%); PEDIATRICS (70%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (69%); SUPREME COURTS
(65%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (65%); NEUROLOGICAL DISORDERS & INJURIES (65%);
RESTAURANTS (64%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (73%);

PERSON: IRVING MUNIZ (67%);

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1281 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 16, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Rebel-Held Zone in Colombia Fears End of Truce

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1396 words

DATELINE: LOS POZOS, Colombia, Dec. 14


For many Colombians, Maria Munoz's existence in the heart of rebel-controlled
territory in southern Colombia would be unfathomable.

A shop owner in this sliver of a community surrounded by thick forests and
verdant cattle ranches, Ms. Munoz lives with her family just a few hundreds
yards from the regional headquarters of the leftist rebel group that has battled
the government for 36 years.

Here, in the heart of the 16,000-square-mile zone that Colombia's government
ceded to guerrillas two years ago as a peace gesture, the rebels operate the
courts, press public officials to pave roads, set up roadblocks, and levy
"taxes" against ranchers and cocaine traffickers.

Millions in Colombia angrily see the government's arrangement with the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, known by the Spanish acronym FARC, as a
concession that has produced few tangible benefits.

But Ms. Munoz has grown accustomed, even grateful, for the rebel presence, she
said.

After all, the tradeoff that brought rebel rule has also translated into a
measure of calm for at least one region of a country considered the hemisphere's
most violent, a rugged land where assassinations and robberies that end in
murder are all too commonplace.

"Here, we don't have a war," Ms. Munoz said, as her children scampered in the
street. "You're tranquil here. Your life is safe. We don't have disorder or
thieves, or anyone stealing anything. And if we need help, other people are
there to lend a hand."

But the future of the demilitarized zone, known here as the despeje, or
clearance, is in doubt just a week after President Andres Pastrana agreed to
extend its existence through Jan. 31.

The rebels have refused to return to the peace table, and a growing number of
people in Colombia are clamoring for the president to revoke the FARC's
privileges.

Military officials are talking tough about the possibility of stepping up
Colombia's already brutal conflict, with Gen. Jorge Enrique Mora, commander of
the army, assuring reporters this week that government forces would be prepared
to retake the territory.

"Every day we're coming dangerously close to war," said Omar Garcia, mayor of
San Vicente del Caguan, the largest of the five towns in the demilitarized zone.
"The guerrillas still have their freeze on the talks, and on the other side, the
military is ready to jump in right now."

The developments have left the humble farmers and small merchants of this region
in Caqueta Province bracing for the possibility of an onslaught of violence.
They talk about the arrival of troops, armored vehicles and helicopter gunships.

They also worry about the coming of right-wing paramilitary death squads, which
in Colombia carry out violence against civilians accused of having worked with
the rebels.

Residents say they are hoping that the demilitarized zone will remain in place,
not necessarily because they support the guerrillas, but because they do not
want to return to the frontier-style disorder that plagued the region in the
past.

"I'm scared now," said Albeny Campos, a seamstress who runs a small bodega in
Los Pozos, "because if the despeje is over, imagine the insecurity. We don't
know what will happen. We're going to have nothing but fear until Jan. 31. It's
hard. I'm so afraid. I have two little girls, and I worry about them. What will
we do if a war comes here?"

Yet, while support for the demilitarized zone appears to be widespread,
interviews with ordinary people from Los Pozos to the municipal seat in San
Vicente suggest a persistent unease. People here may have peace, but they have
never been confident that it will last.

And while many go about their everyday lives as if the FARC were not in control,
they know that if a dispute arises between themselves and the armed men in
charge, they will almost certainly be on the losing end. "People don't really
have the chance to make their own decisions," said a San Vicente official. "They
don't have a choice. They just go along with this thing."

Indeed, in whispers, many privately complain about overbearing FARC authority,
from the taxes levied on cattle ranchers and small farmers to rebel involvement
in public works projects. A few will talk of more serious abuses: the forced
recruitment of teenage guerrillas, the harboring of kidnap victims, the
expansion of coca farms throughout the despeje.

In a report issued this month, the private monitoring group Human Rights Watch
linked the FARC to 26 executions in the zone as of this summer, with another 16
people reported missing.

This month, Jose Miguel Vivanco, head of the organization's Americas division,
criticized Mr. Pastrana for extending the zone on Dec. 6 without having put in
place a mechanism to ensure that the rights of residents were respected.

Guillermo Lombano, who manages a cattle ranch, knows all too well about such
abuses. One night in April 1999, he watched as three rebel gunmen kidnapped his
son, a 9-millimeter handgun pressed to the young man's head. Days later, the
guerrilla leadership accused Guillermo Lombano Jr., who was then 16, of being a
member of paramilitary death squads.

Mr. Lombano still believes that his son is alive, but the FARC's usual practice
is to kill paramilitary collaborators.

Alvaro Castelblanco, the government's human rights ombudsman in San Vicente,
said he had repeatedly asked the FARC to respond to complaints about
disappearances and other abuses but had received no response.

The FARC admits to 19 executions inside the demilitarized zone, but it denies
taking advantage of the government's generosity. Rebel leaders contend that they
have made corrupt local governments honest and brought peace to the streets.
Drunken brawls have decreased.

Town officials say homicides, which could number dozens a month in an area with
just 100,000 people, have dropped to a handful for the year. The rebels say they
have also settled disputes of all kinds.

"This is now a normal town, like any in Colombia," said Alicia Ramirez, a rebel
official who this week ran the FARC office in San Vicente, "but here the people
breathe free. Things here are peaceful."

Earlier this week at the FARC's version of the People's Court, a hillside
encampment of several tents overlooking a green valley and towering mountains,
Maria Bolanos complained about her husband to the judge, a rebel in her 20's
dressed in green camouflage.

Ms. Bolanos said he had abandoned her for another woman, taking the car and
leaving her with the bills. The judge promised a resolution within days, and Ms.
Bolanos seemed relieved.

"This is a good thing," she said, as the hearing wound down. "This is the only
place where they'll figure out the problem and then handle the problem
directly."

Indeed, the court is a streamlined affair. Appointments are quickly scheduled.
The hearings take minutes.

For many, the FARC's system of justice is just another sign that the rebels have
imposed their will on a people who have long been accustomed to being left alone
in this rural area far from Colombia's large cities.

But town leaders do not blame just the FARC for their predicament. They say the
government made the decision to hand over San Vicente and four other towns
without considering the repercussions. Now that the future of this territory is
up in the air, town leaders are scrambling to find ways to prod the government
and the rebels to resume talks or, if negotiations fail and conflict returns, to
ensure that civilians are protected.

"We have to push for peace talks, whether there is a demilitarized zone or not,"
said one man, speaking at a recent gathering of town leaders. "We have to do
this because it gives us a future, with some hope."

So far, though, town officials said, letters to President Pastrana have gone
unanswered. There has been no response from the FARC either, with rebel leaders
this week abandoning the retreat at Los Pozos where peace talks have been held.

For those who are closely following developments, the hardening positions of the
two sides has meant increased anxiety as Jan. 31 approaches.

"We just want to be left along, to do our work and get on with our life," said
Carlos Penagos, a community leader from San Vicente. "But the government at any
moment can do away with the despeje, and that wouldn't be taking account of us,
about our safety."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA  REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF
COLOMBIA (92%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA  REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES
OF COLOMBIA (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; LOS POZOS (COLOMBIA);   COLOMBIA (99%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (93%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ASSASSINATION (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%);
FARMERS & RANCHERS (77%); CITY GOVERNMENT (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%);
ARMIES (75%); ROBBERY (74%); BEEF CATTLE FARMING (72%); MURDER (71%); MILITARY
HELICOPTERS (69%); COCAINE (69%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (54%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
CRIME (54%); HELICOPTERS (50%);

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)  MARIA MUNOZ (72%);

LOAD-DATE: December 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A makeshift People's Court, holding session in a tent in the
demilitarized zone that the Colombian government has conceded to the guerrillas
of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia. The zone's future is in doubt.
(Monique Stauder)

Map of Colombia highlighting Los Pozos: Los Pozos is a small village in the
heart of rebel-held territory.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1286 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 19, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Laurels for Clinton, Friend of Ireland

SECTION: Section A; Page 34; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 174 words



To the Editor:

In "A Hero of the Celtic Renaissance" (Op-Ed, Dec. 15), Thomas Lynch describes
Bill Clinton as "the only American president to take the Irish predicament to
heart." His statement begs the question: Why is this so?

First, President Clinton was not blinded by the Anglophilia and "oldest ally"
rhetoric that Britain has used to obscure its violent means and dubious ends in
Ireland. Second, he also had a partner.

Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain was determined to alter the Conservative
Party's record of censorship, scandalous cases of injustice, and human rights
violations that turned six counties on the island of Ireland into an Orwellian
police state.

President Clinton's willingness to examine the situation with an open mind with
a British prime minister who did likewise made the decisions that followed easy,
not difficult: replacing the dementia of destruction with dialogue and the hope
of peace.

JAMES GALLAGHER
National President
Irish American Unity Conference
Washington, Dec. 17, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); IRELAND (91%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); IRELAND (91%); UNITED KINGDOM (90%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); US
PRESIDENTS (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS
(87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); PRIME MINISTERS (69%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (68%); POLITICAL PARTIES (54%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (92%); TONY BLAIR (55%);

LOAD-DATE: December 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1287 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 20, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Tough Sanctions Imposed on Taliban Government Split U.N.

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 955 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 19


Led by the United States and Russia, the Security Council imposed harsh new
sanctions on the Taliban government of Afghanistan today, leaving the United
Nations profoundly split over the human and political damage the measures could
inflict on one of the world's poorest nations.

The vote in the 15-member Council was 13 for the embargo, with China and
Malaysia abstaining.

At a year-end news conference, Secretary General Kofi Annan expressed his barely
concealed displeasure at the move, which was also opposed by his special envoy
trying to start peace negotiations between the Taliban and the remnants of an
opposition army fighting in a corner of the country. United Nations relief
officials working in Afghanistan have been unusually public in their criticism.
Private agencies also lobbied the Council against taking this step. "It is not
going to facilitate our peace efforts, nor is it going to facilitate our
humanitarian work," Mr. Annan said of the Security Council action. "I think we
had given adequate indications of that to the Council. But the decision belongs
to the Council and of course, once they take the decision, we have to adapt and
take the necessary measures that are required."

Today, the United Nations removed all its remaining relief workers from the
country, fearing a backlash from the Taliban, who will be almost completely
isolated diplomatically when the resolution takes effect in 30 days, a grace
period during which the Taliban could avoid sanctions by meeting the Council's
demands. Air links will be cut and an arms and military training embargo will be
imposed only on the Taliban, not their armed opposition, which is supplied by
Russia, Iran and India. All assets belonging to Osama bin Laden, who is thought
to be living in Afghanistan, will be ordered frozen around the world.

The United States has been demanding Mr. bin Laden's expulsion from Afghanistan
to stand trial for masterminding explosions at American Embassies in Kenya and
Tanzania in 1998. The new sanctions imposed today are linked to the refusal of
the Taliban to meet that demand, made in a first round of sanctions a year ago.
For Russia, the Taliban are assumed to be behind an Islamic rebellion in
Chechnya.

Russian and American pressure on Security Council members and some officials in
the United Nations secretariat has been intense, diplomats said. Two weeks ago,
as the sanctions resolution was circulating, the Russian representative
complained to Deputy Secretary General Louise Frechette that the coordinator of
relief work in Afghanistan, Erick de Mul of the Netherlands, was undermining the
anti-Taliban campaign by drawing attention to what he believed would be the
adverse effects of the tightened embargo on ordinary Afghans, already among the
poorest people in the world.

United Nations officials have warned that as many as a million Afghans could
face starvation in coming months because of a drought and continued civil war.

Ambassador Nancy Soderberg, speaking for the United States today, said that the
Security Council was taking "a strong stand against terrorism." She described
Mr. bin Laden as "the world's most wanted terrorist."

"The Taliban cannot continue to flout the will of the international community
and support and shelter terrorists without repercussions," she said in the
Council following the vote. "As long as the Taliban continues to harbor
terrorists, in particular Osama bin Laden, and to promote terrorism, it remains
a threat to international peace and security.

Sergey Lavrov, the Russian ambassador, said that the one-sided nature of the
sanctions was fully justified. "It is the Taliban who has provided their
territory for the use of terrorists and open support for the Chechen, Uzbek,
Tajik, Uighur and other extremists," he said.

Barnett Rubin, director of the Center for International Cooperation at New York
University and an expert on Afghanistan and Central Asia, characterized the
Council resolution today as an expression of Russian and American interests that
bears little relevance to Afghanistan's real problems.

"Certainly there is a legitimate concern about Osama bin Laden and other
training camps," Mr. Rubin said in an interview. "There is a legitimate concern
not only about attacks on United States forces but also about cross-border
attacks by extremist groups into Central Asia -- although most of those attacks
actually come from bases in Tajikistan, which is controlled by the Russian Army.

"But I think we have to ask ourselves," he said, "What is the strategic goal of
international action in Afghanistan, bearing in mind that this is a country that
has had 21 years of war, that has which has the highest rates of infant, child
and maternal mortality, the lowest life expectancy, the lowest literacy rate and
the highest rate of hunger -- tied with Somalia -- in the world.

"Even sanctions that are carefully targeted -- and these are intended to be --
have some negative impact on civilian populations," Mr. Rubin said, "and the
civilian population in Afghanistan does not have a margin for survival."

Human Rights Watch petitioned the Security Council on Friday not to impose a
one-sided arms embargo when both sides in the lingering Afghan civil war are
guilty of abuses. While the letter, signed by Human Rights Watch's executive
director, Kenneth Roth, and its United Nations representative, Joanna Weschler,
accused the Taliban of scorched-earth policies, attacks on ethnic minorities,
particularly the Hazara, and continuing abuses against women.  The letter also
mentioned atrocities committed by the alliance of former mujahedeen armies now
fighting the Taliban in a pocket of northeastern Afghanistan.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); AFGHANISTAN (97%); UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA

 (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); KENYA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);
PAKISTAN (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%);

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL (UN)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (93%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; SECURITY COUNCIL (UN)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (93%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; RUSSIA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (97%); AFGHANISTAN (97%);
UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); KENYA (79%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%);   KABUL,
AFGHANISTAN (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS; ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS; TERRORISM;
FOREIGN AID  UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (93%); TALIBAN (92%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (78%); AL-QAEDA (78%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); TERRORISM (77%); POOR
POPULATION (77%); PEACE PROCESS (76%); ARMIES (76%); CIVIL WAR (75%); DISASTER
RELIEF (74%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (74%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (73%); STARVATION
(73%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (72%); FOOD CHARITIES (70%); MILITARY TRAINING
(70%); ECONOMIC NEWS (59%); FINES & PENALTIES (58%); RELIGION (50%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); BIN LADEN, OSAMA  OSAMA BIN
LADEN (89%);

LOAD-DATE: December 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A United Nations worker waving as she and five international
workers left Kabul for Pakistan yesterday. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1291 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 22, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Foreign Policy Goals

SECTION: Section A; Page 32; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 103 words



To the Editor:

Re "The Bush Foreign Policy Team" (editorial, Dec. 16):

Conventional national security concerns notwithstanding, the new foreign-policy
team needs expertise and conviction to confront the human security challenges of
our time: H.I.V.-AIDS; widening disparities between rich and poor countries and
people; neglect of education, health and livelihood skills for the world's young
people; and human rights violations, including pernicious and endemic violence
and discrimination against women.

ADRIENNE GERMAIN
President
International Women's Health Coalition
New York, Dec. 18, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S APPAREL (57%);   INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH
COALITION (57%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL WOMEN'S HEALTH COALITION (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (92%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); NATIONAL SECURITY (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); WOMEN'S
HEALTH (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (86%); DISCRIMINATION (86%); WOMEN (86%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);

PERSON: GERMAIN, ADRIENNE; BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV)

LOAD-DATE: December 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1307 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 30, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Ginetta Sagan, 75, Who Spent Her Life Fighting Oppression

BYLINE: By WOLFGANG SAXON

SECTION: Section B; Page 9; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 478 words


Ginetta Sagan, a leader of the American branch of Amnesty International who as a
girl fought World War II's injustices in Europe and suffered for it, died last
Friday at her home in Atherton, Calif., between San Francisco and San Jose. She
was 75.

The cause was cancer, said the American organization, which named her honorary
chairwoman in 1994, the year she also received the Presidential Medal of
Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor.

Mrs. Sagan, a native of Milan, was active in Italy's anti-Fascist Resistance in
World War II and survived torture and imprisonment. Denied dignity and freedom
then, she championed prisoners of conscience for the rest of her life.

She came to Washington in the 1960's and helped establish the American division
of Amnesty International. The worldwide group had been founded in London in 1961
to speak for the victims of oppressive regimes. Today Amnesty International has
1.1 million members, 290,000 in the United States.

When she moved to California, Mrs. Sagan formed the group's first outposts in
the western United States.  She served two terms on the national board, and
Amnesty International U.S.A. now gives an annual Ginetta Sagan Award for
outstanding work on behalf of oppressed women and children.

Mrs. Sagan was born Ginetta Moroni, the daughter of doctors who would both work
for the Italian Resistance. By the time she was 17, she was taking clothing and
food coupons to beleaguered Jews.

Her parents were arrested in 1943, and she never saw them again. That year she
became a courier for a clandestine party in northern Italy and helped print and
distribute pamphlets. She was betrayed, and arrested by the Fascist authorities,
who subjected her to 45 days of interrogation and torture.

But there were instances of unexpected kindness, too. A jailer once threw a loaf
of bread into her cell, and inside she found a matchbox and a slip of paper with
a single word: "coraggio" -- courage.

And when members of the Resistance engineered her escape from prison in the
Alpine town of Sondrio, near Lake Como, on April 23, 1945, they were helped by
two German officers.

She then lived in Paris with her godfather, an American banker, and attended the
Sorbonne. By 1951, she was studying child development at the University of
Illinois's Chicago campus, where she met and married Leonard Sagan, a medical
student. Their work and travels took them to Washington, Boston, Japan and
finally the San Francisco Bay Area.

In addition to forming new Amnesty chapters, Mrs. Sagan established the Aurora
Foundation, which documents civil rights abuses in countries with authoritarian
governments.

Dr. Leonard Sagan, a physician, died in 1997. Mrs. Sagan is survived by three
sons: Loring, of San Francisco; Duncan, of Newark, Calif.; and Pico, of London,
as well as six grandchildren.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (92%); ITALY (91%); GERMANY (79%); FRANCE
(52%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); SACHSEN, GERMANY (79%); WEST
USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (73%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%); SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (93%); SAN
JOSE, CA, USA (88%); LONDON, ENGLAND (87%); BOSTON, MA, USA (73%); PARIS, FRANCE

 (52%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (51%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN BANKER (52%); AMERICAN BANKER NEWSLETTERS (52%);   AMNESTY
INTERNATIONAL  (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (94%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); EUROPE (92%); ITALY (91%); GERMANY (79%);
FRANCE (52%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (94%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); SACHSEN, GERMANY
(79%); WEST USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (73%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (94%);

 SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA, CA, USA (93%); SAN JOSE, CA, USA (88%); LONDON, ENGLAND

 (87%); BOSTON, MA, USA (73%); PARIS, FRANCE (52%); CHICAGO, IL, USA (51%);

SUBJECT: DEATHS (OBITUARIES); BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION  DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(99%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WORLD
WAR II (89%); CHILDREN (89%); TORTURE (89%); WOMEN (77%); PRISONS (75%); JAIL
SENTENCING (75%); CORRECTIONS WORKERS (74%); GRANDCHILDREN (73%); CANCER (72%);
MARRIAGE (65%); ARRESTS (64%); CIVIL RIGHTS (50%);   CORRECTIONS (75%);

PERSON: SAGAN, GINETTA; SAXON, WOLFGANG  LEONARD SAGAN (95%); GINETTA MORONI
(75%);

NAME: Ginetta Sagan

LOAD-DATE: August 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1309 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 1, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Celebrating a Milestone for Freedom;
Black Americans Honor Anniversary of Proclamation to End Slavery

BYLINE: By RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1408 words


As people wake up this morning with the future on their minds, having left the
1900's for the 2000's, William Stallings will prepare to look back, 137 years to
be exact.

He will make his way to the Greater Centennial Missionary Baptist Church in
Mount Vernon, N.Y., take his seat among fellow parishioners, bob his head to
African drumming, pull out a piece of paper and scribble notes as speaker after
speaker sermonizes on a five-page yellowed document kept in an air-conditioned
vault in the National Archives in Washington.

It is the Emancipation Proclamation, and Mr. Stallings and thousands of other
black Americans will honor it as they have done virtually every year since it
took effect on Jan. 1, 1863, declaring slaves in the South free -- if only
symbolically -- and heightening momentum for the abolition of slavery two years
later through the 13th Amendment.

It was the first time the federal government officially took action to end
slavery. And for African-Americans across the country, especially those with
roots in the South and memories of civil rights struggles, the anniversary of
the proclamation gives New Year's Day, even this one that transcends hyperbole,
a grander purpose.

"As an African-American, that was the document that gave us our freedom," said
Mr. Stallings, 55, a social services case examiner who lives in Yonkers. "It was
the greatest turning point in history in this country."

The tradition, which began several years ago at the church, has grown
substantially, from a couple of hundred to several hundred, just as interest in
slavery and the Civil War is surging with a proliferation of books and
television programs.

The commemorations, commonly called Emancipation Day or Jubilee Day, are usually
organized by churches, which have long been the spiritual and social nexuses of
black communities, often in conjunction with local chapters of the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People.

Among the largest is one at the Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, where the
Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. preached. The N.A.A.C.P. chapter in
Williamsbridge, the Bronx, will sponsor a more modest commemoration, with an
expected turnout of 200 people, at the Refuge Temple, 716 East 233rd Street.

"They represent the real Fourth of July or Independence Day for
African-Americans," said Nelson B. Rivers III, the director of local chapters at
the rights group's national headquarters. "The first one, July 4, 1776, did not
apply to us."

Historians cast the commemorations in the context of a constant yearning among
black Americans for a special day to recognize and reflect on the past. The
federal holiday honoring Dr. King, first celebrated on Jan. 20, 1986, satisfied
that thirst to an extent, but emancipation celebrations, which take place on
various dates of the calendar, reflect a desire for an expressly
African-American holiday.

Popular dates include Sept. 22, when President Lincoln issued a preliminary
proclamation that served 100 days' notice of the actual signing. Others have
adopted Juneteenth, a Texas state holiday celebrated on June 19 in honor of the
day in 1865 when, it is said, slaves there finally received news of the
proclamation.

But the Jan. 1 celebrations are the most widespread, and are particularly
popular in the South, said William H. Wiggins Jr., a professor at Indiana
University who wrote a book on freedom celebrations, "O Freedom! Afro-American
Emancipation Celebrations" (The University of Tennessee Press, 1987).

"This is the granddaddy of them all," he said.

As they do now, churches played a role on Jan. 1, 1863, in recognizing the
importance of the event, he said. The text of the proclamation sped across
telegraph wires in the evening, after Lincoln had signed it with a trembling
hand, and reached a church in Boston where Frederick Douglass waited among a
crowd of people gathered for "emancipation watch" services. He immediately read
the proclamation and pandemonium ensued, according to the historian John Hope
Franklin.

Since then, Dr. Wiggins said, the reading of the proclamation, often in a
dramatic and emotional cadence, has been a central part of the celebrations,
which took hold especially in the Southeast, where slavery was most entrenched.
Black Southerners who moved North after the war and in the middle of the 1900's
carried the tradition with them.

The historical nuances of Lincoln's act are sometimes lost, Dr. Wiggins said.
The emancipation did not immediately free a single slave. It applied only to
slaves in rebellious states and exempted parts of the Confederacy that had come
under Northern control.

Although historians say Lincoln personally opposed slavery, they often note his
political and military motives in issuing the proclamation, which was made as
the Union was suffering losses and was looking for a way to bolster its cause
and crush Southern morale.

By attacking the institution considered a bedrock of the Confederacy, the
proclamation made the war seem less like a rebellion and more like a war of
liberation. It opened the way for black men to serve in the Union Army and Navy,
and by the end of war, nearly 200,000 had served under the Union flag.

And so New Year's Day for the likes of the Rev. Freddie Brunswick of the tiny
Salem Missionary Baptist Church in Springfield Gardens, Queens, means a time to
pause and reflect on such events and their resonance.

A choir will sing Negro spirituals. A young member of the congregation of 150
worshipers will read the proclamation. Mr. Brunswick will make a speech.

"When we lose the past, we are subject to make the same mistakes again," his
speech will pronounce.

As it has for dozens of years, the Brooklyn Baptist ministers' conference will
hold a commemoration at one of its member churches, the Brownsville Community
Baptist Church.

A few days before, the Rev. Dr. Charles H. Ancrum of Timothy Baptist Church in
Bushwick, who is president of the conference, reflected on the importance of the
proclamation.

"Politically we have not arrived," Dr. Ancrum said. "We have Congress people,
but in comparison to whites, we are still underrepresented. We have not arrived
in terms of equality of education and economically. In almost every area we are
underrepresented."

Like others involved in the commemorations, he said he had observed a growth in
attendance, fed by people's desire to reconnect with their past or to reaffirm
it. But others are troubled that as with Sunday services, the commemorations
still do not draw large numbers of young people.

That bodes ill for the future of marking such historical occasions, said the
Rev. Dr. Elliott Cuff of Mount Ararat Missionary Baptist Church in Ocean
Hill-Brownsville, who plans to attend the service of the ministers' conference.

"A lot of 'race days' have fallen on hard times in postmodernity," Dr. Cuff
said. "King's birthday, as we move into the next millennium, will probably go
the way of the rest of the holidays, a day to rest and shop. That's unfortunate.
I think it is vitally important because these are marks in the sand for what
made America what it is today."

Such sentiments drew Rodney Olden to the Greater Centennial service in Mount
Vernon a decade ago.

He found it an ideal way to make his children, now in their 20's and 30's and on
their own, more aware of the civil rights struggle.

"We wanted to keep track of our heritage," Mr. Olden said.

Mr. Stallings, too, sees the service as a way to connect with history,
especially his days as a college student in the early 1960's at the all-black
Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. He takes notes at the service to later reflect on
what was said and how it relates to history.

"I marched with Dr. King in South Carolina and Charleston and participated in at
least 50 marches during the summer of 1962 and '63," Mr. Stallings said. "I
remember sitting on the back of a bus and things we could not do."

Today, he said, he need only look at Mount Vernon to find reminders of the
continuing struggle for equity.

"We have a dichotomy going on," he said. "On the northern side, people are doing
well, we have the movers and shakers in the community with their corporate jobs
and jobs in the government. And then we have the masses on the other side, who
have menial or average jobs and have difficulty making ends meet. We have those
kinds of dichotomies, and we have to find a way to deal with it."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (79%);

CITY: ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: MOUNT VERNON NEON (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   GEORGIA, USA (79%);   ATLANTA, GA, USA (79%);



SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ANNIVERSARIES (91%); AFRICAN
AMERICANS (91%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (90%); SLAVERY (90%); HOLIDAYS &
OBSERVANCES (89%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY (89%); RACE & RACISM (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(88%); HISTORY (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); RELIGION (72%); ARCHIVE
COLLECTIONS (70%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(67%);

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (79%);

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: When President Lincoln signed the Emancipation Proclamation on
Jan. 1, 1863, the Union was trying to find a way to bolster its cause and crush
Southern morale. (Archive Photos); The Rev. Dr. Elliott Cuff, left, worries
about the neglect of black history. The Rev. Dr. Charles H. Ancrum, center,
leads the Brooklyn Baptist ministers' conference, which is honoring the
Emancipation Proclamation. With them at Bethany Baptist Church in Brooklyn is
the Rev. Dr. F. D. Waddell. (Michelle V. Agins/The New York Times)(pg. B4);
Copy of the Emancipation Proclamation -- Whereas on the twenty-second day of
September, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight hundred and sixty-two, a
proclamation was issued by the President of the United States, containing, among
other things, to wit: "That on the first day of January, in the year of our Lord
one thousand eight hundred and sixty-three, all persons held as slaves within
any state or designated part of a state, the people whereof shall then be in
rebellion against the United States, shall be then, thenceforward, forever
free..." (pg. B1)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1316 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 3, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Kosovo Inquiry Confirms U.S. Fears of War Crimes Court

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1092 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 2


Eighteen months ago the Pentagon strongly opposed a plan to create a permanent
international criminal tribunal, fearing that a strong and independent court
would expose American troops sent overseas to prosecution outside the American
judicial system.

Now, as a result of NATO's air war against the Serbs last spring, members of the
American military have already undergone the scrutiny of just such a court: the
International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia. Experts on
international law say that may create political and legal precedents for
requiring Americans to submit to international judicial review.

"The future the United States government feared is here sooner than it
expected," said Diane F. Orentlicher, the director of the War Crimes Research
Office at American University's Washington College of Law.

"The United States has been almost obsessively afraid of how an international
criminal court will act with regard to American soldiers," she added, "and now
it turns out by this unforeseen turn of history that the international tribunal
for Yugoslavia has that jurisdiction."

Officials of the tribunal, in The Hague, completed an internal report in late
December that was a legal analysis of the possibility that the NATO allies had
committed war crimes during their 78-day campaign against Yugoslavia.

Tribunal and administration officials said there was virtually no possibility
that charges would be brought against American or NATO personnel. The tribunal's
chief prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte, went to lengths to emphasize in a statement
on Thursday that there was "no formal inquiry into the actions of NATO during
the conflict in Kosovo."

But neither White House nor Pentagon officials disputed the tribunal's legal
authority to review American and allied involvement in the fighting. A State
Department official said there was no question that the tribunal had such
authority.

The tribunal was created by the United Nations Security Council in 1993 to
prosecute those accused of war crimes in the conflicts spawned by the breakup of
Yugoslavia, during which four of its six republics seceded.

When Slobodan Milosevic, the president of what remains of Yugoslavia, ordered
police and military forces to crush rebels operating in the largely
Albanian-inhabited province of Kosovo in southern Serbia in 1998, that conflict
fell under the court's jurisdiction too. It led to Mr. Milosevic's indictment on
war crimes charges last May.

The United States has strongly supported the tribunal and its work, but the idea
of subordinating American sovereignty to any international legal body remains
one that some Americans find objectionable. That has been an issue especially,
though not exclusively, among conservatives in Congress.

When delegates from more than 160 countries gathered in Rome in July 1998 to
negotiate the creation of a permanent international criminal court, the Clinton
administration strongly advocated limiting the court's authority and
independence to protect American sovereignty.

With the Pentagon leading the way, the administration contended that American
soldiers could be subject to frivolous or politically motivated prosecutions in
such a court. American negotiators demanded provisions in the court's charter
that would, in essence, give the United States veto power over any prosecution
through its seat on the Security Council.

Many countries, including strong allies like Germany, countered that the
American provisions would undermine the court, and delegates rejected them.

Since then, 92 countries have signed the treaty creating the court and 6 have
ratified it. When 60 countries have ratified the treaty, the court will come
into being, possibly within two or three years.

Technically, NATO's short-lived air strikes in the waning months of the war in
Bosnia in 1995 also fell under the Hague tribunal's purview, but those strikes
were much more limited and the issue never came up. But NATO's air war last year
included strikes across Serbia and Montenegro, Yugoslavia's two republics.

Kenneth Roth, the executive director of Human Rights Watch, an advocacy group in
New York that has worked extensively on war crimes issues, said NATO's more
recent campaign merited legal scrutiny.

He cited the use of cluster bombs, the decision to strike electrical grids and
other targets with civilian uses and the decision to have planes fly at high
altitudes, which reduced the risk to pilots but increased the chances of
accidental bombings.

"Unlike the rest of the world, the Pentagon cannot accept the idea that its
conduct would be scrutinized by an international tribunal," he said.

The tribunal's review began in August after members of the Russian Parliament
and legal experts met with Ms. Del Ponte's predecessor, Louise Arbour, and urged
an investigation of NATO's role. The review summarized their charges and the
legal issues surrounding them, but stopped far short of endorsing an
investigation, officials said.

Even so, the White House responded sharply. "NATO undertook extraordinary
efforts to restrict collateral damage," said a spokesman, James R. Fallin. "Any
inquiry into the conduct of its pilots would be completely unjustified."

Ms. Orentlicher of American University and other experts said the tacit American
acceptance of the Hague tribunal's jurisdiction over American actions in the
struggle over Kosovo would make it harder for the United States to dispute the
new court's authority in future conflicts.

The State Department official said only "a limited precedent" would be set,
since the new court would be a different legal entity, created by treaty rather
than a Security Council resolution supported by the United States.

The political precedent could be greater. William L. Nash, a retired Army major
general who oversaw the American peacekeepers in Bosnia in 1995 and 1996, said
the tribunal was showing that it was fair-minded enough not to rule out
investigations of NATO but also that it would not rush to prosecute NATO to make
a statement.

"The critics of the court may see this is not all bad," said Mr. Nash, now the
director of civilian-military programs at the National Democratic Institute for
International Affairs in Washington.

The Pentagon would not discuss questions of whether any precedent was being set,
but a Defense Department official said the Pentagon remained adamantly opposed
to any external jurisdiction over the American military, regardless of the
tribunal's jurisdiction in this case.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(93%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (94%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (85%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION
(59%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE FORMER YUGOSLAVIA
(57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
TRIBUNAL  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (85%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR THE
FORMER YUGOSLAVIA (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   UNITED STATES (99%); SERBIA (97%); KOSOVO

 (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); NETHERLANDS (79%); ALBANIA (79%);   DISTRICT
OF COLUMBIA, USA (94%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND
DEFENSE; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (94%); WAR
CRIMES (93%); ARMED FORCES (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL
LAW (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); SEPARATISM &
SECESSION (89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); JURISDICTION
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); JUDICIAL REVIEW (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); LAW SCHOOLS (76%); US
PRESIDENTS (75%); CONSERVATISM (70%);

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE; CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (61%);

LOAD-DATE: January 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1330 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 7, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Silence on Pinochet

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 4; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

Re "Pinochet Case Reviving Voices of the Tortured" (front page, Jan. 3):

The arrest of Gen. Augusto Pinochet in 1998 has led to increased openness and
healing in Chile while contributing to the consolidation of Chilean democracy.

Unfortunately, the American government has remained silent on this case,
asserting that it must balance the pursuit of accountability and justice with
the possible harm the case might do to Chile's democratic transition.

Our government cannot remain neutral about whether a former dictator responsible
for the death or disappearance of more than 3,000 people and the torture of
40,000 should stand trial, a luxury that General Pinochet's victims never
enjoyed.

The globalization of justice for human rights violators as illustrated by the
Pinochet case should be celebrated as a landmark achievement.

STACIE JONAS
Washington, Jan. 3, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHILE (94%); UNITED STATES (91%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TORTURE
(90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
GLOBALIZATION (66%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (51%);

PERSON: AUGUSTO PINOCHET (94%);

LOAD-DATE: January 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1336 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 9, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Military Terrorism Operation Has a Civilian Focus

BYLINE: By ELIZABETH BECKER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 16; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1078 words

DATELINE: NORFOLK, Va.


One year ago, Brig. Gen. Bruce M. Lawlor was a small-town Vermont lawyer whose
duties in the national guard included hauling water to livestock during summer
droughts and rescuing farmers in winter ice storms.

Last month, General Lawlor became the first commander of a sensitive new
military operation that would respond if the United States were struck by a
chemical, germ or nuclear attack.

General Lawlor, a one-star Army general who had never served on active duty
until last year, was given a position just two links removed from President
Clinton in the chain of command precisely because of his homespun background.

"He can talk to civilians," said John J. Hamre, the deputy secretary of defense.

General Lawlor's three-story barracks-style headquarters is here, his budget is
a modest $4 million and his staff of 28 experts could be the vanguard of a much
larger operation.

Originally, the Pentagon contemplated creating a commander in chief for the
defense of the United States -- a "homeland defense command," in military
shorthand. Civil rights groups of all political persuasions knocked down that
idea out of fear that it would open the door to an increase in the military's
influence inside the country.

"We probably were premature," Secretary of Defense William S. Cohen said in an
interview.

General Lawlor's scaled-down command is known by a less evocative phrase: Joint
Task Force Civil Support.

When the Pentagon's senior military and civilian leaders first broached the idea
with President Clinton, they said the military was the only institution that
could aid citizens after an attack by nuclear, chemical or germ weapons or a
large conventional explosion like the attack on the Oklahoma City federal
building. That was long before the recent spate of warnings that terrorist might
attack in the United States during Year 2000 celebrations, a threat that seemed
especially significant with the recent arrests of Algerian expatriates charged
with planning a bombing.

In the event of an attack, all of the military's resources -- from helicopters
and cargo planes to fleets of trucks -- could be used to haul emergency supplies
to devastated cities, but always under the authority of civilians.

Working with civilian agencies, the military would set up whatever was needed,
whether hospitals or decontamination units. Above all, the military would bring
order to the expected chaos and panic that would follow a terrorist attack.

"We posed it as an idea," Mr. Cohen said. "Who are you going to turn to when
there is a catastrophic event?"

Despite the fears of civil libertarians, the idea has not been abandoned, and
General Lawlor's command has been given the mission.

Because President Clinton shares the military's conviction that terrorists and
countries like Libya and North Korea pose the greatest threats to the United
States today, he was intrigued with the homeland defense idea. For several
years, the Pentagon has planned for terrorist attacks overseas by requiring
specific military units to take vaccinations against anthrax, considered the
most likely biological weapon to be used by terrorists against American troops.

General Lawlor's mission is to broaden those preparations to care for civilians
throughout the United States.

"We're taking a war-fighting force and focusing it on public safety," General
Lawlor said. "We don't do law enforcement, or arrests. We will save lives,
prevent human suffering and restore as fast as possible critical life support
systems in the community."

But this command is more than a miniature military version of the Red Cross. It
is nestled in the enormous Joint Forces Command, formerly known as the Atlantic
Command, which supervises more than half of the nation's armed forces. Through
his immediate supervisor, Adm. Harold W. Gehman Jr., the commander in chief
here, General Lawlor will be able to call on nearly all of the military units
based in the United States.

In the meantime, he and his staff are putting together what amounts to the
Pentagon's first detailed preparation for how to work with the major civilian
agencies to respond to a chemical, biological or nuclear attack.

No such plan was in place in 1993 when the World Trade Center in New York was
bombed with a weapon that had been laced with cyanide. It was meant to explode
like a chemical weapon and kill thousands, but the cyanide burned up in the
detonation, said military officials who cite that attack as one reason the
Pentagon set up this command.

Since the bombing, New York and 119 other cities have become part of a Pentagon
program that teaches the chiefs of local services like the fire and police
departments how to react to an attack.

In all likelihood, city and state officials would take little time asking the
president for help, especially if terrorists use nuclear weapons. Then, at the
president's direction, the Joint Task Force Civil Support would jump into
action.

The command's job now is to plan for the unexpected.

Military officers working with scientists and civilian experts will make
computer simulations of various attacks, figure out what will be needed and,
with the approval of civilian agencies, write their playbooks.

In turn, the command will test the plans in exercises involving the military,
the national guards, the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and others, sometimes including top administration and
Congressional officials.

That kind of coordination was part of General Lawlor's life in the guard, which
is at the governor's disposal. A native of Bellow Falls, Vt., he was recruited
by the Central Intelligence Agency while a student at George Washington
University and became an intelligence officer in Vietnam during the war, working
with the South Vietnamese civilian police. Later he was offered a commission
with naval intelligence and joined the national guard when he returned home to
Vermont.

As a lawyer for more than 20 years, and a former member of the Vermont
Legislature, General Lawlor said he was especially sensitive to charges that his
command could violate the Posse Comitatus Act, which prohibits the military from
performing police duties in the United States.

General Lawlor said part of his role was to ensure that the public understood
that his command would always be under the control of a civilian agency and that
the military had no intention of expanding its powers.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);

STATE: OKLAHOMA, USA (79%);

CITY: OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%); KOREA, DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF (79%);
   OKLAHOMA, USA (79%);   OKLAHOMA CITY, OK, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%); DROUGHT
(90%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); ENVIRONMENTAL ACCIDENTS & DISASTERS (89%); ARMIES
(78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); NATURAL DISASTERS (77%); BOMBINGS (77%); INTERVIEWS
(77%); CHEMICAL & BIOLOGICAL WEAPONS (77%); NUCLEAR WEAPONS (77%); NATIONAL
SECURITY (73%); CIVIL RIGHTS (67%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); PASSENGER
& CARGO AIRCRAFT (57%); HELICOPTERS (50%);   SEVERE SUMMER WEATHER (89%); SEVERE
WINTER WEATHER (77%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (88%);

LOAD-DATE: January 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Brig. Gen. Bruce M. Lawlor leads an operation that would respond
in the event of a germ or nuclear attack. (Shana Raab for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1344 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

CAMPAIGN 2000: THE CONFEDERATE FLAG;
McCain Effort to Straddle Sensitive Southern Issue Leaves Position Unclear

BYLINE: By DAVID FIRESTONE

SECTION: Section A; Page 20; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 1377 words


Over the last three days, Senator John McCain has made three conflicting
statements on the Confederate battle flag issue raging in the key primary state
of South Carolina, and with each statement, his position has become less clear.

On Sunday, speaking on the CBS News program "Face the Nation," Mr. McCain said
he considered the battle flag "offensive" and a "symbol of racism and slavery."

The next day, in a statement distributed to South Carolina reporters, Mr. McCain
reversed himself and called the flag "a symbol of heritage," using the precise
language that white Republicans have used in the state to justify keeping the
flag flying over the statehouse. Aides said he had misspoken in the television
interview.

Then last night, in an interview in New Hampshire, Mr. McCain reversed himself
again, saying that if he said he sees the flag a symbol of heritage, he
misspoke.

"My forfathers fought under the Confederate flag," Mr. McCain said. "I believe
that they believed their service was honorable."

But the statement calling the flag a symbol of heritage has been on his campaign
Web site for two days, and was distributed as a news release by his staff. His
top South Carolina strategist, Richard M. Quinn, said earlier in the day that
Mr. McCain had called the flag a symbol of heritage "at least 150 times in the
past."

But while the phrase "symbol of heritage" may sound innocuous outside the South,
its meaning is unmistakable in a region where conflicting interpretations of the
Civil War are often as important as any contemporary political issue. Saying the
flag is a symbol of heritage rather than a reminder of racism, is an argument
made by those who say the war was not fought over slavery, but over state's
rights.

Although Mr. McCain, like the other major Republican candidates, has declined to
take a position on the specific issue of whether the flag should fly over the
South Carolina statehouse, his characterization of the flag's symbolism makes
him the only major presidential contender to empathize with the flag's
supporters.

"When whites say heritage in the South, they are generally referring to a
heritage in which black people are excluded," said Bernard Powers, a professor
of history at the College of Charleston. "In the best possible light, the
senator is just trying to be political, but I fear that he is uninformed about a
critically important element of American history and its legacy for contemporary
times."

The flag issue is enormously volatile in South Carolina, which is holding a
Republican presidential primary on Feb. 19 that is crucial to Mr. McCain's hopes
for the nomination. The N.A.A.C.P. has declared an economic boycott against the
state as long as the flag flies over the capitol, but Republicans in the state
House of Representatives have blocked any attempt to move it.

In declaring the flag a symbol of heritage, Mr. McCain, an Arizonan, has taken a
more conservative position than his chief rival for the Republican nomination,
Gov. George W. Bush of Texas or any other major candidate. When he is asked
about the flag issue in South Carolina, Mr. Bush has repeatedly said the matter
was for South Carolinians to decide. On Monday night, he told MSNBC in an
interview that he would not fly the Confederate flag over the Texas statehouse
"because of the symbolism."

But Mr. McCain has much closer ties to the leaders of the pro-flag movement. One
of the most prominent members of the so-called Heritage Movement in the state,
who has helped organize the campaign to keep the flag flying, is Mr. Quinn.

Mr. Quinn, the editor in chief of the neo-Confederate magazine Southern
Partisan, is the father of state Representative Rick Quinn, the majority leader,
who has said the flag will not be lowered as long as the N.A.A.C.P. boycott is
in effect.

The elder Mr. Quinn said yesterday that he had not pushed Mr. McCain to support
the flag. But the emotions sweeping the state are intense and may explain why
Mr. McCain felt the need to issue a formal statement.

Although the business community is lobbying hard to remove the flag, most of the
Republicans in the legislature -- who represent white disnecessary to win the
primary -- are fervently in favor of the flag.

Mr. McCain's written statement, which also appeared on his Web site, was his
first on the subject, and was issued quickly after he seemed to suggest on
Sunday that he found the flag offensive.

"The Confederate flag is offensive in many, many ways, as we all know," he said
on the CBS program "Face the Nation" on Sunday. "It's a symbol of racism and
slavery. But I also understand how others do not view it in that fashion. My
forbears from Mississippi fought under the Confederate flag. They were not slave
owners, and I'm sure they considered their service -- one I believe died in
Shiloh -- was honorable. So, I obviously understand why many Americans find it
offensive."

A day later, he issued a statement apparently intended to correct the impression
that he finds the flag offensive, and it was that most recent statement that
appears to align him with the flag supporters.

"As to how I view the flag, I understand both sides," he said in the statement.
"Some view it as a symbol of slavery; others view it as a symbol of heritage.
Personally, I see the battle flag as a symbol of heritage."

But when asked last night why he said he saw the flag as a symbol of heritage,
Mr. McCain said, "If I said it, I misspoke."

He added, "My forefathers fought under that flag. I know that they thought their
service was honorable."

John Weaver, Mr. McCain's political director, said last night that Mr. McCain
had used the phrase many times but was referring to his relatives' service in
the Confederate army. "He's talking about the heritage of his family," Mr.
Weaver said. "That's different from heritage that some may see it as -- a sign
of segregation or political issues."

Mr. Quinn said in an interview yesterday that Mr. McCain had misspoken on Sunday
by not saying the flag was offensive "to some people." He added that Mr. McCain
has often said in the past that he considers the flag a symbol of heritage, but
had never issued a formal, written statement of his position before. Several
political reporters in South Carolina confirmed that they had heard Mr. McCain
describe the flag as a symbol of heritage over the past year.

Mr. Bush has several pro-flag supporters in his camp, as well, including Charlie
Condon, the state attorney general, co-chairman of Mr. Bush's South Carolina
campaign. But none are as well known for their ideology as is Mr. Quinn, whose
quarterly magazine has become a leading journal of the notion that the Civil War
was not fought over slavery.

A recent issue, the cover of which shows a man reading an Uncle Remus book to
his grandchildren, contains a list of the 15 best Southern books of all time.
Though the list includes Faulkner, Robert Penn Warren and Margaret Mitchell,
most are apologias for the Southern cause, and none is by a black writer.

"The magazine takes the view that the flag should be regarded as a symbol of
heritage, rather than slavery," said Mr. Quinn, who was the Rev. Pat Robertson's
media adviser in 1988. "Many Southerners believe that there are positive aspects
to Southern history, without having to link everything to slavery. Taking down
the flag or hiding it or treating it in a dishonorable way turns the banner over
to the racists on both sides. It helps define the flag as something ugly and
evil rather than something that memorializes the heroism of these young men who
fell for the South, most of whom were not slaveowners."

But the word "heritage" means something different to South Carolina's blacks,
most of whom do not vote in the Republican primary.

"It's a word kind of like 'choice' or 'life' in abortion, a code word to mean
certain things that people don't want to come right out and say," said Dr.
Lonnie Randolph Jr., president of the Columbia branch of the N.A.A.C.P., who
oversees the group's economic sanctions against the state. "Of course the flag
has to do with heritage, but it's a heritage of white supremacy and racism. Too
many people are in denial about what the heritage really is."

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: CBS (NYSE) (90%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS515120 TELEVISION BROADCASTING  (90%); SIC4833 TELEVISION
BROADCASTING STATIONS (90%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (96%);

CITY: COLUMBIA, SC, USA (79%);

COMPANY: ACP (BELGIUM) (50%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH CAROLINA;   UNITED STATES (96%);   SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (96%);
   COLUMBIA, SC, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA; BLACKS; ELECTION ISSUES; PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION OF 2000; CIVIL WAR (US) (1861-65)  CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%);
INTERVIEWS (90%); US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES
(90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (89%); CIVIL WAR (89%); HISTORY (89%); PLATFORMS &
ISSUES (89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (89%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (89%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%); ELECTIONS (78%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (78%); RACE
& RACISM (76%); BOYCOTTS (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (50%);   RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (76%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (85%);

PERSON: FIRESTONE, DAVID; MCCAIN, JOHN S (SEN)  JOHN MCCAIN (93%);

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1345 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               January 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Supreme Court Shields States From Lawsuits on Age Bias

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1305 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Jan. 11


Continuing its march in the direction of states' rights, the Supreme Court ruled
today that Congress lacked the authority to bind state governments to the
federal law that bars discrimination against older workers.

The national policy against age discrimination in employment could not overcome
the states' sovereign immunity from suit in federal court, the 5-to-4 majority
said in the first of five federalism rulings the court is due to hand down
during its current term.

The vote was the same as in a series of rebuffs the court has dealt Congress
over the past five years on issues ranging from the regulation of gun possession
near schools to the right of state employees to sue for overtime and of
patent-holders to sue states for patent infringement.

The difference this time was a notable hardening of tone, with both the majority
and dissenting opinions conveying the impression that the two sides, wedded to
sharply opposing views of the authentic nature of the federal system, had little
left to say to one another across one of the great divides in the court's recent
history.

The dissenters, led by Justice John Paul Stevens, accused the majority of
substituting its own will for that of Congress and of displaying "the kind of
judicial activism" that "represents such a radical departure from the proper
role of this court that it should be opposed whenever the opportunity arises."

Justice Sandra Day O'Connor responded for the majority that the dissenters'
refusal to accept the court's recent rulings "makes it difficult to engage in
additional meaningful debate on the place of state sovereign immunity in the
Constitution."

The others in the majority were Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices
Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas. Justices David H.
Souter, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen G. Breyer joined the dissent.

Justice O'Connor announced the decision this morning just before the court
turned to hearing arguments in another of the term's federalism cases, the
government's effort to defend a central provision of the Violence Against Women
Act as a proper exercise of Congressional authority. The provision at issue,
authorizing victims of violence motivated by gender to sue their attackers for
damages in federal court, met with considerable skepticism from the justices who
formed the majority in today's ruling.

Congress passed the Age Discrimination in Employment Act in 1967 and extended it
to state governments in 1974. The law protects employees against discrimination
on the basis of age beginning at age 40 and authorizes suits for damages in
federal court.

While all states offer their employees some form of state-court redress for age
discrimination, the remedies vary and in many cases are not as useful as the
federal law, which provides for reimbursement of attorneys' fees and for double
damages in cases of willful violations.

In New York, employees may sue the state, but only in the Court of Claims, which
does not have jury trials; attorneys' fees are not reimbursed, and there are no
double damages. New Jersey state employees can take their complaints to the
state Department of Labor, which may order reimbursement for lost pay.
Connecticut employees have redress in the state's Commission on Human Rights and
Opportunities.

The decision today, affirming a 1998 ruling by the federal appeals court in
Atlanta, came in a consolidated appeal on behalf of a group of faculty members
and librarians employed by state universities in Alabama and Florida. The
Clinton administration joined the appeal to defend the constitutionality of the
law as applied to the state employers.

The decision, Kimel v. Florida Board of Regents, No. 98-791, came against a
background of several recent rulings interpreting the 11th Amendment, which
provides states with immunity from suit in federal court, and circumscribing the
ability of Congress to overcome the states' immunity. In a 1996 ruling, Seminole
Tribe v. Florida, the court held that Congress could not breach state immunity
in the exercise of its authority to regulate interstate commerce.

That left only one route for Congress: section 5 of the 14th Amendment, under
which Congress may act through "appropriate legislation" to carry out the
amendment's guarantees of due process and equal protection. On this basis, the
administration defended the application of the Age Discrimination in Employment
Act to the states, and on this basis the court's majority rejected it.

The law "is not 'appropriate legislation' under Section 5 of the 14th
Amendment," Justice O'Connor said, because age discrimination itself was not
inherently unconstitutional and because the law imposed requirements that "are
disproportional to any unconstitutional conduct that conceivably could be
targeted by the Act." The extension of the law to the states "was an unwarranted
response to a perhaps inconsequential problem," she said.

Justice O'Connor noted that over the last 25 years the court has rejected
constitutional challenges to mandatory retirement ages for various groups of
public employees. The lesson of these cases was that states were free to make
distinctions on the basis of age as long as the policy was rational, she said,
adding that there was no constitutional requirement that states "match age
distinctions and the legitimate interests they serve with razor-like precision."

"Under the 14th Amendment, a state may rely on age as a proxy for other
qualities, abilities, or characteristics that are relevant to the state's
legitimate interests," Justice O'Connor continued. Drawing a distinction between
age discrimination and discrimination on the basis of race or sex, she said that
old age "does not define a discrete and insular minority because all persons, if
they live out their normal life spans, will experience it."

This distinction raised the question of the fate of provisions in other federal
laws that bar states from other forms of discrimination against their employees,
such as the Americans with Disabilities Act or the Equal Pay Act's prohibition
against sex discrimination in the workplace.

Cases questioning whether these laws can be applied to the states as employers
have been appealed to the Supreme Court, and the justices may announce within a
week whether they will hear any of them. Justice O'Connor's opinion today left
open the possibility that other federal antidiscrimination laws might still
apply to the states as employers.

However, the majority opinion also made clear that to sustain such an
application, the court would have to be persuaded that Congress had acted not
only in response to discrimination in general, but to proof of a widespread
pattern of discrimination by the states themselves. There was no such evidence
of age discrimination by the states, Justice O'Connor said.

It was this part of the opinion, as much as anything else, that appeared to
provoke the dissenters' anger. Justice Stevens accused the majority of relying
on its own legislative judgments and of ignoring "the importance of respecting
the framers' decision to assign the business of lawmaking to the Congress."
Justice Stevens said the court should recognize that the Constitution itself
adequately protects state interests against federal intrusion by giving each
state equal representation in the Senate and by apportioning the House of
Representatives along state lines.

The American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees issued a
statement denouncing today's decision. "We emphatically disagree that Congress
has overstepped its powers in extending to public employees the same legal
protections as private employees," said Gerald W. McEntee, the federation's
president. "Public employees are not second-class citizens."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

COMPANY: SUPREME COURT (US)

ORGANIZATION: SUPREME COURT (US)

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES;   UNITED STATES (92%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: STATES (US); GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; AGE,
CHRONOLOGICAL; LABOR; OLDER WORKERS; LAW AND LEGISLATION; CONSTITUTIONS; LAW AND
LEGISLATION; DISCRIMINATION  SUPREME COURTS (92%); AGE DISCRIMINATION (92%);
LITIGATION (92%); AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (94%); LEGISLATION (90%);
DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS
(90%); IMMUNITY (90%); OLDER WORKERS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); REGIONAL &
LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (89%);
EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (89%); ELDER LAW (89%); VERDICTS (78%); COSTS &
ATTORNEY FEES (78%); PATENT INFRINGEMENT (78%); PUBLIC POLICY (78%); CIVIL
SERVICES (78%); WAGE VIOLATIONS (78%); INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY LAW (78%); DAMAGES
(77%); LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (77%); LAWYERS (75%); PATENTS (69%);
DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, LINDA; STEVENS, JOHN PAUL (ASSOC JUSTICE); O'CONNOR, SANDRA
DAY (ASSOC JUSTICE); REHNQUIST, WILLIAM H (CHIEF JUSTICE); SCALIA, ANTONIN
(ASSOC JUSTICE); KENNEDY, ANTHONY M (ASSOC JUSTICE); THOMAS, CLARENCE (ASSOC
JUSTICE)  ANTONIN SCALIA (89%); JOHN PAUL STEVENS (73%); CLARENCE THOMAS (58%);
DAVID SOUTER (58%); STEPHEN BREYER (58%); ANTHONY KENNEDY (58%); RUTH BADER
GINSBURG (58%);

LOAD-DATE: January 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1349 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 14, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Republicans and the Confederate Flag

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 421 words


Both leading Republican candidates for president, Senator John McCain and Gov.
George W. Bush, are being too clever by half in the perennially inflammatory
debate over the Confederate battle flag in South Carolina. By declining to take
a principled stand in this key primary state, the candidates are pandering to
bias and perpetuating an outdated and ignoble practice from past Republican
campaigns.

For years, South Carolina has been the only state to fly the Confederate battle
flag over its Capitol. Black South Carolinians and many whites rightly view the
flag as a reactionary symbol of slavery and segregation, but they have sought in
vain to have it removed. The N.A.A.C.P. has declared an economic boycott against
the state for as long as the flag flies, but Republicans in the state
legislature have blocked all attempts to lower it.

Senator McCain, for whom the state's primary on Feb. 19 will be a crucial test,
has made conflicting statements on the flag. On Sunday, facing a national
television audience, he properly called it "offensive" and a "symbol of racism
and slavery." A day later, addressing South Carolina reporters, he reversed
himself and called the flag "a symbol of heritage." This was unmistakable code
language that conservative white Republicans -- Mr. McCain's base in the state
-- have long used to justify keeping the flag flying over the Statehouse.

Governor Bush has been no more principled.  While he has said he would not fly
the Confederate flag over the Texas Statehouse "because of the symbolism," he
has also repeatedly said that the matter was for South Carolinians to decide.
This won't do. It fails to take into account the concerns of a minority that
lacks the political strength to expunge this affront to its dignity as an equal.

Other states across the South have long since moved beyond this ugly debate.
Alabama, the last to do so, removed its flag from the Capitol dome in Montgomery
in 1993 after black legislators won a lawsuit. Business leaders throughout the
region, eager to compete in a cosmopolitan global market, have been at the
forefront of efforts to remove the alienating emblems of a bygone era.

The campaign in South Carolina recalls earlier efforts by the Republican Party
to tap into residual segregationist impulses, from Richard Nixon's Southern
Strategy to Ronald Reagan's appeal for states' rights at a county fair in
Philadelphia, Miss., in 1980. Today's Republicans are playing a cynical and, one
might have hoped, obsolete game.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (97%); ALABAMA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%);
MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%);

COMPANY: ACP (BELGIUM) (55%);   NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF
COLORED PEOPLE (57%);

ORGANIZATION: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF COLORED PEOPLE (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH CAROLINA;   UNITED STATES (97%);   SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (97%);
ALABAMA, USA (79%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (79%); MISSISSIPPI, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA; ELECTION ISSUES; PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTION OF 2000; PRIMARIES; BLACKS  US PRESIDENTIAL CANDIDATES 2008 (92%);
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (91%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS
(90%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);

 LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY
(90%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CONSERVATISM
(78%); ELECTIONS (78%); PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS
(78%); GOVERNORS (78%); BOYCOTTS (69%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (52%);   RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (75%);   HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); MCCAIN, JOHN (SEN)  JOHN MCCAIN (90%); GEORGE W
BUSH (90%); RONALD REAGAN (79%); RICHARD NIXON (58%);

LOAD-DATE: January 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1352 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

War Crimes Court Convicts 5 Bosnian Croats in '93 Massacre

BYLINE: By SUZANNE DALEY

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 465 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Jan. 14


The international war crimes tribunal in The Hague, in its largest case to date,
convicted and sentenced five Bosnian Croat militiamen today for taking part in
the massacre of more than 100 Muslims in a Bosnian village in April 1993.

In its ruling, the court rejected arguments that the massacre -- in Ahmici, a
village in central Bosnia where Muslims, including children, were burned alive
in their homes -- was a random act. Instead the court found that the killings
and burnings were part of an organized effort to terrorize Muslims and force
them to leave the region.

The presiding judge, Antonio Cassese, noted that the killing of unarmed Muslim
civilians had served no military purpose.

"Indisputably, what happened on April 16, 1993, has gone down in history as
comprising one of the most vicious illustrations of man's inhumanity to man,"
the judge said.

"Today, the name of that small village must be added to the long list of
previously unknown hamlets and towns that recall abhorrent misdeeds and make us
shudder with horror and shame," he added, going on to mention Dachau and My Lai.
A total of 116 were killed in the attack, including 33 women and children.

The court ordered the five men -- Zoran and Mirjan Kupreskic; their cousin
Vlatko Kupreskic; Drago Josipovic; and Vladimir Santic -- to serve sentences
from 6 to 25 years.

The prosecution praised the sentences, saying they set a benchmark for future
cases of "ethnic cleansing." Several higher-ranking defendants still await
verdicts.

The court also acquitted one defendant, Dragan Papic, saying his role in the
local militia was unclear and there was insufficient evidence to show he had
played an active role in the attack.

Since the trial began more than 15 months ago, the three trial judges had heard
testimony from 158 witnesses, some of whom described in detail the horrors of
the day when Ahmici was overrun by fighters who machine gunned entire families,
killed their livestock and set houses on fire. One witness in the case told how
she stood on a balcony, her dead son below, as jeering Bosnian Croat soldiers
told her to jump.

Four of the five men were convicted of persecution for helping to organize or
taking part in the violence, first shelling, then attacking house to house, as
soldiers of the Croatia Defense Force swept through the Lasva Valley from
January to May 1993.

The court described how the five had taken part in a rampage that resulted in
the killing of Muslims and the burning of 169 houses and two mosques. The
"tragic episode" was aimed at expelling the Muslims from the village, stopping
short of the most serious war crimes charge, genocide, the court said.

Lawyers for the five convicted men said they were shocked by the ruling and
planned to appeal.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); CROATIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (88%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); CROATIA (95%); NETHERLANDS (88%);   THE
HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (92%); WAR & CONFLICT
(92%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); RELIGION (91%);

 SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); MUSLIMS &
ISLAM (89%); WITNESSES (89%); LITIGATION (89%); JUDGES (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(89%); EVIDENCE (78%); VERDICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(78%); TESTIMONY (77%); BURN INJURIES (76%); LAWYERS (75%); ARMED FORCES (74%);
ACQUITTAL (72%);

PERSON: VLATKO KUPRESKIC (70%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1353 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                January 15, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 983 words



THE AMERICAS

MEXICO: CONVICTIONS OVERTURNED
Citing procedural errors by the prosecution, an appeals court overturned the
murder convictions of 24 pro-government Indians from the state of Chiapas, in a
case stemming from a 1997 incident in which 45 unarmed people, mainly women and
children, were killed. The victims were sympathizers of the Zapatista rebels.
Prosecutors can present their case again, and the accused will remain in jail.
   Julia Preston (NYT)

PERU: U.S. WOMAN ON HUNGER STRIKE
A New York woman convicted as a terrorist has begun a hunger strike, stepping up
pressure for a new trial at the start of the fifth year of her life sentence.
Jailed as a Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement leader, Lori Berenson, 30, began
refusing food Tuesday and is being monitored by doctors, prison authorities
said.   (Reuters)


COLOMBIA: ALBRIGHT IN TALKS
Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright has arrived in Cartagena for two days
of talks with President Andres Pastrana on a trip that will also take her to
Panama and Mexico. The talks follow a two-year plan announced by Washington to
funnel $1.3 billion in emergency help to Colombia, much of it for military
equipment and training to fight leftist guerrilla groups.   Larry Rohter (NYT)

VENEZUELA: U.S. AID SPURNED
The Pentagon has delayed the arrival of two United States ships, on their way to
Venezuela with 450 marine and navy engineers to help the country rebuild from
floods and landslides. The action came after President Hugo Chavez was quoted as
saying he did not want American troops on Venezuelan soil. "Clearly, if they
don't want the help, we won't provide it," the Defense Department spokesman,
Kenneth H. Bacon, said.   Larry Rohter (NYT)

ARGENTINA: EMERGENCY PACKAGE
President Fernando de la Rua introduced to Congress an emergency economic
package that would allow him to fire thousands of government workers and
refinance the public debt. The legislation also requests authority to create
special judges to prosecute tax evasion.   Clifford Krauss (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: BARAK AND ARAFAT TO MEET
Prime Minister Ehud Barak will take a break from negotiations with Syria to meet
with the Palestinian leader, Yasir Arafat, in Washington next Thursday, Foreign
Minister David Levy announced. Thursday is also the day that Israeli is expected
to undertake another large withdrawal from the West Bank.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)


ISRAEL: WAVE OF ARRESTS
Israeli troops carried out a series of "preventive" arrests in the West Bank
based on information that the Islamic Holy War group was planning attacks, the
army said. According to its statement, which did not say how many were being
held, the arrests were made near Jenin, Hebron and Ramallah.   (Reuters)

PALESTINIANS: ARREST LINKED TO ABU NIDAL
A key associate of the Abu Nidal guerrilla group, Nimer Halima, has been
arrested in Vienna, the police said. The group carried out deadly attacks in
Vienna in 1981, 1982 and 1985. Format magazine said Ms. Halima was detained as
she tried to withdraw $7.4 million from a bank.
   (Agence France-Presse)

KUWAIT: IRAQ-BACKED LEADER HELD
The leader installed in Kuwait after Iraq's August 1990 invasion is being held
in Kuwait after flying in from Norway in defiance of a death sentence against
him, the airport police said. Col. Alaa Hussein Ali headed the government set up
by Baghdad after its invasion of Kuwait in the 1991 gulf war.   (Agence
France-Presse)

AFRICA

NIGERIA: ISLAMIC LAW EXTENDED
A fifth province, Niger, has announced plans to extend Islamic law, or sharia,
after its declaration in Zamfara state last October, officials said. In December
the states of Kano, Sokoto and Yobe also announced steps to extend the law to
criminal and civil areas, claiming that right under the May 1999 Constitution.
   (Agence France-Presse)

EUROPE

GERMANY: KOHL TO TESTIFY
Former Chancellor Helmut Kohl was summoned as the first witness by a
parliamentary committee investigating his use of secret funds channeled to his
Christian Democratic Party. The panel, which will press Mr. Kohl to identify the
donors of more than $1 million during his tenure, begins work next Wednesday,
and he is likely to appear soon after that.   Roger Cohen (NYT)

FINLAND: CLOSE VOTE PREDICTED
Opinion polls for Sunday's first round of balloting for the successor to
President Martti Ahtisaari shows former Prime Minister Esko Aho, the Center
Party candidate, running even with the Social Democrat, Foreign Minister Tarja
Halonen, above. No one is expected to win more than 50 percent of the vote, and
a runoff is scheduled for Feb. 6.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

SPAIN: BASQUE LEADER FREED
Jose Antonio Urrutikoetxea, 48, a former top commander of the Basque separatist
group E.T.A., left prison after the high court freed him on the ground that he
had been convicted in France in 1990 on the same terrorism charges he faced in
Spain, where he was sent in 1996.   Al Goodman (NYT)

CROATIA: LEADER EMERGES
Stipe Mesic, 66, Croatia's last representative to the Yugoslavia that broke
apart in 1991, has emerged as a narrow leader in the presidential race to
succeed the late Franjo Tudjman, according to a poll to be published by the
newspaper Jutarnji List today, Reuters reported. The first round of elections
will be held Jan. 24.   Steven Erlanger (NYT)

ASIA

CHINA: FALUN GONG SENTENCE
A court has sentenced a retired senior air force official, 74, to 17 years in
prison on charges he was an organizer of the Falun Gong spiritual group,
according to the Information Center of Human Rights and Democratic Movement in
China, based in Hong Kong. Yu Changxin was formerly a pilot and Air Force
Command Institute professor. The Ministry of Defense would not confirm the
report.   Erik Eckholm (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF
(93%); MEXICO (93%); COLOMBIA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
PANAMA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); SYRIA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (58%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN REPUBLIC OF

 (93%); MEXICO (93%); COLOMBIA (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%);
PANAMA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%); SYRIA (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%);

   VIENNA, AUSTRIA (58%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (91%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (90%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (90%); JAIL SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS
& RULINGS (89%); ARRESTS (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (88%); ARMED FORCES (87%); SENTENCING (78%);
CIVIL SERVICES (78%); PUBLIC DEBT (78%); PRIME MINISTERS (78%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (78%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); ARMIES (74%); TAX FRAUD
(73%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (73%); TAX LAW (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE (73%); APPEALS
COURTS (73%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); JUDGES (73%);
TERRORISM (72%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (71%); PRISONS (71%); DEFENSE
DEPARTMENTS (71%); LANDSLIDES (66%); TAXES & TAXATION (64%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(61%); RELIGION (60%); MURDER (58%);   CORRECTIONS (78%); TECHNICIANS &
TECHNOLOGICAL WORKERS (71%);

PERSON: HUGO CHAVEZ (58%); EHUD BARAK (50%);

LOAD-DATE: January 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1354 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Suspect in Serbian War Crimes Murdered by Masked Gunmen

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 1; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 948 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Jan. 15


Zeljko Raznatovic, a notorious Serbian paramilitary leader known as Arkan who
was wanted on war crimes charges in the Bosnian and Croatian wars, was shot and
killed today in the lobby of the Intercontinental Hotel here.

Mr. Raznatovic was shot in the left eye by gunmen about 5:15 p.m. and was
immediately taken to Belgrade's main emergency hospital where he was pronounced
dead at about 6:40, reported Studio B, the Belgrade television station.

A witness at the Intercontinental, where blood still spattered the entrance an
hour after the shooting, said that a bodyguard and an associate, known as Manda,
had also been killed. Other reports said that an unidentified woman was wounded.
She was believed to be Lidija Velickovic, the sister of Mr. Raznatovic's wife,
Svetlana, a famous Serbian folk singer known as Ceca.

The gunmen, described by the state news agency Tanjug as masked assailants who
used automatic weapons, apparently escaped, though police arrived quickly.

Mr. Raznatovic, 47, was said to be accompanied by his wife and their two
children, who were not reported hurt. The attack bore the hallmarks of political
assassinations here: gangland style, with shootings in a public place and no
arrests.

Mr. Raznatovic's paramilitary group, the Tigers, took part in the brutal
three-month siege of the Croatian city of Vukovar in 1991 and a year later
helped the Bosnian Serbs overrun northern and eastern Bosnia, where he was one
of the pioneers of the killing and violent expulsion of rival ethnic groups that
came to be known as "ethnic cleansing."

He was secretly indicted in 1997 by the international war crimes tribunal for
the former Yugoslavia for crimes against humanity in both Bosnia and Croatia.
But his indictment was made public by the tribunal in the Hague only during
NATO's bombing war against Serbia over Kosovo that began last March.

Mr. Raznatovic was thought to be dangerous to President Slobodan Milosevic of
Yugoslavia and other government figures because of what he knew about the
killings and atrocities of the war in Bosnia. The tribunal was said to be
negotiating at different points with Mr. Raznatovic to get him to turn himself
in and testify against others, but Mr. Raznatovic regularly denied those
reports. The immediate speculation here is that Mr. Milosevic, who has already
been indicted by the tribunal for war crimes during the Kosovo war, and his
regime would benefit most from the killing.

One of the very few occasions at which Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Raznatovic were
ever seen together was the 1997 funeral of Radovan Stojicic, a former deputy
chief of Serbian police whose name was linked to atrocities during the Croatian
war and who was gunned down in a Belgrade restaurant. His killers have never
been found.

Mr. Raznatovic was said by friends to have been worried about his safety in the
last few months, said Zoran Djindjic, the leader of the opposition Democratic
Party, who had various contacts with him. Mr. Milosevic was particularly irked
by Mr. Raznatovic's support of the Montenegrin President, Milo Djukanovic, after
the Montenegrin turned against Mr. Milosevic in 1997, Mr. Djindjic said in an
interview this evening.

At the same time, Mr. Djindjic said, Mr. Raznatovic kept strong contacts with
the Yugoslav and Serbian security services on whose orders he is said in the
past to have carried out assassinations of exiles in western Europe viewed as
enemies of the Belgrade government.

Mr. Raznatovic was also wanted by the international police group Interpol in
connection with bank robberies across western Europe.

He did not play a major role in the Kosovo war, though some of his Tigers were
engaged in the forced expulsion and murder of ethnic Albanians there. But Mr.
Raznatovic did not go to Kosovo himself, though Mr. Djindjic said that the
regime had urged Mr. Raznatovic to go. In fact, he spent much of the war in the
Hyatt Hotel in Belgrade, where many foreign journalists stayed, and which was
perceived as a place NATO would not bomb. An English-speaker, he was sometimes
interviewed about the war by CNN and the BBC.

Mr. Djindjic said that Mr. Raznatovic told him that in late 1996, Mr.
Milosevic's wife, Mirjana Markovic, wanted Mr. Raznatovic and his men to break
up the large pro-democracy demonstrations in Belgrade and offered him money to
do so. When Mr. Djindjic met with him then, Mr. Raznatovic told him he had
rejected the proposal.

During the Kosovo war, Mr. Djindjic said, Mr. Raznatovic kept Mr. Djindjic
informed about threats to his life, one of the reasons Mr. Djindjic left
Belgrade during the war to travel to Montenegro and abroad.

Mr. Raznatovic was one of the last of the criminal and paramilitary leaders
closely involved with both state security and the wars in Bosnia and Croatia.
Last month, Zoran Sijan, a mafia leader and a man with experiences similar to
Mr. Raznatovic, was killed, Mr. Djindjic said.

The last such figure still alive is Ljubisa Buha, known as Cume, who is based in
Belgrade, Mr. Djindjic said.

Mr. Raznatovic dabbled in politics in 1992-93, and was also involved in
business, both open and criminal, reaping what was thought to have been a
considerable fortune through his control of gasoline smuggling and illegal sales
during the international sanctions imposed on Yugoslavia during the war. He was
a well-known soccer fan, leading the club of the fans of the famous Red Star
soccer team. Later, he bought his own soccer club, Belgrade Obilic.

Mr. Raznatovic was shrewd, intelligent and had a criminal personality, Mr.
Djindjic said, adding: "He was baby-faced but very dangerous, without moral
scruples and a kind of beast."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
CROATIA (94%); KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA (96%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);

 CROATIA (94%); KOSOVO (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (95%); THE
HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (78%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (91%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (90%); SHOOTINGS (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
ASSASSINATION (77%); WITNESSES (75%); BOMBINGS (73%); RESTAURANTS (72%); WOUNDS
& INJURIES (71%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (67%); ETHNICITY (64%); ETHNIC GROUPS
(64%); MURDER (58%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (56%);

PERSON: ZORAN DJINDJIC (92%); SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC (81%);

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Zeljko Raznatovic, known as Arkan, pictured in March wearing a
"Target" sign at a Belgrade protest against NATO airstrikes. (Reuters)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1356 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 16, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COPING;
Q.& A. Day for Parents: 'Where Do I Fit In?'

BYLINE: By FELICIA R. LEE

SECTION: Section 14; Page 1; Column 3; The City Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 811 words


TOMORROW is the holiday honoring the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. For some,
it's a day to sleep late and catch the sales at Macy's. But others, in
particular those of us with darker skins, will use the day to talk to our
children about a battle against prejudice we believe they will fight well into
this new century.

Many black parents do not have any special rituals associated with the King
holiday. If their children are old enough, they learn about and celebrate Dr.
King in school. If they're younger, they have little conception of this thing
called civil rights. But the raft of images associated with Dr. King and his
times -- attacking police dogs, dignified marchers, the civil disobedience
following his 1968 assassination -- are a powerful tool in presenting our
versions of history.

"It's the hardest thing black people have to teach their children," said Pamela
Newkirk, a college professor who lives with her husband and daughters, Marjani,
9, and Mykel, 5, in Greenwich Village.

Ms. Newkirk recalled the time about four years ago when Marjani came home from
school and said in horror, "Did you know, Mommy, that black people had to sit in
the back of buses!"

"It's so painful," Ms. Newkirk said. "It cuts so deep. You have this innocent
child who has no context for understanding this, it's so absurd."

Her solution is not only to talk to her children about the realities of a
society that sanctioned slavery for so long but also to inoculate them against
bias by building their self-esteem.

She went to her daughters' school, for instance, to talk about Kwanzaa. She
fills their home with nourishing black images, from the art on the walls to
beautiful brown-skinned dolls. She exposes them to black cultural events and she
monitors the books they read and the TV shows they watch. So when Dr. King's
birthday rolls around, and the speeches and the images play on, there is an
emotional as well as social context for the wellspring of pain.

The line between frightening children with stories of slavery and oppression and
making them aware of bias is delicate, parents say. A recurrent conversation
among African-American parents is what to tell children about race, when to tell
them, and whether to use words like "racism."

My son turns 2 this year. One day, I will tell him that Dr. King is a hero who
became famous, but that there are many unknown men and women, of all colors, who
stood up and still stand up against the wrongs done to black people.

"You have to be careful how you feed it to them," said Rosemary L. Bray, author
of "Martin Luther King" (1995, Greenwillow Books), a biography of Dr. King for
children 7 to 10. "I want my children to hate racism. I don't want them to hate
white people."

When Ms. Bray's 6-year-old son, Allen, learned that some white people once
enslaved black people, she said, "he was just dumbfounded, he was just amazed."
The other day, when he was listening to Dr. King's famous last speech, she said,
he turned to her and asked, "Mama, what is the promised land?"

"I really think it's important for kids to know that Martin Luther King was a
little boy like them and people were mean to him and he had to overcome his
rage," she said. "I tell Allen that people and societies can change, they can
overcome bad feelings and bad behaviors."

Luvon Roberson, a health communications specialist who lives on the Upper West
Side, said her discussions with her 12-year-old son, Ade, focus more on family
history and the concept of heroes. She has talked to him about respecting
differences -- without using the word race at all -- since he was about a year
old. She tells him stories about his maternal great-grandfather, Luther, who
took on the white establishment in Mississippi by sleeping with a gun by his
side and insisting that whites address his wife with a courtesy title.

Howard Gordon is a social worker and psychotherapist who lives in Williamsburg,
Brooklyn, and has two daughters, Carolyn, 16, and Elizabeth, 12. He lets them
know he wrote to politicians in the 1980's urging Dr. King's birthday be made a
holiday.

"We talk about Dr. King in a different way every year, because they're growing
up and there are always different things in their lives," he said. "Elizabeth,
for instance, had an experience in school where they wanted to move her into
another class and it seemed the majority of kids they were moving were black. My
older daughter said she felt people disrespected her because of the way she
speaks.

"I told them you're going to get it from white people who feel you're less
deserving, who are ignorant about your history," said Mr. Gordon, who is a
single father. "It's my responsibility to help them in a sensitive way to see
reality."

He took a deep breath. "I don't know if it's hard," he said of the lessons
learned and taught. "It just is."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC2899 CHEMICALS & CHEMICAL PREPARATIONS, NEC (92%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (78%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);

COMPANY: SA DAY MANUFACTURING CO (92%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (78%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA
(79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (90%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (90%); CHILDREN (90%); RACE & RACISM (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); KWANZAA (78%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (76%); DOGS
(69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (67%);
WRITERS (67%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (62%); CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE (54%);   RACISM
& XENOPHOBIA (76%);

PERSON: MARTIN LUTHER KING JR (92%);

LOAD-DATE: January 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Bob Hambly)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1359 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 17, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Political Motive Suspected in Killing of Serbian Warlord

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1182 words

DATELINE: BELGRADE, Serbia, Jan. 16


The Serbian authorities today provided few details of the assassination on
Saturday of Zeljko Raznatovic, a notorious Serbian paramilitary leader known as
Arkan, who was wanted on war crimes charges in the Bosnian and Croatian wars.

But officials of political parties here said Mr. Raznatovic, worried about his
security, had made overtures to the Serbian political opposition in the last few
months.

They said he had traveled to Montenegro, Serbia's sister republic, which is led
by President Milo Djukanovic. Mr. Raznatovic supported Mr. Djukanovic's election
in 1997 against the wishes of President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia. But
Mr. Djukanovic, who is supported by the West, made clear to Mr. Raznatovic that
as an indicted war criminal he could not remain in Montenegro, these officials
said.

Mr. Raznatovic was killed in the lobby of the Intercontinental Hotel here, shot
three times in the face by gunmen about 5:15 p.m. as he emerged with friends
from the hotel restaurant.

He was taken to Belgrade's main emergency hospital, where he was pronounced
dead.

The immediate assumption here was that the Milosevic government had ordered and
carried out the killing, because Mr. Raznatovic knew too much about the
activities of Mr. Milosevic and his associates during the Bosnian and Croatian
wars that raged from 1991 to 1995.

"The main question was not whether Arkan would be killed, but when," said
Slavoljub Kacarevic, editor in chief of the independent daily Glas Javnosti.

Late last night, Mr. Raznatovic's followers, some of whom are members of
paramilitary groups who live in a sort of plush barracks in Belgrade, went to
his huge, modern house in the rich suburb of Dedinje, where Mr. Milosevic also
lives, and fired their guns in the air in mourning.

Officials say at least 500 families in Belgrade owe their livelihoods directly
to Mr. Raznatovic, who had businesses both open and shady, ranging from bakeries
to currency exchanges, oil smuggling and a casino.

His Serbian National Guard, known as the Tigers, was active in the Bosnian and
Croatian wars and was responsible for murder, looting and so-called ethnic
cleansing.

Mr. Raznatovic was secretly indicted by the war crimes tribunal in The Hague in
1997, apparently for events in Bosnia and in Vukovar, Croatia, where 250 Croats
were taken from a hospital and murdered. The tribunal did not disclose that he
was under indictment until NATO's bombing campaign against Serbia was under way
last spring, and the document detailing the charges has not been unsealed.

A tribunal spokesman, Paul Risley, said in a telephone interview today that
lawyers asserting that they represented Mr. Raznatovic had contacted the
tribunal, exploring the idea of Mr. Raznatovic turning himself in and agreeing
to testify.

Mr. Risley suggested that Mr. Raznatovic's fate might encourage other wanted
men, including the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic and former Gen. Ratko
Mladic, to consider turning themselves in to the relative safety of a Dutch
prison cell.

Mr. Raznatovic had close ties to the Serbian and Yugoslav intelligence services
and secret police, carrying a membership card in the Federal State Security
police.

In the shooting, two other men were also killed, a former business associate
named Milovan Mandic, known as Manda, and Dragan Garic, a high-level police
official who worked in the Interior Ministry, the political officials said,
confirming a report in Glas Javosti.

Mr. Kacarevic, the editor, said today that his newspaper believed that there had
been two gunmen with automatic Heckler and Koch machine pistols, and that one of
them had been wounded but crawled out of the hotel. Both managed to escape. A
woman who was passing by was also hurt, apparently trying to flee the carnage.
There were at least 38 shells on the floor of the hotel lobby, the police said.

Mr. Raznatovic, 47, was said to have been accompanied by his wife, the popular
singer Svetlana Raznatovic, known as Ceca, and their two children, as well as
his sister-in-law, Lidija Velickovic. The sister and sister-in-law are said to
own a boutique for luxury goods in the hotel.

Some news reports said Ms. Velickovic had been wounded, but Mr. Kacarevic said
she had not been, and had in fact organized the transport of Mr. Raznatovic to
the hospital.

The attack had all the characteristics of previous gangland style killings here
of public figures -- a police chief, other senior police officials, a top
journalist and shady business figures with ties to the Milosevic family or the
government.

Among those who have been gunned down in public in recent years are the former
chief of Serbia's uniformed police and the editor of an independent daily who
was once close to Mr. Milosevic's wife, Mirjana Markovic, but then turned away
from her. No arrests have been made.

Another indicted war crime suspect who was said to have led paramilitary forces
in Bosnia, Slobodan Miljkovic, died in a hail of bullets in 1998 in the Serbian
town of Kragujevac.

There will be a memorial service for Mr. Raznatovic on Tuesday and a funeral on
Wednesday. In the meantime, his body will be at the headquarters of his party,
the Party of Serbian Unity.

Serbian opposition parties called Mr. Raznatovic's killing emblematic of
Serbia's condition under Mr. Milosevic's rule. The Serbian Renewal Movement of
Vuk Draskovic, who says the secret police tried to murder him in a car crash
last October, said the killing was "confirmation that we live in a country of
state terrorism."

In a statement on the Belgrade television channel it controls, Studio B, Mr.
Draskovic's party said, "Such brutal executions aim to spread fear and general
insecurity among citizens."

Later today, Studio B said one of its main transmitters had been sabotaged,
cutting off up to two million viewers -- half of its possible audience -- in
central Serbia. Studio B's signal is often jammed in Belgrade and elsewhere,
with the government blaming NATO. The station said the sabotage had occurred
after it had managed to bypass the jamming.

Vladan Batic, coordinator of the Alliance for Change, an opposition coalition,
said the murder bore the hallmarks of hundreds of other political killings and
would never be solved.

"Violent death has become an everyday thing, and such a murder would be solved
quickly only if the police and judiciary functioned normally," he said. "Someone
is pulling the strings and deciding every morning who will be next."

In Sarajevo, a Bosnian Muslim official said Mr. Raznatovic's death was no
surprise. Mirza Hajric, an adviser to Muslim political leader Alija Izetbegovic,
told Reuters he was only sorry that Mr. Raznatovic would not go to The Hague to
testify against Mr. Milosevic.

"I think he could have provided crucial evidence on Milosevic's involvement in
war crimes in Bosnia," Mr. Hajric said.

Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said in a statement that the United
States took "no satisfaction in Arkan's murder and would have wanted him to
stand trial in The Hague for his crimes."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); CROATIA (96%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (76%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (97%); CROATIA (96%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); MONTENEGRO (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA
(94%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (76%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ASSASSINATION (90%); PARAMILITARY &
MILITIA (90%); POLITICS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); DEATHS & OBITUARIES (90%);
INDICTMENTS (89%); HOTELS & MOTELS (88%); INTERVIEWS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); SMUGGLING (77%); POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); SHOOTINGS (74%); BOMBINGS (72%);
POLITICAL PARTIES (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (72%); RESTAURANTS (68%);
MURDER (58%); CURRENCIES (50%);

PERSON: SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (71%);

LOAD-DATE: January 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: The police in Belgrade blocked the entrance of the
Intercontinental Hotel, where Zeljko Raznatovic, known as Arkan, was killed
Saturday. (Reuters); Arkan, whose unit was called the Tigers, holding a tiger
cub during Serbia's war in Croatia in 1991. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1369 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 23, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Mass Graves In Turkey Put Attention On Terror Cell

BYLINE: By STEPHEN KINZER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 787 words

DATELINE: ISTANBUL, Jan. 22


Police officers searching for victims of a religious-oriented terrorist group
found four bodies buried beneath a villa in the central Turkish town of Konya on
Friday night, bringing the total exhumed so far to 17.

The gruesome search has riveted the nation's attention since Monday, when a
heavily armed police squad surrounded a building that authorities called the
group's Istanbul headquarters and seized it after a spectacular gunbattle that
was broadcast live on television.

One man inside the building in Istanbul was killed. The police identified him as
Huseyin Velioglu, leader of a militant Islamic group known as Hezbollah, which
is believed to be unrelated to the anti-Israeli group Hezbollah based in
Lebanon.

Ten bodies, all nude and bearing signs of torture, were found beneath the
Istanbul hide-out. According to news reports, some of the bodies were missing
limbs, and others had nails driven into their skulls. The killers had planted
onions above the mass grave to cover up the odor.

The police captured two men who were inside the house. They also found
documents, computer disks and videotapes said to contain scenes of torture and
executions.

All 17 victims whose remains have been found so far are believed to have been
Kurds from southeastern Turkey, which has been torn by war and terror for years.
The lone woman among them was reportedly Konca Kuris, a writer who had often
portrayed Islam as a permissive religion that demands freedom for women.

An estimated 200 residents of southeastern Turkey, most of them businessmen
unsympathetic to the cause of militant Islam, have disappeared since August.
Hezbollah, which means Party of God, is now considered the prime suspect in many
of those cases.

The group is also suspected of involvement in a 1993 arson attack in the city of
Sivas. That fire killed 37 secularist intellectuals who had gathered for a
conference.

Although Turkey's Hezbollah is not believed to be connected to the group based
in Lebanon, the two evidently share a fervent commitment to radical Islam.
Turkish and Israeli officials believe that both groups receive support from
Iran, but the Iranian foreign minister, Kamal Kharrazi, who was in Turkey during
the Istanbul raid, denied that his government had any connection to Hezbollah in
Turkey.

Hezbollah emerged as a force in southeastern Turkey in the late 1980's, when a
Kurdish uprising was reaching its peak. For the next several years, the ranks of
Kurdish nationalists, intellectuals and businessmen were decimated by thousands
of unsolved "mystery killings."

In recent days, news commentators and academic researchers have asserted that
many of those killings may have been carried out by Hezbollah in cooperation
with the army and the police. Many of the victims were perceived as supporters
of the rebel Kurdistan Workers Party, or P.K.K., which the government was
determined to wipe out.

Now that the Kurdish group's top leader, Abdullah Ocalan, has been captured and
sentenced to death, fighting in the southeastern provinces has subsided. If
Hezbollah was once an ally of the government, it is now considered a threat
because of its support for radical Islam.

"Hezbollah's anti-P.K.K. stance and the sympathy it has received for killing
P.K.K. members has put the state in the position of being the target of the
Frankenstein monster it created," the columnist Gungor Mengi wrote in an
Istanbul newspaper. "We hope this incident has taught our leaders not to use
religious terror groups under any circumstances."

The two recent raids may lead to new investigations into some of the most highly
publicized mystery killings. The victims included not only Kurds, but also
prominent secularists like a newspaper columnist, Ugur Mumcu, who was killed by
a car bomb in 1993, and a former minister of culture, Ahmet Taner Kislali, who
was killed by a bomb last year.

Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit said operations against Hezbollah "will continue
until we have completely wiped out this murderous organization."

One leading expert on Turkish terror groups, Emin Gurses, a professor of
international relations at the University of Sakarya in western Turkey, said
Hezbollah and the Kurdistan Workers Party fought not only over ideology, but
also for control of smuggling routes.

"The P.K.K. was at the peak of its power in the early 1990's," Mr. Gurses said.
"Army commanders knew that it was dangerous to give free rein to Hezbollah, but
the P.K.K. was their main concern. Central authorities in countries around the
world close their eyes temporarily to these kinds of organizations in similar
circumstances. But now that the P.K.K. is defeated, a decision has been made to
crush Hezbollah."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: TURKEY (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); LEBANON (92%); ISRAEL
(79%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (95%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH (83%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TURKEY (99%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); LEBANON (92%); ISRAEL

 (79%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (95%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (93%);
RELIGION (91%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (90%);

 MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (89%); WOMEN (78%); JOURNALISM (76%);
ARSON (72%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%); TORTURE (69%); POLITICAL PARTIES
(66%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (65%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES
(60%);

LOAD-DATE: January 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1382 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 January 28, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Rwanda Tribunal Convicts Private Citizen

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 169 words

DATELINE: ARUSHA, Tanzania, Jan. 27


A United Nations tribunal found a former Rwandan tea factory manager guilty
today of three genocide-related charges and sentenced him to life in prison.

The defendant, Alfred Musema, 50, the former director of the state-owned tea
factor, was the first private citizen tried and convicted by the tribunal, which
is prosecuting chief architects and perpetrators of the mass killings in 1994 of
more than 500,000 minority Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu. It was the
maximum sentence allowed.

"Musema personally led attackers to attack large numbers of Tutsi refugees and
raped a young Tutsi woman," said the presiding judge, Lennart Aspegren of
Sweden. "He knowingly and consciously participated in the commission of crimes,
and never showed remorse for his personal role in the commission of the
atrocities."

The three-judge panel found Mr. Musema guilty of rape, genocide and crimes
against humanity. It acquitted him on six other genocide-related counts. Mr.
Musema's lawyer said he would appeal.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RWANDA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (74%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  RWANDA TRIBUNAL CONVICTS PRIVATE (56%);   UNITED
NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA;   RWANDA (92%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (74%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  SENTENCING (90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (90%);
GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); SENTENCING GUIDELINES (88%);

 CRIMINAL OFFENSES (88%); COFFEE & TEA (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(88%); JUDGES (88%); TEA (88%); JAIL SENTENCING (88%); LAWYERS (74%); REFUGEES
(73%); ACQUITTAL (72%);   CORRECTIONS (90%); MANAGERS & SUPERVISORS (88%);

PERSON: MUSEMA, ALFRED  ALFRED MUSEMA (93%);

LOAD-DATE: January 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1406 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 5, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

I.R.A. and the Arms Principle

BYLINE: By WARREN HOGE

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1003 words

DATELINE: LONDON, Feb. 4


The Irish Republican Army, now in the third year of a cease-fire, is trying to
convince people of its peaceful intent by not using its guns. But it has cast
doubt on that objective by insisting on keeping them.

The power-sharing Northern Ireland government, only two months old, faces being
suspended next week because the guerrilla group refuses to start disarming.  The
British and Irish Governments announced on Thursday that the I.R.A. must start
scrapping its arsenal now.

The I.R.A. shows no signs of yielding, and Gerry Adams, the Sinn Fein president,
said today that he did not expect them to do so in time to avert a shutdown of
the Belfast government. "No undefeated army ever acted on the back of a series
of demands to do certain things," he said.

In those words lay a telling reference to the thinking of the I.R.A., which
could start disarming immediately and still have an enormous arsenal left. The
force also has bomb-making equipment to enable it to speedily replace whatever
arms it sacrifices.

"When people ask why can't they just give in a gun or a bullet or a wheelbarrow
of weapons or whatever, that's the wrong question," said Dominic Murray, the
director of the Center of Peace and Development Studies at the University of
Limerick in the Irish Republic. "It's an understandable question, particularly
from outsiders, but it misses the point."

"It's not whether you decommission a ton or a ha'penny's worth," he said. "It's
not the amount; it's the principle."

The I.R.A. equates disarmament with surrender. The group stresses, as Mr.
Adams's words point up, that it is not an army that lost a war. It is taking
part in the peace settlement out of choice, not force, and disarming must be
voluntary, it insists.

"People say, 'Why don't they hand over a small amount, make a gesture,' " said
Brian Feeney, author of "Lost Lives," a book detailing the lives and deaths of
3,637 people who have been killed in sectarian violence since 1966. "The gesture
as they see it would be symbolic of their being the bad guys, their struggle the
one that was illicit and wrong."

Add to this sense elements of tradition, suspicion, fear and national
myth-making, and no amount of logic can overcome it.

Republicans, the largely Catholic movement that wants closer links to the Irish
Republic, generally recognize that the arrangements that the I.R.A. is now
defying have brought them significant benefits. Their politicians sit in the
power-sharing legislature and command primary ministries; a human rights panel
has been set up; hundreds of prisoners have been freed; the British troop
presence has been reduced. And the Royal Ulster Constabulary, which many
Catholics believe embodied harsh Protestant domination of their people, is being
demilitarized, down-sized and made more representative of the province's
population mix.

"There's nothing about the I.R.A.'s decision that is strategic," Mr. Feeney
said. "It's atavistic and sentimental."

Paul Arthur, a politics professor at the University of Ulster, put it this way:
"Never underestimate the impact of folk memory on the psychology of
republicanism."

When it comes to arms, the I.R.A. has no qualms about dashing the incipient
political careers of the Sinn Fein leaders who appeared to be relishing their
new roles as government ministers. In a warning last week, Mr. Adams betrayed
his own inability to sway the I.R.A., saying: "It is not easy to get the I.R.A.
to do this speedily. This is the reality."

Northern Ireland remains the most heavily armed area in Europe, with police
officers operating out of bunkers, riding the streets of the province in armored
personnel carriers and setting out on sidewalk patrols in bulletproof vests.

The issue of guns has continually arisen, and in peace talks politicians have
shied away from demanding iron-clad commitments. At the beginning of the current
talks, they came up with a neutral-sounding word -- decommissioning -- to try to
get around the onus of surrender attached to the word disarmament.

In the language of the 1998 peace accord, all that Sinn Fein and other parties
with links to paramilitary groups were committing themselves to was to use "any
influence they may have to achieve the decommissioning of all paramilitary arms
within two years." That period extends to May 22.

The clandestine nature of the I.R.A. makes it difficult to estimate the amount
of its weaponry with accuracy. Britain's domestic news agency, The Press
Association, has reported that the arsenal includes thousands of handguns and
rifles, Russian heavy-caliber armor-piercing machine guns, AK-47 semiautomatic
rifles, flame throwers, rocket-propelled grenades, mortars and grenade
launchers, surface-to-air missiles and from one to four tons of Semtex
explosive.

The bulk is said to have come in shipments from Libya in the early 1980's. The
Libyan leader, Muammar el-Qaddafi, said publicly that he wanted to arm the
I.R.A. in retaliation for the decision by Margaret Thatcher, then the British
prime minister, to assist American bombing raids on his country.

The Irish police also say illicit shipments from the United States have included
handguns, submachine guns, pistols and ammunition for sniper rifles.

I.R.A. arms are hidden on both sides of the border in holes and caves in farm
country. The police are sometimes alerted to caches by hikers and picnickers.

Various methods of taking the I.R.A. weapons out of circulation have been
suggested. They include allowing the I.R.A. to destroy its own weapons, with
verification coming from a monitoring panel, and what is called a "rust
solution," of alerting the authorities to the location of munitions and sealing
them off to prevent use.

Weapons are seldom out of sight in Northern Ireland. The walls of housing
projects there are scarred by murals showing ski-masked terrorists brandishing
machine guns. These days the ones in Catholic neighborhoods are displaying
chilling slogans that read, "Not one bullet."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NORTHERN IRELAND (93%); IRELAND (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (78%);

COMPANY: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY; SINN FEIN  IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (93%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (93%); SINN FEIN (83%);

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY; SINN FEIN  IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (93%);
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (93%); SINN FEIN (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NORTHERN IRELAND;   NORTHERN IRELAND (93%); IRELAND (93%); UNITED
KINGDOM (93%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (79%); BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (78%);

SUBJECT: TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (90%); POLITICAL
PARTIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); PEACE PROCESS (78%); ARMS CONTROL &
DISARMAMENT (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (72%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (67%); WRITERS (60%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (60%);

PERSON: HOGE, WARREN; ADAMS, GERRY  GERARD ADAMS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: February 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: News Analysis

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1415 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 8, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

A Vallone Bill Bars Purchases In Sweatshops

BYLINE: By STEVEN GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 319 words


City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone proposed legislation yesterday that would
bar New York City from buying uniforms or other apparel from companies unless
they paid at least what he called "nonpoverty wages."

Mr. Vallone said the bill could help ensure fair working conditions. The city
spends more than $70 million a year on uniforms for police officers,
firefighters and other public employees.

The bill is modeled on similar laws adopted by more than two dozen
municipalities and is intended to discourage the abusive labor practices often
found in the garment industry in New York City, around the nation and overseas.

"The City of New York should not be lending its taxpayer support to
sweatshop-like conditions which profit from subhuman business practices," Mr.
Vallone said at a news conference at City Hall.

The legislation, developed in conjunction with officials from the Union of
Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees, would bar the city from
contracting with any apparel company that failed to pay what Mr. Vallone said
were "nonpoverty wages," as defined by federal guidelines. Under the bill, the
city comptroller would develop wage standards for overseas apparel
manufacturers.

Called the Anti-Sweatshop Procurement Law, it would require potential city
apparel contractors to provide information about their wages and demonstrate
that they comply with international and American regulations concerning labor,
the environment and human rights.

Patrick Lynch, president of the Patrolmen's Benevolent Association, said he had
evidence that clothing produced for the Police Department was made in China,
where many factories suppress unions and require employees to work 70-hour
weeks.

Kathryn E. Freed, chairwoman of the City Council's Committee on Contracts and
the cosponsor of the bill, said, "It's time for New York to slam the door shut
on the sweatshop industry."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (94%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

COMPANY: UNITE HERE (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITE HERE (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY; NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA

 (94%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (94%);

SUBJECT: LABOR; LAW AND LEGISLATION; UNIFORMS; APPAREL; WAGES AND SALARIES
LEGISLATION (91%); GARMENT WORKERS (91%); WAGES & SALARIES (90%); SWEATSHOPS
(90%); EMPLOYMENT (90%); CITIES (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); CITY GOVERNMENT

 (90%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (90%); APPAREL MFG (90%); POLICE FORCES
(79%); CLOTHING LABELS (78%); CUT & SEW APPAREL CONTRACTORS (78%); FACTORY
WORKERS (77%); CIVIL SERVICES (76%); GOVERNMENT CONTROLLERS & AUDITORS (74%);
LABOR & EMPLOYMENT LAW (71%); PRESS CONFERENCES (54%);   MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES (75%); ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: GREENHOUSE, STEVEN; VALLONE, PETER F (SPEAKER)  PETER F VALLONE (93%);

LOAD-DATE: February 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1416 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 9, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section A; Page 2; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1282 words




INTERNATIONAL   A3-12

New Israeli Death Prompts More Raids on Hezbollah
Shiite Muslim guerrillas killed an Israeli soldier, the sixth in two weeks, and
Israeli warplanes retaliated, less than 24 hours after their first bombardment
shut down civilian life in Lebanon. Arab and some European countries condemned
the strikes, but Prime Minister Ehud Barak defended them, though he lamented
that civilian sites were struck and that the Middle East peace effort had been
dealt a blow.   A10


The people of Beirut sought to cope with a loss of electric power.   A10

Arab officials expressed alarm that the violence in Lebanon was spilling out of
what had been accepted as routine sparring between Israel and the militia backed
by Syria.   A10

China Getting Russian Warship
China's first Russian-built guided-missile destroyer is expected to arrive in
the East China Sea soon, enhancing Beijing's ability to threaten American
aircraft carriers in any future encounters over Taiwan.   A3

The police in China blocked a messenger from delivering $25,000 in foreign
donations to help the families of people killed in the crackdown on the
Tiananmen student democracy movement in June 1989.   A12

Hostage Incident Continues
More than 150 passengers spent their third night aboard a hijacked Afghan
airliner, held prisoner by an armed gang who perplexed British police by giving
no explanation for the seizure or making any political demands. One passenger
was freed and four men escaped out cockpit windows.   A7

Concern for Missing Reporter
Associates of Andrei Babitsky, a Russian reporter for Radio Liberty, appealed
for information about him five days after Russia said it had given him to
Chechen rebels.   A4

U.S. Asks for Congo Force
The United States introduced a Security Council resolution to create a
peacekeeping force of 5,500 troops, but said they should not be deployed until
the fighting stopped.   A5

Chilean's Foes Gain a Hearing
A British court said it would hear an appeal of a government decision that Gen.
Augusto Pinochet, who is under house arrest, was not medically fit to stand
trial on torture charges.   A9

World Briefing   A6

NATIONAL   A12-21

A Decisive Victory for Bush In the Delaware Primary
Gov. George W. Bush handily won the Republican primary in Delaware, taking 51
percent of the vote to John McCain's 25 percent and Steve Forbes's 20 percent.
   A1

Bradley Education Plan
Bill Bradley will call for increasing spending by $80 billion over the next
decade to improve schools in poor areas; teachers would have to meet minimum
standards or their schools would face takeover by the state.   A21

Mr. Bradley assailed Gov. George W. Bush and Senator John McCain for failing to
condemn South Carolina's flying of a Confederate flag.   A21

Limiting Use of Genetic Data
President Clinton issued an order barring federal agencies from using genetic
data in any decision to hire, promote or dismiss workers.   A16

No More Security Clearances
A former C.I.A. director, John M. Deutch, requested that his remaining security
clearances be dropped, following a finding that he mishandled classified
information as director.   A13

One Cause of Antimissile Failure
Pentagon investigators said a leak in a coolant pipe might have caused the
failure of a missile interceptor last month, but that it was too early to say if
that was the sole reason.   A19

Shift in Focus of Crash Inquiry
Officials said the initial problem the crew had with the horizontal stabilizer
on the MD-83 jet that crashed last week did not appear to be what sent it
plunging into the Pacific.   A19

Bias Suit Costing Hotel Chain
Adam's Mark, facing a federal racial bias suit, has lost the patronage of the
Episcopal Church of America and the Human Rights Campaign, and two other groups
are considering canceling large bookings.   A19

Giving Victims Power to Sue
Illinois lawmakers are weighing legislation to let the victims of wife-beating,
gay-bashing and other violence based on gender or sexual orientation sue their
attackers. The bill is backed by the governor.   A14

Common Ground for Labor
The A.F.L.-C.I.O. pledged $500,000 to the Teamsters to help strengthen the
union's hand in a 16-week-old strike against Overnite Transportation, a big
nonunion trucking company.   A14


NEW YORK/REGION   B1-9

City and Yanks Near Deal For Minor League Stadium
The Giuliani administration is nearing completion of a deal to build what would
be the country's most expensive minor league baseball stadium, a $71 million
complex near the Staten Island ferry terminal that would be built entirely with
public money.   A1

Fatal Bullet Came Early
The pathologist who did the autopsy on Amadou Diallo's body testified that the
police bullet that probably caused his death came early in the barrage. And, he
said, at least one bullet hit him after he was down. The prosecution rested its
case.   B3

Louima on the Stand
Abner Louima was cross-examined by defense lawyers who sought to damage his
credibility by exposing inconsistencies in testimony about his brutalization by
the police.   B3

Identified, but Not Prosecuted
The statute of limitations is running out on hundreds of unsolved rape cases in
New York City just as advances in DNA testing offer hope of bringing the rapists
to justice. Rape survivors and many others hope the Legislature will drop the
limits.   B1

Returning to a Familiar Theme
Hillary Rodham Clinton pledged a renewed effort to push for universal health
care coverage, proposing legislation to give American consumers unlimited access
to low-cost prescription drugs sold in Canada.   B5

Donors to Mrs. Clinton's campaign surfaced in fund-raising scandals of the
president's 1996 campaign.   B1

NEEDIEST CASES   B4

FASHION   B12

ARTS   E1-10

SPORTS   D1-8

Study of McGwire Supplement
A study found that androstenedione increases testosterone, but scientists still
do not know if that helped Mark McGwire hit 70 home runs in 1998.   D1

Chiefs' Linebacker Dies
Derrick Thomas, who was paralyzed in a car accident on Jan. 23, died in a Miami
hospital.   D1

BUSINESS DAY   C1-25

U.S. Worker Getting Better
Efficiency surged in the last six months, the government said, making the 1990's
the decade of greatest improvement in labor productivity since the 1960's. The
measure is based on the goods or service a worker produces in an hour.   A1

Stocks rose broadly, with the Nasdaq setting another record.   C14

More Attacks on Web Sites
Hackers mounted what appeared to be coordinated attacks on big e-commerce sites,
including Amazon.com, eBay.com and Buy.com, and a leading media site, CNN.com.
   A1

Cisco Revenue and Profit Soar
Cisco Systems surpassed earnings estimates and reported a 53 percent gain in
revenue for the quarter.   C1

A Warning From Nike
The world's largest shoe manufacturer said it would miss earnings forecasts this
year and next.   C1

OBITUARIES   B10

Doug Henning
The ebullient, shaggy-headed magician who sparked a renewed interest in the
craft was 52.   B10

Business Digest   C1

DINING   F1-12

EDITORIAL   A22-23

Editorials: Setbacks to Mideast peace; CUNY and the public schools; Tiger's
streak; Howell Raines on John McCain and the G.O.P.
Columns: Paul Krugman, Maureen Dowd.

Crossword   B4
TV Listings   B9
Public Lives   B2
Weather   A19


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ISRAEL (94%); CHINA (94%); LEBANON (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%);
TAIWAN (79%); CHILE (79%); SYRIA (79%);

STATE: EAST CHINA SEA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (79%); PACIFIC OCEAN (71%);
NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (56%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); BEIJING, CHINA (76%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH (84%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); ISRAEL (94%); CHINA (94%); LEBANON (93%);
UNITED STATES (92%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%);
TAIWAN (79%); CHILE (79%); SYRIA (79%);   EAST CHINA SEA (79%); SOUTH CAROLINA,
USA (79%); PACIFIC OCEAN (71%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (56%);   BEIRUT, LEBANON
(79%); BEIJING, CHINA (76%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  NEWS BRIEFS (90%); HEZBOLLAH (90%);
REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); PEACEKEEPING (79%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA
(78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (78%); HIJACKING (78%); HOSTAGE TAKING (78%); TORTURE
(78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); LEGISLATIVE
BODIES (77%); POWER FAILURES (75%); POLICE FORCES (75%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS

 (74%); MILITARY VESSELS (74%); NAVAL VESSELS (74%); AIRLINES (73%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (72%); PRIMARY ELECTIONS (72%); HOUSE
ARREST (70%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (69%); LITIGATION (69%); US FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT (68%); ARRESTS (67%); ARMED FORCES (62%); PEACE PROCESS (57%);

PERSON: BILL CLINTON (74%); EHUD BARAK (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (58%); JOHN MCCAIN
(50%);

LOAD-DATE: February 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1427 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 10, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Chancellor Proposes to Compensate Austria's Wartime Slaves

BYLINE: By DONALD G. McNEIL Jr.

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 572 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Feb. 9


Austria's new chancellor, trying to calm foreign fears about his coalition with
the rightist Freedom Party, presented his government's platform to Parliament
today and said he wanted to compensate people forced into slavery in Austrian
factories during World War II.

The possibility of wartime compensation was included in a package otherwise
fairly typical for a conservative European government: tax cuts, plans to
balance the budget, faster sales of state assets, strong anti-crime measures and
curbs on immigration. The chancellor, Wolfgang Schussel, named a former
president of the Austrian National Bank as coordinator in charge of Nazi-era
compensation claims.

Mr. Schussel spent much of his speech addressing fears about the Freedom Party
and its leader, Jorg Haider, who is best known abroad for his anti-immigrant
stance and remarks interpreted as defending the Third Reich.

Noting that Austria is a stable democracy, Mr. Schussel pointed out that it has
very few anti-foreigner incidents, labor strikes or violent demonstrations.

"This Austria has not changed in the last few days," he said. He appealed to the
international community to "reconsider its prejudices and pre-formed opinions."

The government will press for former Nazi slave laborers, "who are after all at
an age where they need help quickly," to get payments, Mr.  Schuessel said.
Austrian companies that used slave laborers would be expected to pay, he said.

Today's announcement is "potentially significant, but there are many issues
still to be dealt with," said Gideon Taylor, executive vice president of the
Claims Conference, an umbrella body of 23 Jewish organizations that coordinates
and negotiates claims of Holocaust victims and their survivors.

After decades of portraying itself as Hitler's first victim, Austria has only in
the last few years acknowledged its own debt to Holocaust victims and begun to
restore property seized by the Nazis. Payments to survivors of up to $7,000 were
treated as compassionate aid, rather than as reparations owed. Also, Mr. Taylor
noted, most of the slave laborers in Austria were Poles, Czechs and other
eastern Europeans rather than Jews.

As Mr. Schussel spoke, about 1,500 officers surrounded the Parliament building
and blocked off traffic on the Ringstrasse, Vienna's most famous boulevard, in
anticipation of up to 20,000 protesters. But few showed up, and the cordoned-off
area was cleared earlier in the afternoon than expected.

Two weeks ago, the other 14 nations of the European Union threatened to isolate
Austria diplomatically if Mr. Haider was invited into a coalition government.
Since that government took office on Friday, Mr. Schussel has been at pains to
reassure Europe that it wishes to remain part of the union and does not plan to
oppose its expansion to include eastern Europe. Mr. Haider had opposed European
expansion, but he also opposed Austria's own entry into the union and has a
history of changing his political positions to suit changing circumstances.

Today a spokesman for the French government said France still "wants to go
further" in isolating Austria, but recognized that it had few allies, and
proposed no specific measures.

In Washington, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright said she felt reassured
by promises from Mr. Schussel and said the recently summoned American ambassador
to Austria would return to Vienna this weekend.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (96%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%); CZECH
REPUBLIC (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (72%); CENTRAL EUROPE (59%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL-BANK AG  (57%); NATIONAL BANK LIFE INSURANCE CO (57%);
NATIONAL BANK FOR DEVELOPMENT (57%); NATIONAL BANK SECURITIES INC (57%);
NATIONAL BANK FINANCIAL (57%); NATIONAL BANK FOR INDUSTRIAL & TOURISTIC
DEVELOPMENT (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRIA;   AUSTRIA (96%); EUROPE (95%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES

 (79%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (72%); CENTRAL EUROPE (59%);
VIENNA, AUSTRIA (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; FRINGE GROUPS AND MOVEMENTS; NAZI POLICIES
TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; SLAVE LABOR  SLAVERY (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%);
PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (89%); HOLOCAUST (89%); GENOCIDE (87%); JEWS & JUDAISM

 (86%); EUROPEAN UNION (79%); CONSERVATISM (78%); POLITICS (78%); GOVERNMENT
BUDGETS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); WORLD WAR II (77%); BUDGETS (76%);

 EXECUTIVES (75%); TAX LAW (73%); STRIKES (72%); TAXES & TAXATION (72%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (53%);   MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (72%); ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (66%);

PERSON: MCNEIL, DONALD G JR; SCHUSSEL, WOLFGANG (CHANCELLOR)  WOLFGANG SCHUSSEL

 (92%);

LOAD-DATE: February 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1439 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Which Path for America Abroad?

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 159 words



To the Editor:

Michael Ignatieff (Op-Ed, Feb. 13) is right in arguing that American values
require us to intervene to stop crimes against humanity even where our national
interests are not directly affected. But no one wants the United States to
become the world's policeman. What to do?

We need an international military force to be effective when peaceful measures
fail. We need an international criminal court to deter future offenders. We need
clear rules stipulating when the world community may lawfully intervene to stop
large-scale atrocities.

The international force called for by the United Nations Charter was never
created. A new criminal court is being formed, but the president has failed to
sign the treaty, which remains nonbinding without Senate ratification. Law is
always better than war.

BENJAMIN B. FERENCZ
Delray Beach, Fla., Feb. 13, 2000

The writer was a prosecutor at the Nuremberg war crimes trials.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: FLORIDA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED
NATIONS (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (57%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED
NATIONS (57%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   FLORIDA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW

 (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); WRITERS (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (66%);

PERSON: FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B  MICHAEL IGNATIEFF (57%);

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1440 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 15, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

EDITORIAL OBSERVER;
Shifting Politics of the Confederate Battle Flag

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 799 words


The Republicans began this election cycle with a conciliatory tone on race,
hoping to attract support from members of the black middle class, many of whom
fit the G.O.P. profile but were put off by the race-baiting and Willie
Hortonizing that dominated Republican politics during the 1980's. George W. Bush
seemed to be reaching out to black voters early on, when he took his message of
inclusion and "compassionate conservatism" into African-American communities
that had rarely seen Republican candidates in the flesh.

But the Republicans have reverted to old tactics in South Carolina, where the
two leading presidential candidates have hedged their bets for the Feb. 19
primary by supporting the right of South Carolinians to fly the Confederate
battle flag over the State Capitol, despite the flag's association with
segregation and the Ku Klux Klan.

This compromise with bigotry has proved convenient for the candidates at this
moment. But it could also stimulate the black vote across the Deep South in the
general election, threatening the Republican grip on Congress and aiding the
Democratic attempt to keep control of the White House.

Mr. Bush took the traditional states'-rights approach in South Carolina, arguing
from the start that the issue of whether to keep the flag rested with South
Carolinians themselves. But Senator John McCain took one side and then the
other, saying at first that the flag was "offensive" and a "symbol of racism and
slavery," then reversing himself, saying that it was defensible to fly the flag
over the capitol because it symbolized Southern honor in battle. In truth, the
Confederate battle flag as we know it today has little to do with the glories of
the Civil War and everything to do with the backlash against civil rights that
eventually made the flag a symbol of choice among neo-Nazis, skinheads and other
bigots.

In the years immediately following the Civil War, the Confederate battle flag
was not an omnipresent symbol in the South. But around the time of Jefferson
Davis's death in 1889 there was a blossoming of "lost cause" nostalgia, and the
flag emerged as an icon of defiance and racism.

The flag returned to popularity in the 1890's just as the former Confederacy was
stripping blacks of the rights to vote and hold political office, which they had
briefly enjoyed just after the Civil War. The flag had begun its transformation
from an emblem of a dead cause to a symbol of resistance to Reconstruction and
civil rights and, later, to an emblem associated with night riders and vigilante
terrorists. By the mid-20th century the battle flag had been fully appropriated
by the Klan and other extremists, who displayed it at cross-burnings and
lynchings and to show resistance to black demands for civil rights and equal
treatment under the law.

Apologists in South Carolina say that the flag was hoisted over the capitol for
the centennial of the Civil War, then mistakenly left flying. In truth, the flag
went up in 1962, a full year after the centennial. State officials were in a a
dispute with the Kennedy administration, which had urged the integration of the
Charleston, S.C., hotel where a centennial convention was being held. When South
Carolina refused to admit black delegates to the hotel, the convention was moved
to a nearby military base.

The flag's appearance a year later was an implicit endorsement of segregation --
and the premise that black citizens were unworthy of sharing public
accommodations with whites. South Carolina's present governor, Jim Hodges,
tacitly acknowledged this negative symbolism in this year's State of the State
Message, when he implored the legislature to remove the flag, reminding it that
"the entire nation is watching and listening to us."

In previous presidential campaigns, the flag issue in South Carolina came and
went quickly with little fanfare or lasting impact. This year's dust-up brought
a demonstration by civil rights activists that included nearly 50,000 people,
followed by the threat of an economic boycott against the state. In a
development that should shame both Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain, a group of former
state legislators who were serving while the flag went up recanted the decision
and urged the current legislature to bring it down.

The flag will eventually come down, making South Carolina the final state to put
it away. By failing to take a strong position now, the G.O.P. has missed an easy
opportunity to distance itself from offensive racial politics and to build the
beginnings of a bridge to the black electorate. In the quest to wring every
possible white vote out of South Carolina, Mr. Bush and Mr. McCain have
identified their party yet again with forces that have poisoned our national
politics for more than 100 years.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%);

STATE: SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (95%); SOUTHEAST USA (79%);

COMPANY: KU KLUX KLAN

ORGANIZATION: KU KLUX KLAN

GEOGRAPHIC: SOUTH CAROLINA;   UNITED STATES (95%);   SOUTH CAROLINA, USA (95%);
SOUTHEAST USA (79%);

SUBJECT: PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION OF 2000; BLACKS; FLAGS, EMBLEMS AND INSIGNIA;
ELECTION ISSUES  CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (91%); ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL
CANDIDATES (90%); POLITICS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%);
US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%); VOTERS & VOTING (89%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (88%); CIVIL WAR (88%); CONSERVATISM (78%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); US
STATE GOVERNMENT (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); APPROPRIATIONS (73%);
TERRORISM (60%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%); DISCRIMINATION LAW (68%);
ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%); HEADS OF GOVERNMENT ELECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: BUSH, GEORGE W (GOV); MCCAIN, JOHN (SEN); STAPLES, BRENT  GEORGE W BUSH
(79%); JOHN MCCAIN (58%);

LOAD-DATE: February 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1441 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               February 16, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Lithuania Holocaust Trial

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 75 words

DATELINE: VILNIUS, Lithuania, Feb. 15


Lithuania's Parliament amended the country's criminal code today to permit the
resumption of the first Holocaust trials in a former member of the Soviet Union.

Two trials stalled last year because of the failing health of the aged
defendants. The amendment -- which applies in cases of war crimes and crimes
against humanity -- allows defendants to follow the proceedings on a video link,
eliminating the need for their physical presence.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: LITHUANIA (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);

CITY: VILNIUS, LITHUANIA (79%);

COMPANY: LITHUANIA'S PARLIAMENT (72%);

ORGANIZATION: LITHUANIA'S PARLIAMENT (72%);

GEOGRAPHIC: LITHUANIA; RUSSIA;   LITHUANIA (95%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%);
VILNIUS, LITHUANIA (79%);

SUBJECT: NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS
CRIMINAL LAW (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (86%); JEWS & JUDAISM (85%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (83%);

LOAD-DATE: February 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1465 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                February 25, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

An Afghan Mosaic of Misery: Hunger, War and Repression

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2097 words

DATELINE: KABUL, Afghanistan, Feb. 20


As snow melted on his cheeks, the tall, stout man -- a father of seven --
reached past the firm red apples on a vendor's pushcart and began to choose from
the rotting ones, assessing the brown and the speckles and the mushiness.

"People don't have money to buy the good ones," Aman Ullah said flatly. And
then, as if to help him make the point, a whimpering old man fell to his knees
and touched his forehead on Mr. Ullah's muddy boots, begging for a share of the
spoiled fruit.

Rotten apples outsell the fresh ones in Afghanistan's capital, but that only
begins to describe the poverty here, for even bad apples -- sold at a penny a
pound -- are an extravagance in a city so overcome with tragedy and want. Each
day, hundreds of thousands survive on nothing more than weak tea and handouts of
bread.

This woebegone nation is enduring its 21st straight year of war, unable to
escape the malign shadow that geopolitics has cast on its history. Since it
emerged as a force five years ago, the Taliban militia has conquered 80 to 90
percent of the country. But while the Taliban have brought a measure of security
to the territory they control, including Kabul, the better part of their
attention is focused on what they know best -- the strategies of battle, not the
burdens of government.

Their tasks are made harder by the world's scorn. The Taliban are notorious for
imposing a puritanical Islam that includes the head-to-toe sheathing of women
and justice by amputation. Only three nations recognize them as Afghanistan's
legitimate government. In November, the United Nations -- at Washington's urging
-- imposed economic sanctions against the Taliban for their refusal to hand over
their guest, the accused terrorist Osama bin Laden.

The sanctions puzzle people here. Oddly enough, they come at a time when Taliban
leaders are showing some signs of moderation. And while the restrictions may
have only made a dismal winter a bit worse, they carry the sting of ill will.
Afghans believe that others are reveling in their pain, smugly approving of a
situation where hungry families huddle in bomb-ravaged buildings and children
forage through the streets for firewood.

"It's such an insidious thing, making people feel like pariahs, pushing them
away from the world community," said Jolyon Leslie, the South African who is the
United Nations' senior regional coordination officer for relief assistance in
Kabul. "I keep reminding the Afghan people that the member nations voted the
sanctions, not the U.N. staff. But this may be a difficult distinction for the
people in the bread lines."

Last week, Abdul Samad waited in one of those meandering lines. He is a teacher
who earns the $6-a-month wage common to government employees. "The Taliban are
like animals," he complained as friends cautioned him to be more discreet. "They
have no respect for human rights. They rule at the point of a gun. They have no
wisdom."

To him, like many in the city, the Taliban are "they," some alien force, an
occupying army whose men are largely undereducated, overzealous and mean.

But as he stood in the punishing cold, Mr. Samad did not blame the Taliban for
the hunger in his belly or the fits of coughing that afflict his six children.

"The West had use for us when the Soviets invaded our land in 1979, when we were
a front line in the cold war," he said, sounding at once boldly sarcastic and
utterly defeated. "We were worth helping then. We are not so important now."

The United Nations sanctions banned flights to and from Afghanistan and froze
all the government's assets held outside the country. The impact of those
restraints is hard to measure, though it is probably just another jab to a
country already reeling from body blows.

More important, the sanctions further demonstrate a fundamental decision by the
outside world that it is better to isolate the Taliban than to engage them --
and this is something that angers people here as they teeter from one day to the
next.

"If you think a family member has gone mad, shouldn't you try to give him help
through treatment, through talking?" asked Abbas Stanikzai, the deputy minister
of public health and one of the Taliban's more skilled diplomats. "We may not be
accepted by most nations, but we are still human beings. To want us to suffer is
cruel."

And the suffering is extraordinary.

An estimated 70 percent of the working age population of Kabul is jobless. For
men, work is hard to find; for women, it is forbidden. Afghans in the
countryside are thought to be better off; they can live off the land. In Kabul,
there is nothing to reap from the dead factories or the shuttered stores.

People sell their possessions on the street, their cooking utensils and their
picture frames and their extra clothes. Competition is keen, customers few. At
dusk, hundreds of women come outside to beg, desperate for a pittance before the
9 p.m. curfew. Dressed in the all-encompassing burkas, they look ghostly in the
aqueous light of oncoming headlights.

Older people recall a worldly Kabul, a city with fine wares and good restaurants
and easy laughter. But the memories sometimes startle them, like the tingling in
the stump of an amputee. An elderly carpet seller, Haji Abdul Hakim, began to
weep and could not stop, thinking of days when he sipped tea with buyers from
New York.

"I have lived too long," he said. "I shouldn't have lived to see this."

Half of the city's buildings are devastated. The entrance to the government's
central bank is a hanging brown blanket. Kabul University's computer science
department recently acquired its first computer, but there is no electricity. In
many neighborhoods, the only water supply flows from curbside spigots that
operate four hours a day.

Some 15,000 refugees who fled last summer's fighting in the Shomali Plain have
taken shelter in the compound of the long-abandoned Soviet Embassy. They live
much like the many thousands of squatters throughout the sprawling urban
detritus, their blankets spread over cold concrete and their makeshift cook
stoves exhaling smoke.

Imam Uddin, 62, has lived these last three years in a blind corner of rubble. He
was wearing a lightweight coat over three sweaters and was eager to display the
hardship of his meager home. But once inside he too began to sob.

"This is for a dog to live like this," he said.

Last year's dry weather caused a poor wheat harvest, and neighboring Pakistan,
with a scarcity of its own, has withheld exports. Each day, 400,000 people --
about a fourth of Kabul's population -- are given bread or wheat by the United
Nations and the Red Cross and other charities. The United States is the largest
donor country.

Mr. Uddin has lost his identification papers, and is thus ineligible to receive
food from the aid groups. He earns his daily bread by acting as a stand-in for
others in the lines, trading his time in exchange for a few bites from the flat
loaves he collects.

"Our bread program," said Karina Schmitt of the United Nations' World Food
Program, "used to be an income transfer, allowing people to buy other things to
eat, but for most of these people the bread now seems to be all they have."

Amid Afghanistan's long run of grief, gathering reliable statistics has become
impossible. The population is variously estimated between 18 million and 24
million. In 1996, the last time the United Nations included it in its surveys,
Afghanistan was near the bottom in every social indicator. More than one in four
children died before the age of 5. Average life expectancy was 44 years.
Literacy was 30 percent.

The Soviet invasion in 1979 opened the trapdoor that Afghanistan fell through.
Resistance fighters -- the mujahedeen -- were given billions in the latest
lethal weapons by the United States and Saudi Arabia.

In 1989, the Soviets made an ignoble retreat, and many presumed that Afghanistan
would right itself. Instead, age-old ethnic rivalries and simple avarice turned
one mujahedeen group against another. The fight for freedom was replaced by
civil war.

Kabul became a main battleground, and peace did not return to the city until the
Taliban arrived in September 1996. This new militia was made up largely of
Pathan students from religious schools popular with refugees and the poor. They
were welcomed by the masses who saw them as an overdue answer to the prevailing
lawlessness.

But the price for this semblance of peace was paid with forfeited rights. The
Taliban refused to allow women to work. They banned girls from schools. They
whipped or imprisoned anyone who defied their strict dress codes. They outlawed
television and popular music.

This pious wrath was far too extreme for most others to accept. And aid agencies
working in Afghanistan criticized the Taliban as impossibly obstinate.

Recently, however, many of those criticisms have become tempered.

"We've painted such a bleak picture of Afghanistan that nobody in their right
mind wants anything to do with it," said Mr. Leslie of the United Nations. "But
there is a transformation going on within the Taliban, and we'd do better by
stepping off the high ground to meet them in the middle. This country was in
decline long before the Taliban."

There are signs of moderation. Most significant, about 10,000 girls in Kabul
have been allowed to attend schools in mosques or private homes. The classes are
financed by aid groups, including one headed by a German, Peter Schwittek.

"The Taliban are a very heterogeneous movement," he said, chosing his words
carefully. "They are not united about the treatment of women or education for
girls."

He offered an example: In 1998, he was approached by some of the clergy who
wanted to offer their mosques as schools for both boys and girls. Approval had
been won from the Ministry of Education. But once classes began, the minister of
Islamic affairs took umbrage and raised objections; he ruled that while it was
O.K. for girls to read, they should not be permitted to write. He wanted their
pencils and notebooks taken away.

"But the ministry's second deputy was on our side, and he made a little trick,"
Mr. Schwittek said. "He told me, 'I will invite the minister to a class and have
a girl write a religious statement on the blackboard. Then we will ask: Tell us
what is wrong with this.' "

Interestingly, that second deputy was al-Haj Maulavi Qalamuddin, who had been
considered infamously harsh when he was head of the Taliban's moral police force
known as the General Department for the Preservation of Virtue and Prevention of
Vice.

"Of course, there are differences of opinion within any movement," said Mr.
Qalamuddin, whose thick black beard is striking even in a country where facial
hair is mandatory. He spoke with prudence and demanded precise translations from
Pashto. "Don't conclude that differences of opinion mean there are opposing
forces. We all receive our guidance from Allah."

Undoubtedly, there are some cleavages, but observers of the Taliban disagree
about their extent. Some believe that the movement will implode, with the next
phase of Afghanistan's interminable warfare involving one Taliban faction
against another.

At the same time, there are many in Kabul who mock the very idea that the
Taliban are easing away from their harsh interpretations of Islamic law.

"If in public I show my face or a hair on my head, I will be beaten," said a
woman named Nadera, a former teacher who took the forbidden risk of speaking to
a man who was not her relative. "To talk of moderation is to miss the essential
tyranny."

Indeed, optimism may be a luxury available only to those with some means of
escape from here. Otherwise, the pigments of life have turned to gray in Kabul.

At the zoo, there is an old blind lion named Marjan, and his story seems a
metaphor for the city itself. Once, there were 500 animals on exhibition. Then
the civil war of the early 1990's came. In a lurid carnival of slaughter, some
elephants and other great beasts were killed by artillery. Deer were stolen for
meat. A building collapsed on the reptiles.

One soldier, displaying his bravery, leaped a wall and strutted through the lion
pit, showing he was unafraid to touch Marjan and his mate. The big cat
instinctively tore the man apart. A few hours later -- as the elderly zoo
keepers now tell the story -- the soldier's brother arrived to take mandatory
revenge. He tossed a grenade at the lion, blinding him.

And ever since, Marjan has paced about miserably, without promise for better
times, waiting day after day to be fed.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (99%);

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (96%);

COMPANY: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)  UNITED NATIONS (62%);

ORGANIZATION: TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)  UNITED NATIONS (62%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; KABUL (AFGHANISTAN);   AFGHANISTAN (99%);   KABUL,
AFGHANISTAN (96%);

SUBJECT: ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND TRENDS; ISLAM; FAMINE; FOREIGN AID; CIVIL WAR
AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; WOMEN  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); TALIBAN (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (88%); TEMPORARY STAND
RETAILING (78%); HUNGER IN SOCIETY (77%); FAMINE (74%); FAMILY (74%); WAR &
CONFLICT (73%); CIVIL WAR (72%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (71%); TERRORISM (71%);
AL-QAEDA (71%); POVERTY & HOMELESSNESS (69%); RELIGION (69%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (68%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (68%); CHILDREN (64%); ECONOMIC
NEWS (59%);

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY  OSAMA BIN LADEN (79%);

LOAD-DATE: February 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Hunger is widespread in Afghanistan, and despite aid from
international groups, many residents of Kabul have to sell their meager
possessions to survive. This man was lucky enough to have food to sell --
carrots. (Barry Bearak/The New York Times)(pg. A1); DEVASTATION -- Half of the
buildings in Kabul have been ruined by war, like the bombed-out ones at right.
Imam Uddin, 62, is a squatter who lives in a corner of rubble. "This is for a
dog to live like this," he said, sobbing. Because he has lost his identification
papers, he cannot receive food aid and stands in lines for others to earn his
bread. A quarter of Kabul's population receives food from aid groups.
(Photographs by Barry Bearak/The New York Times)(pg. A10)

Map showing the location of Kabul: Kabul and most of the rest of Afghanistan is
ruled by the Taliban militia. (pg. A10)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1495 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 6, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

War-Crimes Figure Is Arrested in Bosnia

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 184 words

DATELINE: LONDON, March 5


British-led NATO forces in Bosnia today arrested a Serb indicted for war crimes
supposedly committed at the Omarska detention camp during the 1992-95 war,
officials said.

In Brussels, the NATO secretary general, George Robertson, said in a statement
that the arrest, the fourth in three months, was a warning to other suspects
still at large that "it is time to turn yourself in."

The Belgrade-based news agency Beta said NATO-led peacekeepers had arrested
Dragoljub Prcac, 62, while he was driving with his wife and a neighbor.

Mr. Prcac was the deputy commander of the Omarska camp near Prijedor in
northwestern Bosnia, one of the most notorious of the camps set up by Bosnian
Serbs for non-Serb civilians in 1992. Nineteen Serbs have been publicly indicted
by the United Nations tribunal in The Hague for alleged atrocities committed at
the camp. Mr. Prcac is charged with crimes against humanity, including murder,
torture and rape.

The trial began last week in The Hague of four other Bosnian Serbs accused of
crimes against Muslims and Croats in three Serb-run camps near Prijedor.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (85%); CROATIA (79%); BELGIUM (73%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (85%); LONDON, ENGLAND
(59%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

 (94%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS  (56%); UNITED
NATIONS (56%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (94%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS
(56%); UNITED NATIONS (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA;   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (85%); CROATIA (79%); BELGIUM (73%);   BELGRADE,
SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (85%); LONDON, ENGLAND (59%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE  WAR CRIMES (94%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); PEACEKEEPING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (73%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (73%); TORTURE (73%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (72%); RELIGION (50%);

PERSON: PRCAC, DRAGOLUB

LOAD-DATE: March 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1514 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 14, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Trial Opens on Serb General Accused in Srebrenica Massacre

BYLINE: By DAVID ROHDE

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 344 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 13


The trial of a Bosnian Serb general accused of overseeing the largest single
massacre of the war in Bosnia opened here today with a war crimes investigator
contending that determined resistance from United Nations peacekeepers might
have prevented the tragedy.

Jean-Rene Ruez, the lead investigator into the killings in 1995 of an estimated
7,000 Bosnian Muslims during and after the fall of the United Nations-declared
safe area of Srebrenica, said that Bosnian Serb forces at first did not intend
to take the town.

But after Gen. Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb commander, encountered paltry
resistance from the Dutch United Nations peacekeepers, Bosnian Muslims and NATO
warplanes defending the town, he drove his forces forward, the prosecutor
contended. He said he based his statements on Bosnian Serb documents seized in a
raid.

The town's fall has been widely blamed on the reluctance of United Nations
commanders to press for NATO air attacks and the failure to provide enough
troops to defend it.

The trial that opened today is for Gen. Radislav Krstic, a deputy commander in
the attack, who has been charged with genocide, crimes against humanity and
violating the laws of war. He is the only Bosnian Serb arrested for the attack
and has pleaded not guilty.

The general, 52, swallowed and stared at his hands when pictures of bodies in
mass graves were flashed in the courtroom.

He was arrested by American soldiers in 1998. His superior and the commander of
the Srebrenica attack, General Mladic, remains at large and is believed to be in
Belgrade under protection of the Yugoslav president, Slobodan Milosevic.

Because Bosnian Serb forces are alleged to have killed nearly all the men they
captured, this case may reflect prosecutors' best opportunity to win a
conviction for genocide in the war in Bosnia.

Survivors have long complained of the inquiry's slow pace. Identification of
bodies has been hampered by a lack of resources, and survivors complain that
NATO troops have been slow to arrest suspects.




http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (79%);
NETHERLANDS (56%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (56%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA; SREBRENICA (BOSNIA);   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA
(99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (79%); NETHERLANDS (56%);   BELGRADE,
SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (56%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  WAR CRIMES
(92%); GENOCIDE (91%); WAR & CONFLICT (91%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATIONS (90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); ARRESTS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%);

 CIVIL WAR (78%); HOMICIDE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); RELIGION (71%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (65%);   LAW OF WAR
(73%);

PERSON: ROHDE, DAVID; KRSTIC, RADISLAV (MAJ GEN)

LOAD-DATE: March 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1517 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 16, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

After the Pope's Apology, a Range of Voices

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 174 words



To the Editor:

"The Pope's Apology" (editorial, March 14) speaks of "the failure of Pope Pius
XII to speak out against the Nazi genocide."

In September 1939, The New York Times reported the Vatican's disclosures of Nazi
atrocities against Jews and non-Jews in Poland. In 1940, the newspaper reported
the Vatican's condemnation of the herding of Jews and Poles into ghettos, as
well as Pius XII's publicizing of the mass executions of Poles by the Nazis and
his defense of the rights of Jews against the Nazis. In 1942, The Times reported
the pope's efforts to save the Jews in France. In December 1943, there was an
article on Pius XII's denunciation of the Nazi attempt to wipe out the Jews in
Italy.

On Dec. 25, 1941, and Dec. 25, 1942, New York Times editorials spoke of "a
lonely voice" to describe the pope's intervention on behalf of Jews and other
victims of the Nazis.

(Rev.) VINCENT A. LAPOMARDA
Worcester, Mass., March 14, 2000

The writer is coordinator of the Holocaust Collection, College of Holy Cross.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: HOLY SEE (90%); POLAND (87%); UNITED STATES (79%); FRANCE (53%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%);

CITY: WORCESTER, MA, USA (69%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

GEOGRAPHIC: HOLY SEE (90%); POLAND (87%); UNITED STATES (79%); FRANCE (53%);
MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%);   WORCESTER, MA, USA (69%);

SUBJECT: JEWS; WOMEN; IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; EDITORIALS  CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (93%); RELIGION (92%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM

 (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); CLERGY &
RELIGIOUS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (79%);
WRITERS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); IMMIGRATION (74%); REFUGEES (74%); SLUM
DWELLINGS (70%);

PERSON: POPE (JOHN PAUL II); LAPOMARDA, VINCENT A (REV)  POPE JOHN PAUL II
(93%);

LOAD-DATE: March 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1522 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  March 19, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Is Warned On Executions In Terror Case

BYLINE: By BENJAMIN WEISER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 37; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk; Second Front

LENGTH: 1882 words


Lawyers for three men charged in the 1998 African embassy bombings are arguing
for their clients' lives on political grounds, contending that executing them
would be a foreign-policy disaster for the United States.

In a memorandum that is being sent to Attorney General Janet Reno, the defense
lawyers contend that executions of their clients, who are accused of being mere
"foot soldiers" in a terrorist conspiracy, would only turn them into Islamic
martyrs while creating a blood feud between the United States and the Muslim
world.

The effect, the lawyers say, would be to damage seriously the government's
chances of prosecuting Osama bin Laden, the wealthy Saudi exile who has been
accused of leading a terrorist conspiracy that included the embassy attacks and
other acts of violence against Americans abroad.

Apparently worried that the issue may be viewed too narrowly, the lawyers have
also taken the unusual step of circulating their 30-page document to top
officials in the State Department.

"We think it plain," the memo declares, "that the State Department ought to be
fully consulted, and its views considered, on all of the grave foreign policy,
national security and human rights implications of a U.S. government request for
the death penalty."

All three men have pleaded not guilty and plan to fight the charges in court
later this year. But the memorandum, which claims to represent the views of the
lawyers but not necessarily the defendants, assumes for the sake of argument
that they have been convicted and that the death penalty would be inappropriate.
Such arguments to prosecutors are routine in federal court.

But lawyers in the case, U.S. v. bin Laden, are seeking a much broader audience
in the government for their concerns about their clients' fates.

The case is the first in which federal prosecutors have sought to impose the
death penalty against a defendant accused of terrorism in a foreign country. It
is also the first time the government has begun to pursue the death penalty in
the series of major terrorism prosecutions of about two dozen Islamic militants
in New York that began with the 1993 World Trade Center bombing. Among those
cases is another plot to blow up major landmarks in New York City.

One defense lawyer who has read the memo said: "This case lies at the
intersection of the criminal justice system and foreign policy. The whole point
of the memo is that it is folly to simply treat this as a mere criminal case,
much as we might wish things were so simple."

The defense decided last week to send the memo after the United States attorney,
Mary Jo White, indicated that she would seek the death penalty for at least one
of the defendants, Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, and was still considering
doing so against two other defendants. Ms. Reno must approve all decisions to
seek the death penalty in federal cases.

The bombings at Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, killed more than
200 people and wounded thousands. Mr. al-'Owhali is one of two men in custody
accused of playing a direct role in the Nairobi bombing.

A copy of the memo, which was submitted by the nine lawyers representing the
three defendants, was provided to The New York Times by a person who has read it
and believes that the death penalty issue should be debated in a broader forum.

The memo makes the strategy clear: to catch the attention of top national
security advisers to President Clinton and to cast the death penalty issue not
in legal terms but in a larger context of the government's stand against
terrorism.

The memo notes, for example, that if prosecutors seek to execute Mr. al-'Owhali
and two co-defendants, Mohammed Saddiq Odeh and Khalfan Khamis Mohamed, it would
be the clearest signal that Mr. bin Laden would also face execution were he ever
brought to New York, tried, and convicted.

The government could hardly spare the leader of the conspiracy if it planned to
execute his "foot soldiers," the memo asserts.

Mr. bin Laden remains at large, living in Afghanistan under the protection of
the fundamentalist Taliban, and the United States has conducted sensitive
negotiations with other Muslim countries in hopes of having him arrested.

Yet, if the world knew Mr. bin Laden could receive a "lethal injection at USP
Terre Haute" -- the federal execution facility in Indiana -- that would
certainly chill any chance of cooperation from Muslim countries, "who must
respond to domestic public sentiment against handing over a Muslim leader to a
Western power," the memo says. But if Mr. bin Laden is not captured or is spared
execution as part of a deal with another country for his extradition, it would
be all the more unfair to execute his lower-level operatives, the memo says.

Three other defendants in the case will not face the death penalty, the
prosecutors have decided, even though they are accused of being higher-ranking
members of the organization that conspired to carry out the bombings. In the
case of one, the United States had to agree not to seek the death penalty to win
his extradition from Germany.

The three defendants who could face the death penalty are virtually unknown
today, the memo says, and if sentenced to life imprisonment, along with the
others, they "will vanish from view and soon be forgotten.

"But a sentence of death will rescue them from oblivion," the memo says, "and
transform them into celebrated martyrs."

"The very fact that the United States will have designated these defendants for
execution," it goes on, "will guarantee that their pictures will be held aloft
over crowds of protesters. Babies will be named for them, and young men from
Morocco to Pakistan will make plans to emulate them. Their actual executions
will ignite outrage and protest in many Muslim countries, and will leave a
legacy of further violence and revenge."

Placing Mr. bin Laden on death row would have enormous ramifications for the
United States, the memo says. In the World Trade Center case, it notes, the
defendants did not face capital charges because the bombing occurred before the
1994 death penalty law was passed. An attempt to arrest Mr. bin Laden and
imprison him for life, the memo contends, will be seen as a credible punishment,
"because it displays the self-restraint and moderation of a great nation."

"But if the United States declares that its success in this effort will be
measured by its ability to kill bin Laden once he has been taken prisoner and
rendered harmless," the memo says, "the story line will quickly shift in a
direction that could do considerable harm to long-term American interests."

In addition to the memo, the lawyers have submitted separate papers for their
clients tailored to each man's personal circumstances, offering arguments of why
the death penalty is not appropriate. Those documents are not being circulated
outside the Justice Department.

But the lawyers argue in their policy memo that the death penalty decision is
too big to be left solely to Attorney General Reno. The memo says that such a
"momentous decision" should involve "those agencies which do possess genuine
expertise and experience in how the actions of U.S. courts may affect American
policy interests around the world."

Experts who were interviewed last week agreed that the case posed difficult
questions. "I think Washington is attempting to treat these cases as criminal,
and, in one sense, the rationale is not bad," said Graham E. Fuller, a former
vice chairman of the National Intelligence Council at the Central Intelligence
Agency, who is writing a book on the future of Islamic movements around the
world. "They are trying to say, look, we have nothing against Islam. This has
only to do with criminal activity, period."

"On the other hand, by treating it purely as a criminal case," Mr. Fuller said,
"they may be falling into the trap of saying there are no political
ramifications."

Philip B. Heymann, a former deputy attorney general under Ms. Reno and author of
"Terrorism and America" (M.I.T. Press, 1998), said the death penalty was
probably being seen as appropriate for the case because of the sheer number of
deaths.

"If the death penalty is going to be used in any case," Mr. Heymann said, "it's
hard to fail to use it in a case with 200 deaths."

In their memo, the lawyers argue that retribution would not justify the death
penalty. They say they went to Kenya and interviewed survivors of the blast, who
said they wanted those responsible arrested and brought to justice, "but we met
no one who wanted to see them executed," the lawyers say.

They also argue that deterrence is not a valid consideration for these
defendants. They note that the government has accused Mr. al-'Owhali, for
example, of being a would-be suicide bomber.

"Indeed, given the centrality of the concept of martyrdom in extremist Islamic
political movements," the memo says, "a stronger case could be made for the
counter-deterrent effect of the death penalty -- that is, that the death penalty
would actually stimulate rather than deter similar crimes in the future."

"The death penalty is simply not what they fear," the memo adds.

Because court-ordered executions can take years to carry out, the memo likens
the death-penalty decision to "a cruise missile with a 6-, 8- or 10-year
trajectory." By that time, the political terrain may be totally different, the
memo says, and "it may be self-evident that executing three Islamist prisoners
under the glare of world attention is exactly the wrong thing for the United
States to do."

The memo cites the Turkish government's struggles over whether to carry out the
death sentence of Abdullah Ocalan, the most prominent Kurdish rebel. Under
pressure from European leaders, Turkey has delayed his execution.

The case "ought to stand as a warning about how easily in political cases a
death sentence can entrap the government that imposes it," the memo says.

It also notes that the Allied powers did not execute the "rank and file SS
officers who ran the German concentration camps, but reserved the death penalty
for the very highest-ranking civilian and military officials who conceived and
directed this vast criminal undertaking."

In perhaps its most chilling section, the memo describes Mr. bin Laden's being
convicted in the United States and sentenced to die. The memo says he would
likely present a "dignified and charismatic figure" in the courtroom, and "his
denials of legal responsibility for the Africa bombings will be credited by
millions throughout the world, to whom he will appear as a martyr for Islam."

"His sentencing hearing will provide him with a forum for denouncing U.S.
policies in the Muslim world," the memo continues, "and to identify U.S.
military actions which have undeniably produced unintended collateral harm to
civilian populations far greater than even the Nairobi embassy bombing."

"The propaganda value of this opportunity for bin Laden and his terrorist
organization would be immense," the memo notes, "and the psychological impact of
such a dramatic and highly personal confrontation between the soon-to-be
martyred bin Laden and the United States government might well reverberate
throughout the Muslim world for decades to come."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); KENYA (79%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);

COMPANY: STATE DEPARTMENT

ORGANIZATION: STATE DEPARTMENT

GEOGRAPHIC: ;TANZANIA; KENYA;   UNITED STATES (95%); KENYA (79%); TANZANIA,
UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; UNITED STATES FOREIGN SERVICE; CAPITAL
PUNISHMENT  LAWYERS (92%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (90%); CONSPIRACY
(90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (90%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (89%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); CAPITAL
CRIMES (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (86%); LITIGATION (79%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
ATTORNEYS GENERAL (77%); AL-QAEDA (76%); RELIGION (76%); NATIONAL SECURITY
(73%);

PERSON: WEISER, BENJAMIN; AL-'OWHALI, MOHAMED RASHED DAOUD; ODEH, MOHAMMED
SADDIQ; MOHAMED, KHALFAN KHAMIS; RENO, JANET (ATTY GEN); LADEN, OSAMA BIN;
WHITE, MARY JO (US ATTY)  MARY JO WHITE (92%); OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%);

LOAD-DATE: March 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mohamed Rashed Daoud al-'Owhali, accused in bombing. (Associated
Press)(pg. 38)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1529 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 21, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serb Trial Opens; First on Wartime Sex Crimes

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 469 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, March 20


The war crimes tribunal in The Hague took an important step in legal history
today as it opened the first United Nations trial focusing exclusively on
widespread sexual crimes against women during wartime.

The trial is based on accusations that during the war in Bosnia, soldiers
committed gang rape and forced women to act as prostitutes and individual
domestic and sexual slaves.

The women involved lived in Foca, a small town in southeastern Bosnia that was
stormed by Bosnian Serb soldiers in the spring of 1992. No one has precise
numbers on how many women were abused among Foca's 40,000 or so inhabitants,
half of whom were Muslims.

But in the coming weeks, 10 Muslim women from Foca are expected to testify on
the atrocities they suffered while held captive during the summer and fall of
1992.

The witnesses will come face to face with the three Bosnian Serb defendants, who
have been charged with for crimes against humanity as well as violating the laws
or customs of war.

As the trial opened today, the three defendants, Dragoljub Kunarac, Radomir
Kovac and Zoran Vukovic, stared blankly ahead or sometimes looked at their video
terminals while maps of the area and photographs of places identified as "rape
camps" and "quasi-brothels" were shown.

All three defendants have denied the charges.

Although none of the victims were present, an unusually large number of women
were in court today. The president of the three-judge panel is a woman, Florence
Mumba. Both the prosecution and the defense attorney teams include women. And
behind the thick glass wall of the public gallery, female lawyers and
representatives of women's groups listened attentively.

"What happens here is tremendous progress," said Kelly Askin, an American legal
scholar and author of the book, "War Crimes Against Women." "Some 200,000 women
who were forced into sexual servitude by the Japanese in World War II never had
any redress. Now we are seeing tremendous improvement in the jurisprudence for
women."

Presenting the case, Dirk Ryneveld, a prosecutor, said, "This is a case about
rape camps in Eastern Bosnia, whose uncovering in 1992 shocked the world. This
is a case about the women and girls -- some as young as 12 or 15 years old --who
endured unimaginable horrors as their worlds collapsed around them."

The crimes, he said, were an intrinsic part of the Serbian "ethnic cleansing
campaign" against the Muslims of Bosnia, and he said that some of the soldiers
told their victims that they would now bear Serbian babies. In his 38-page
statement the prosecutor cited many examples of abuse.

The lowest estimates made by research groups hold that during the conflicts that
followed the breakup of the Communist-era Yugoslavia, 20,000 women were raped,
most of them Muslims.



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (88%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (88%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (94%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (88%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(88%);

SUBJECT: WOMEN; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; SEX CRIMES; PROSTITUTION  SEX OFFENSES

 (93%); WAR CRIMES (92%); CRIMES AGAINST PERSONS (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%);

 SEXUAL ASSAULT (90%); PROSTITUTION (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%);
WOMEN (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); RELIGION (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); LAWYERS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%); TESTIMONY
(78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WORLD WAR II (73%); JUDGES (73%); WRITERS (62%);   LAW
OF WAR (78%);

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE

LOAD-DATE: March 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1532 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                March 22, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Bodies in Pit Suggest Slayings at Uganda Fire

BYLINE: By HENRI E. CAUVIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 917 words

DATELINE: KANUNGU, Uganda, March 21


As the last bodies were dumped into mass graves today, forensic investigators at
the site of the inferno here that burned more than 400 people to death
discovered the bodies of several others who appeared to have been murdered and
dumped into a latrine pit.

Who they were and why they were killed was not immediately clear.

Investigators counted 330 bodies and estimated that more than a hundred others
may have died, their remains burned to ashes in a chapel here controlled by a
cult called the Movement for the Restoration of the Ten Commandments of God. It
was the largest mass suicide-murder since 1978, when 912 followers of Jim Jones
died in Guyana.

Perhaps the most pressing question is the fate of the cult's leader, Joseph
Kibwetere, and his lieutenants. The police do not know which, if any, of them
died in the fire that was intentionally set last Friday. Any who are still alive
could face murder charges, the police have said.

While authorities pressed ahead, religious leaders tried to distance themselves
from the cult.

Uganda's Roman Catholic hierarchy issued a statement today that said the leaders
of the cult, two of whom it identified as former Roman Catholic priests, had
been excommunicated because they had "erred and broke the discipline of the
church."

The sect members "were misled by obsessed leaders into an obnoxious form of
religiosity completely rejected by the Catholic Church," according to the
statement, issued in Kampala, the Ugandan capital. The bishops interrupted an
annual retreat to respond to suggestions that they had erred in isolating the
sect over disagreements on doctrine.

The sect's leaders had proclaimed that the world would end in 2000, saying they
received the message directly from God, the bishops said. The leaders had also
preached that only those who heeded their apocalyptic message would go directly
to heaven.

Sects like this, including the most notorious and most politically active here,
the Lord's Resistance Army, have been problems for the Uganda government for
years, and in recent months the police broke up two cults that were becoming
threats.

What happened here was a "crazy thing," and shows how people can be brainwashed,
said the Rev. Benon Nkwasinbwe, an Anglican priest in northern Uganda. "These
kinds of cults are spreading," he said as he walked around the compound. "I'm
very worried about it."

The problem is complicated for government and religious leaders who do not want
to appear to infringe on religious freedom in this mostly Christian country but
want to ensure that the country does not endure a repeat of what happened last
Friday.

"It did not have to happen," the Rev. Martin Sempa, a leading evangelical
Christian leader said tonight on Radio One, repeatedly endorsing government
efforts to flush out dangerous extremist religious groups. "And it should not
happen again."

Today, members of Uganda's Parliament called for an inquiry into the deaths and
demanded that the police do a better job of identifying potential problems among
such groups.

Active for more than a decade, the Ten Commandments cult drew many of its
members from the Roman Catholic Church and incorporated some of the
Catholicism's symbols and teachings into its tenets and traditions.

In another of the sect's chapels here, discarded green rosaries lay about the
floor, and the smashed remnants of ceramic figures of Jesus and Mary littered
the altar.

The group's leader, Mr. Kibwetere, had been a lay worker in a Roman Catholic
parish in Bushenyi, just north of here, before breaking away and apparently
bringing a number of his fellow congregants with him.

Bishop William Magambo, head of the Anglican Diocese in Bushenyi, said he knew
of Mr. Kibwetere by reputation and his was not a good one. "Their leader was a
rebel," Bishop Magambo said after he and several aides examined the grounds and
the buildings.

For the trickle of loved ones who came to this remote spot in the Rukungiri
region of southwestern Uganda, near the country's borders with Congo and Rwanda,
there is confusion, anger and sadness.

Joy Turyomurugendo lost four brothers, two sisters, a host of nieces and nephews
and her mother in the fire, and knows she could have been among them. Only she,
another sister and their father remain.

"My mother was trying to convince me to come," Ms. Turyomurugendo, 43, said as
she sat on a log in the middle of a clearing on the edge of the compound, "but I
told her I can't go in this church."

She did not like what she heard about how the cult forced its members to sell
their possessions to be admitted, how the leaders tried to control communication
among followers and outsiders, and how parents were separated from children and
spouses were split up inside its compound. "I told them not to come here, but
they refused," she said.

So, while many of her relatives packed up their few remaining possessions and
came here in July to live at the compound, she stayed away. "They would tell me
that in the year 2000, they were going to a new world," she said.

She never had a chance to see them before they died, so today she came from her
village, Kirima, about five miles away. "I just came to see how they are
buried," she said.

On Monday, a huge ditch was dug and, with not even a spoken prayer, the charred,
twisted remains were dumped into it and quickly covered with fresh earth. "There
was really nothing more to do," Ms. Turyomurugendo said. "There were just so
many of them."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UGANDA (94%); GUYANA (79%);

CITY: KAMPALA, UGANDA (55%);

COMPANY: MOVEMENT FOR RESTORATION OF TEN COMMANDMENTS OF GOD

ORGANIZATION: MOVEMENT FOR RESTORATION OF TEN COMMANDMENTS OF GOD

GEOGRAPHIC: UGANDA; KANUNGU (UGANDA);   UGANDA (94%); GUYANA (79%);   KAMPALA,
UGANDA (55%);

SUBJECT: FIRES AND FIREMEN; RELIGIOUS CULTS; SUICIDES AND SUICIDE ATTEMPTS
RELIGION (94%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (92%); CULTS & SECTS (91%); CATHOLICS
& CATHOLICISM (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); MURDER (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS

 (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); CHURCH & STATE (89%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS
(89%); DEATHS (78%); FORENSICS (78%); ARSON (78%); FIRES (78%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (75%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (72%); SUICIDE (55%);

PERSON: CAUVIN, HENRI E  JOSEPH KIBWETERE (63%);

LOAD-DATE: March 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relatives of the dead wait at the compound in Kanungu, Uganda,
where hundreds died in a fire last Friday. Investigators said that some appeared
to have been murdered and their bodies dumped in a latrine pit. (Associated
Press)

Map showing the location of Kanungu: The cult's leaders split up families at the
compound in Kanungu.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1552 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Vast Trade in Forced Labor Portrayed in C.I.A. Report

BYLINE: By Joel Brinkley

SECTION: Section 1; Page 22; Column 5; National Desk

LENGTH: 1532 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 1


As many as 50,000 women and children from Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe
are brought to the United States under false pretenses each year and forced to
work as prostitutes, abused laborers or servants, according to a Central
Intelligence Agency report that is the government's first comprehensive
assessment of the problem.


The carefully annotated and exhaustively researched, 79-page agency report -
"International Trafficking in Women to the United States: A Contemporary
Manifestation of Slavery" - paints a broad picture of this hidden trade and of
the difficulties that government agencies face in fighting it

Completed in November, the report is based on more than 150 interviews with
governnment officials, law-enforcement officers, victims and experts in the
United States and abroad, as well as investigate documents and a review of
international literature on the subject.

Law-enforcement officials have seen episodic evidence for years of trafficking
in immigrant women and children, some as young as 9 years old But the report
says that officers generally do not like to take on these cases because they are
difficult to investigate and prosecute. What is more, it says, the nation does
not have sufficient laws aimed at this problem, meaning that the penalties often
are insubstantial.

Two years ago, Attorney General Janet Reno chartered an interagency task force,
saying, "We are not interested in containing modern-day slavery; we want to
eradicate it." The report mentions many efforts to fight the problem, but also
many barriers to doing so

Over the last two years, while up to 100,000 victims poured into the United
States, where they were held in bondage, federal officials estimated that the
government prosecuted cases involving no more than 250 victims. The Justice
Department said it could not provide precise figures.

The report was prepared by a government intelligence analyst who was working on
assignment to the CIA While the report is not classified, it has not been made
public. Another government official who wanted the report's findings publicized
provided a copy

It describes case after case of foreign women who answered advertisement for au
pair, sales clerk, secretarial or waitress jobs in the United States but found,
once they arrived, that the jobs did not exist. Instead they were taken
prisoner, held under guard and forced into prostitution or peonage. Some of them
were, in fact, sold outright to brothel owners, the report says.

"Examples of this may include Latvian women threatened and forced to dance nude
in Chicago," the report says. Thai women were brought to the United States "but
then forced to be virtual sex slaves." Chinese-Korean women were "held as
indentured servants." And "Mexican women and girls, some as young as 14," were
promised jobs in house-keeping or child care but, upon arrival, "were told they
must work as prostitutes in brothels serving migrant workers."

Girls from Asian and African countries, some 9 years old, were essentially sold
to traffickers by their parents, "for less than the price of a toaster," one
government official said. This mainly happens in cultures where female children
are not valued. The girls are smuggled into the United States where, in a
typical case, they are forced to work "in an indentured sexual servitude
arrangement," the report says.

A Nigerian smuggling ring, the report says, citing an Immigration and
Naturalization Service case, charged parents from that country $10,000 to
$12,000 to bring their children to New York so they would have "better
educational opportunities." But once here, the smugglers "forced the Nigerian
children to work as domestics."

Some of these cases received news coverage when they were discovered. But they
are only a tiny fraction of the problem. The report says 700,000 to two million
women and children worldwide are victimized by traffickers each year. Although
the numbers who come to the United States are relatively small, the report says
that the problem "is likely to increase in the United States."

At a conference in Manila this week, delegates from 23 Asian countries called on
governments to seize the profits of the crime syndicates involved. A Filipino
group estimated those profits at up to $17 billion a year.

The countries that are the primary sources for traffickers are Thailand,
Vietnam, China, Mexico, Russia and the Czech Republic, the report says. Other
countries that are increasingly providing victims include the Philippines,
Korea, Malaysia, Latvia, Hungary, Poland, Brazil and Honduras, the report says.

The I.N.S, one of several federal agencies with jurisdiction in this area, noted
in an internal assessment last fall that agents had found 250 brothels in 26
cities that appeared to be holding trafficking victims. It was not always easy
to tell, the C.I.A. report says, because the victims generally did not speak
English and might have been even more afraid of law-enforcement officers than of
their captors. After raiding one of these brothels, the immigrations officers
generally move to deport the women because they are in the country illegally.
Often the officials do not have enough information to prosecute their captors.

Government officials said the problem is not new, but the scope seems to have
increased in recent years. The biggest reason is that, since the mid-1990's,
traffickers from Russia and the former republics of the Soviet Union have
aggressively entered the business, taking advantage of women from those
countries who are looking to the West for opportunities.

"It's accelerated tremendously in the last 10 years," said Donna Hughes,
director of the Women's Studies Program at the University of Rhode Island. She
has monitored the issue for a decade. "An important reason is that there's
increased migration of women now for purposes of work."

A C.I.A. analyst derived the estimate of 50,000 victims per year from public and
classified intelligence data, a government official said. No comparable
estimates were made in previous years, the official said, but the widespread
opinion among government officials was that the number was uch smaller 10 years
ago.

One reason for the scrutiny of the problem now is that Clinton administration
officials, including Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright and Attorney
General Reno, in addition to the first lady, Hillary Rodham Clinton, have spoken
out on the issue.

The task force that Ms. Reno established federal efforts to fight the problem
meets every two or three months. It sponsors training seminars for
law-enforcement personnel and pilot projects for victims, among other efforts.
The Justice Department set up a hot line for victims, staffed during business
hours, Monday through Friday.

Other federal officials, and the report itself, say the government's efforts are
often fragmented and ineffectual. Many agencies have theoretial jurisdiction -
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the I.N.S., the Department of Labor, the
State Department, among others - but none of them see trafficking of women and
children as their clear responsibility, or as a desirable assignment because
"investigating trafficking and slavery cases is arduous" and unrewarding, the
report says.

Even when trafficerks are convicted, the penalties are usually light. In fact,
there are few federal or state laws aimed directly at this crime. One federal
law does forbid "sale into involuntary servitude." It carries a maximum penalty
of 10 years in prison. Many recent trafficking convictions have brought
sentences that were shorter than that.

In one case last year involving 70 Thai laborers "who had been held against
their will, systematically abused and made to work 20-hour shifts in a
sweatshop," the report says, seven defendants received sentences of four to
seven years; one received seven months.

"These low penalties and the long, complicated and resource-intensive nature of
trafficking cases tend to make them unattractive to many U.S. attorneys," the
report says.

Despite interest in the issue from the Clinton administration, government
officials said, few resources have been devoted to it.

"We have hundreds and hundreds of government analysts looking at drugs, arms,
economic issues," a government official said. "But hardly anyone is on this."

Two pending bills, in the House and the Senate, would increase prison time for
traffickers, provide assistance for victims and increase resources and training
for law-enforcement officers.

The bills would require the State Department to public an annual report on
trafficking and recommend sanctions against countries that are not, in the
administration's view, fighting it aggressively enough. This would be similar to
the annual State Department reports on human rights and drug trafficking. But
the department strongly opposes this idea, threatening the bills.

Although the C.I.A. report was distributed within the government last November,
it does not appear to be getting much attention.

"No one really knows what do with it," one government official said. "I'm not
sure people are really focusing on this."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); LATIN AMERICA (93%); ASIA (93%); EUROPE (92%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); MEXICO (79%); LATVIA (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (73%);

CITY: CHICAGO, IL, USA (50%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (91%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (91%);
CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: FAR EAST, SOUTH AND SOUTHEAST ASIA AND PACIFIC AREAS; LATIN AMERICA;
RUSSIA;   UNITED STATES (95%); LATIN AMERICA (93%); ASIA (93%); EUROPE (92%);
SOUTH-EASTERN ASIA (79%); MEXICO (79%); LATVIA (79%); EASTERN EUROPE (73%);
CHICAGO, IL, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; PROSTITUTION; CHILD ABUSE AND NEGLECT  LABOR
TRAFFICKING (90%); SLAVERY (90%); INVESTIGATIONS (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%);
PROSTITUTION (90%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (90%); WOMEN (90%); SEX TRAFFICKING
(89%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (88%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); CHILD TRAFFICKING
(78%); CHILD ABUSE (78%); CHILD CARE (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (77%); FOREIGN
LABOR (77%); MIGRANT WORKERS (77%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (77%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL
(73%); REFUGEES (69%);   FORCED LABOR (90%);   CORRECTIONS (68%);

PERSON: BRINKLEY, JOEL  JANET RENO (55%);

LOAD-DATE: April 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1555 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Nassau's Tax Base: The People Were Heard

BYLINE: By VIVIAN S. TOY

SECTION: Section 14LI; Page 1; Column 1; Long Island Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1901 words


RUTH VANBOOM never knew how much of the mortgage payment that she and her
husband paid every month for more than 20 years went for taxes.

So they were quite shocked when they finally paid off the mortgage in the early
1990's and were told that from then on, they faced an annual property-tax bill
of nearly $10,000. The vanBooms live in a four-bedroom house in Hempstead whose
value they estimate at $173,000.

"When you're working and raising a family, you're not really concerned about
what items are in the mortgage, you just pay the bill," Mrs. vanBoom said. "But
when we got that first tax bill, I said, 'Hold the phone, this can't be right.'
"

To her great consternation, county officials insisted it was right -- and that
was enough to turn the retired black schoolteacher into a tax crusader.

She became one of the six plaintiffs in a lawsuit filed in 1997 by the New York
Civil Liberties Union, charging that Nassau County's archaic tax assessment
system unfairly discriminated against black and Hispanic homeowners.

Last week, when the County Legislature finally agreed to overhaul the
62-year-old system and reassess all properties by Jan. 1, 2003, Mrs. vanBoom and
her fellow plaintiffs reacted with cautious optimism: While pleased that the
promised reassessment brings an end to their lawsuit, they are nonetheless wary
of the county's ability to handle the complicated reassessment fairly and
efficiently.

They plan to follow the process with the same rapt attention that a bird dog
brings to a hunt.

"I'm not going to say, 'This is it, we won,' " Mrs. vanBoom said. "I have two
words to say: Show me. And then I have two more words: Prove it."

Mrs. vanBoom, who is 70, said she would not rest until she knew that all the
overassessed homeowners in Hempstead and other black and Latino communities
finally got their due.

"I am weary of the minorities having become the elephant upon whose back the
more affluent have traveled all these years," she said. "We've been paying all
along, and now it's time for it to be split more evenly."

For years, county officials have insisted that the system was fair, despite
thousands of successful assessment appeals, which cost the county more than $100
million a year in refunds.

But faced with the opening of the trial last week, the fractious Legislature
mustered a bipartisan 14-4 vote approving a settlement in which the county did
not admit to discrimination but agreed to reassessment. The vote came just hours
before the trial was to begin.

Robert Summerville, a Roosevelt homeowner and another plaintiff in the lawsuit,
found the victory bittersweet. "Believe it or not, I was not thrilled after the
vote; I was pained," he said. "A gun had to be placed to the heads of the
legislators before they would take action to relieve the pain and suffering of
so many people in Nassau County."

The lawsuit charged that because the county's assessment system is based on 1938
building costs and pre-1964 land values instead of current market value, it
results in disproportionately higher assessments and taxes in black and Latino
areas.

Since property and land values tend to rise more quickly in predominantly white
areas, the suit argued, a house built in Garden City some 60 years ago might be
worth $300,000 today while its twin in Roosevelt would be worth only $110,000.
Despite the difference in current values, both homes are assessed at the same
rate, overtaxing the Roosevelt homeowner by $670 a year and undertaxing the
Garden City homeowner by $271, the plaintiffs estimated.

Donald Shaffer, an attorney for the New York Civil Liberties Union, said the
county's current fiscal crisis probably played no small part in pushing
officials to settle. One credit rating agency threatened to reduce the county's
bonds to junk status and insisted that reassessment was crucial to financial
stability. But in the end, Mr. Shaffer said, the prospect of losing at trial was
probably what ultimately prompted officials to drop their opposition to
reassessment.

"The facts are overwhelming," he said. "Not a single report or study contradicts
the correlation between race and overassessment. Nobody defends the current
system."

He also said a judgment in favor of the homeowners would have been an enormous
help to a class action suit against the county that also charges discrimination
and demands that the county refund all tax overpayments. No trial date has been
set in that case, but Frederick K. Brewington, the lawyer handling the case,
said thousands of homeowners, white and nonwhite, could eventually collect
hundreds of millions of dollars in damages.

Mrs. vanBoom and her fellow plaintiffs said they would watch that other case
closely, but said fixing a tax system that seemed to defy comprehension was a
crucial first step before asking for payback.

At first blush, the six plaintiffs would seem to have little in common. They
include, besides Mrs. vanBoom, a former New York City transit police officer, a
retired Defense Department engineer, a retired printer, a retired housing
advocate and a health plan administrator.

But as disparate as their backgrounds are, the inequities of the assessment
system made them a team. The three years of winding legal turns only made them
more determined, and the endless questions and demands of county lawyers that
often seemed accusatory and demeaning only gave the plaintiffs a shared
experience that made them feel like a family.

The case began in the mid-1990's when two tax consultants, a black from
Roosevelt and a white from the East End, got together and decided to try to
document what they had long believed.

Walter L. Winfree, the Roosevelt consultant, said he had been handling
property-tax-reduction cases for years, but the injustice of the system
crystallized for him in 1995 as he argued a case for an elderly woman from
Roosevelt.

"She was paying $7,000 on a small Cape Cod house worth about $120,000 and her
appeal was summarily rejected, when others in wealthier communities were getting
approved," Mr. Winfree recalled. "I got incensed and decided to do something
about it."

His friend, Paul Henry, agreed that the system was weighted against minority
communities and they started consulting with lawyers and eventually the civil
liberties union.

Mr. Winfree was considered as a plaintiff but was eliminated because, over the
course of five assessment appeals, he had managed to get the taxes on his own
$150,000 home in Roosevelt gradually reduced from $8,200 a year to about $4,900.
So in 1996 Mr. Winfree went on a campaign to drum up support and to find
plaintiffs. It was an easy sell.

At a meeting of the local chapter of 100 Black Men, a mentoring and community
action group where Mr. Winfree is a member, he recruited John E. Harris, a
70-year-old retired printer from Lakeview. Mrs. vanBoom read about the campaign
and called to volunteer. Then, at a meeting of the N.A.A.C.P. chapter for
Freeport and Roosevelt, Mr. Winfree signed up Mr. Summerville, a retired transit
officer and the chapter president, and two others, Arthur and Eileen Weaver.

The Weavers bought their home in Freeport in 1987, after Mr. Weaver, now 74, had
retired as an engineer with the Department of Defense. Mrs. Weaver, 65, retired
a few years later from a housing and community development program in New York
City. Their home is worth an estimated $165,000, but it is assessed as if it
were worth $188,012. Their tax bill comes to about $7,000 a year but they pay
only about $4,000 because Mr. Weaver fought in World War II and gets a veteran's
discount.

Shortly after moving in, Mr. Weaver said, he and his wife started noticing home
listings in local papers that showed million-dollar homes on the North Shore
paying the same or less than they were in taxes.

"My wife has a folder that would choke a horse showing all those houses," he
said. "It drove us nuts."

They have appealed their assessment four times since 1992 and have been
successful twice. The last time, in 1998, their lawyers told them they could
expect a refund of $600. "But we haven't seen a dime of it," Mr. Weaver said.
"And now that the county's out of money, who knows if we ever will?"

Mrs. Weaver said she resented the wealthier homeowners who have complained that
reassessment will drive up their taxes. "I've been subsidizing them all these
years and they have no right to complain," she said. "They need to pay their
fair share."

She said she and Mr. Weaver never thought twice about becoming plaintiffs. "We
volunteered because it was a terrible injustice being inflicted on all
working-class families, not even just black people," she said. "I knew it would
be a long haul and a dirty battle."

They made countless trips to Mineola to meet with lawyers and to bring
documentation on their home. Last year, they both sat through seven hours of
arduous questioning from county lawyers.

"It was a lot of foolishness," Mrs. Weaver said, "asking the same questions over
and over again, questions that were tangential and that were starting to get
very personal. I guess they thought they were going to beat me down, but they
found out who they were opposing."

Diana Coleman, at 47 the youngest of the plaintiffs, also said the legal process
often felt abusive.

"The county wanted to know over and over why we thought the system was
discriminatory," she said. "We had to pull together our tax records, submit and
resubmit them, explain and re-explain them. I was made to feel like I was lying
about having paid the taxes. And why on earth would I do that?'

Ms. Coleman, who manages the health plan for a community group in Hempstead, was
born and raised in Roosevelt and owns a home there that is worth an estimated
$110,000 on the market but is assessed at $160,883. A community activist for
most of her life, she jumped at the chance to become the lead plaintiff when she
learned that her old friends at the civil liberties union had decided to take on
the county.

"As soon as I heard they were doing something, I just said, 'When, when, when?
Let's get going,' " she said.

The plaintiffs met on a number of occasions to review legal tactics but for the
most part, lawyers working with the New York Civil Liberties Union built the
case.

"God bless the civil liberties union and people like them," said Mrs. Weaver.
"They just wanted to right a wrong. And none of us could have afforded to pay
lawyers to do what they did."

The plaintiffs and their lawyers said the settlement merely set the stage for
years of monitoring in which they and the state Supreme Court would closely
follow the reassessments and then test the tax rolls to make sure that there was
equity throughout the county.

Budget analysts have said that with reassessment, about a third of the county's
415,000 residential and commercial properties would see tax increases, a third
would see decreases and a third would see no change.

Mr. Weaver, the oldest of the plaintiffs, said he figured from the day he agreed
to join the suit that he would never see a tax reduction as a result of
reassessment.

"When it looked like we were going to trial, I said, 'No matter who wins this
stupid thing, the other side is going to appeal,' and I don't think I could make
100," the 74-year-old said. "But now that we're just looking at four years of
waiting, there's hope I might actually see it."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   COUNTIES (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(90%); TAXES & TAXATION (90%); LITIGATION (89%); COUNTY GOVERNMENT (89%); TAX
ASSESSORS (89%); HOMEOWNERS (89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (88%); DISCRIMINATION
(87%); PROPERTY TAX (78%); TAX LAW (78%); MORTGAGE LOANS (78%); RACE & RACISM
(73%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (67%); DOGS (63%);

PERSON: RUTH VANBOOM (91%);

LOAD-DATE: April 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Diana Coleman of Roosevelt was the lead plantiff in a suit
seeking property tax reassessment in Nassau. (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1559 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 4, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

NATO TROOPS SEIZE A TOP SERB FACING WAR CRIME CHARGE

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1339 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, April 3


After years of criticism for not bringing top war criminals to justice, NATO
troops today arrested Momcilo Krajisnik, one of the most important Serbian
leaders in the Bosnian war, on charges of war crimes, including genocide.

NATO officials said in announcing the arrest that Mr. Krajisnik, a close ally of
the Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader, was the most senior of 39 war
crime suspects now in custody. Diplomats have described Mr. Krajisnik as a
fanatic politician who sometimes equaled Dr. Karadzic in power, and through his
business deals helped finance the "ethnic-cleansing" campaign in the 1992-95
Bosnian war.

Mr. Krajisnik was immediately flown from Bosnia to The Hague, where he will
stand trial before the international tribunal, which charged him with every
major war crime on its books and accused him of being a key strategist behind
hundreds of civilian massacres. Conviction would mean a maximum sentence of life
in prison for Mr. Krajisnik, 55, who is expected to enter a plea this week.

Although his impending indictment was reported in the Serbian press three months
before, it was issued secretly only in late February. The French troops serving
with the NATO peacekeeping force who apprehended Mr. Krajisnik reportedly
learned of the indictment in early March and, by NATO standards, moved unusually
fast to make the arrest.

NATO and tribunal officials said Mr. Krajisnik was at his elderly parents' home
in Pale when French troops blew open the door with explosives shortly after 3
a.m. today. They briefly detained his parents, tied the hands of his two sons
and hustled Mr. Krajisnik, still in his pajamas, out the door.

In New York, Richard C. Holbrooke, the American ambassador to the United
Nations, said in an interview, "This is possibly the most important day since
the Dayton agreement on Bosnia."

He added: "Krajisnik was a very important person after all. He was the former
co-president of Bosnia. He was the head of the Bosnia Serb delegation at
Dayton." Mr. Holbrooke was the author of the peace accords that were agreed to
in Dayton, Ohio, in 1995, ending the Bosnian war.

"The removal of Krajisnik from the country, which is long overdue but couldn't
happen until he was indicted, removes from Bosnia the leading public opponent of
the Dayton agreement," Mr. Holbrooke said. "The other opponent, Karadzic, has
been in hiding for four years."

During the talks in Dayton, Mr. Krajisnik drew attention for his rigid,
separatist views and his opposition to the accords. But his arrest does not
affect the accords, diplomats said, because it was Slobodan Milosevic, then
president of Serbia, who excluded the Bosnian Serbs and signed for the Serb
side.

Following the arrest, the chief prosecutor for the tribunal, Carla del Ponte,
called once more for the capture of Dr. Karadzic and said the two men should
stand trial jointly because they were charged with the same heinous crimes. The
tribunal is clearly pressing NATO to make that trial a reality by arresting Dr.
Karadzic, who was indicted in 1995 on charges of genocide.

The indictment against Mr. Krajisnik listed some 40 towns and villages where
Muslims and Croats were driven out by force. It also listed hundreds people who
were massacred and specified 11 prison camps where non-Serbs were detained and
tortured, executed or deported under orders from Mr. Krajisnik and other top
leaders.

"In the war he was second only to Karadzic and shared command over Bosnian
military and police," said Paul Risley, the spokesman for Mrs. del Ponte. "The
decisions he participated in resulted in the deaths of thousands of Bosnians and
in the deportations and ethnic cleansing of hundred of thousands."

The pressure on NATO to arrest key figures accused of genocide in the Balkans
has been growing since last spring, after Louise Arbour, then the tribunal's
prosecutor, began complaining publicly about the lack of cooperation she had
received from Western governments.

In May, Mrs. Arbour began to receive the help she sought from British, German
and American military intelligence agencies, Western diplomats said. "This puts
pressure on everyone else," Mr. Holbrooke said, adding that it was "a strong
warning, and a strong assertion of renewed determination by NATO."

Mrs. del Ponte, who succeeded Mrs. Arbour, has stepped up demands on NATO
members for intelligence support and military action against suspected war
criminals in the Balkans. Her demands helped stiffen NATO's spine, American
officials said.

Mr. Krajisnik, an executive of Yugoslavia's biggest power company before the
war, has long been Dr. Karadzic's political ally. Dealing in arms during the
war, he also played a shrewd enough hand to emerge as the titular political
leader of Bosnia's Serbs in 1996. Out of office since 1998, he has still wielded
political control in concert with Dr. Karadzic.

"Krajisnik is a big fish," the State Department spokesman, James P. Rubin, said
in an interview today. "And we expect his arrest to rattle Karadzic's cage."

In Brussels, Lord Robertson, the NATO secretary general, warned other war crimes
suspects: "The net is closing. It is time to turn yourselves in."

Mr. Krajisnik held a series of political posts after helping Dr. Karadzic found
the Serb nationalist party known as S.D.S. in the 1980's. As one of the S.D.S.
leaders, he became speaker of the Bosnian Serb assembly and was a member of the
Bosnian Serb Security Council. His roles gave him shared control over the
military and the police.

He was Dr. Karadzic's top aide for much of the Bosnian war, and after Dr.
Karadzic was indicted publicly and could no longer have an official function,
Mr. Krajisnik succeeded him. Mr. Krajisnik served as the Serbian representative
in the post-settlement presidency of the Bosnian Federation from 1996-98 without
being challenged by the NATO-led peacekeeping troops that arrested him today.

French officers were reluctant to act against prominent Serbs in and around
Pale, in the zone French forces command under NATO's banner..

In fact, one question being asked behind the scenes here was why France suddenly
agreed to capture a senior Bosnian Serb official.

Although most NATO personnel in Bosnia deliberately avoided encountering
indicted individuals until 1997, France held out until recently. This prompted
open talk among British and American military officials that France was pro-Serb
and that the French sector of Bosnia was a safe haven for indicted Serbs. Of the
18 NATO arrests made since 1997, the French military had arrested only two
low-level men, and only in the last three months.

By some accounts here, several recently publicized incidents pointing to
cooperation between French and Serbian intelligence may have embarrassed Paris
and brought the turnabout that led to the arrest.

Dutch officials also said that Mrs. del Ponte, an experienced and tough
prosecutor in Switzerland before joining the tribunal last year, has made it a
priority to enlist French cooperation. She has called on several ministers in
Paris recently. President Jacques Chirac visited the tribunal here in February
while on a state visit to the Netherlands.

"It looks like the French at last may have pulled the plug on wanted Serbs in
Bosnia," said one Dutch official. "Some even went skiing in the French sector,
but people must be getting quite nervous over there."

Today, 70 suspects are known to be under indictment by the tribunal; other
sealed indictments may also exist. Of those suspects, 39 are now in custody,
including Mr. Krajisnik.

Some of his critics in the region believe that Mr. Krajisnik's time had come
because he remained an important obstacle to Western attempts to make progress
in the peace effort in Bosnia and allow Muslim and other refugees to return.

"I found him to be the most persistent extremist and xenophobic individual with
whom I had to deal," said Jacques Klein, the head of the United Nations mission
in Bosnia. "He has this xenophobic kind of hatred."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); SERBIA (94%);
FRANCE (92%); UNITED STATES (90%); NETHERLANDS (88%);

STATE: OHIO, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: DAYTON, OH, USA (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION

 (94%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (94%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA; SERBIA;   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(96%); SERBIA (94%); FRANCE (92%); UNITED STATES (90%); NETHERLANDS (88%);
OHIO, USA (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);   DAYTON, OH, USA (90%); BELGRADE, SERBIA
(79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  WAR CRIMES (94%); ARMED FORCES (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); GENOCIDE (90%); ARRESTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (88%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); SENTENCING (78%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); INTERVIEWS (76%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%);
JAIL SENTENCING (73%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (69%); WRITERS (68%);
SEPARATISM & SECESSION (60%);   CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KRAJISNIK, MOMCILO; KARADZIC, RADOVAN  RICHARD
HOLBROOKE (73%);

LOAD-DATE: April 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Momcilo Krajisnik, left, who was arrested yesterday, meeting
with President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia in Belgrade in 1997. (Agence
France-Presse)(pg. A14)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1570 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 8, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnian Serb Leader Taken Before War Crimes Tribunal

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 796 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, April 7


In the last three years, he has had his picture taken with President Clinton,
Pope John Paul II and President Jacques Chirac of France in his role as a senior
leader of the Bosnian Serbs and their bridge to the West.

Today he made his first appearance, looking dour and tired, before the war
crimes tribunal for the former Yugoslavia to face its most serious charges,
including genocide.

The nervous bustle in the gallery, which is usually nearly empty and quiet,
stopped abruptly as Momcilo Krajisnik (pronounced mohm-CHEE-loh cry-ISH-nik)
entered under the escort of three uniformed United Nations guards.

It was the first public appearance of Mr. Krajisnik, who is the most senior war
crimes defendant of the Bosnian conflict. French NATO troops pulled him out of
bed before dawn on Monday, and he was flown here hours later.

The purpose of the session was for him to hear the charges and enter his plea.
Prosecutors have accused Mr. Krajisnik, an extreme nationalist politician, of
helping draw up and direct the strategy to establish Serbian control over
northern Bosnia.

That set the groundwork for the war, which drove out hundreds of thousands of
Muslims and led to the massacres of thousands, most of them civilians.

Mr. Krajisnik coolly responded "not guilty" to each of the nine charges solemnly
read by Judge Richard May of Britain. Each fell into one of four main categories
defined by the tribunal: genocide, crimes against humanity, violations of the
laws and customs of war, and grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions.

Long a powerful figure, Mr. Krajisnik, 55, seemed just a slight figure in the
largest courtroom of the tribunal.

Twice he tried to speak, first asking, "May I say a few words?" and then saying,
"I would like to ask for a couple of minutes at this hearing to say a few words
in my defense."

Both times Judge May cut him off, saying that no statements could be made at
this stage.

The session, which lasted less than an hour, was attended by the chief
prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte.

"It's very rare for a chief prosecutor to appear in court," her spokesman, Paul
Risley, said. "By attending, she is sending a signal to the judges and every one
else that this is an important case."

Prosecutors, who have been elated with the arrest, hope that the French troops
who seized Mr. Krajisnik will now go after Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb
wartime leader who has been indicted on the same charges. Dr. Karadzic, too, has
been hiding in the French-controlled sector of Bosnia.

After the session, Mrs. Del Ponte said, "I hope that it will be possible to
arrest also Karadzic, so we can have only one trial with both of them."

While the cut-and-dried hearing was proceeding, some of the extreme pain
inflicted by the Bosnian Serbs' wartime strategy was being described in a nearby
courtroom. A witness, an elderly man, recalled a massacre that he had survived
near Srebrenica.

Prosecutors and defense lawyers alike sat spellbound as the unidentified
survivor described how column after column of Muslim prisoners arrived by bus to
be shot down on a field by Serbian soldiers. The witness said he had survived by
feigning death. He detailed how he eventually escaped by crawling and climbing
over hundreds of bodies.

Mr. Krajisnik's indictment does not cover the Srebrenica massacre of July 1995,
in which at least 8,000 Muslim men and boys were executed by Serbian troops who
had overrun the United Nations safe haven. The indictment covers only from July
1991 to December 1992 -- a move that has raised questions here because Mr.
Krajisnik held senior positions, with shared control over military and police
actions, until the end of the war in 1995.

The deputy prosecutor, Graham Blewitt, said today in an interview that the
original indictment had gone far beyond 1992, but that this would have made its
preparation and the trial itself far more complex and time consuming. The
indictment was narrowed, he said, "to shorten the trial and speed up the
process." But he added that the indictment could be extended any time.

Still, one lingering question is why it took the prosecutor until now to indict
Mr. Krajisnik, a close ally of Dr. Karadzic, who was indicted soon after the war
ended. Mr. Krajisnik's indictment was signed only in late February. It was kept
under seal until after his arrest.

Mr. Blewitt said the indictment had been held up by missing evidence, part of
which became available when NATO troops seized documents in the Serbian region
of Bosnia in 1998 and 1999.

"Some of those seizures have yielded very important documents," he said.

Mr. Blewitt declined to specify precisely what had been missing until recently,
saying, "I can't be specific about what particular gap was closed."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); FRANCE (91%);
NETHERLANDS (91%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (57%); UNITED NATIONS (57%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY
ORGANIZATION  (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA; HAGUE (NETHERLANDS);   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (94%); FRANCE (91%); NETHERLANDS (91%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(90%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  WAR CRIMES (93%);
LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); GENOCIDE (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); POLITICS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (76%); INDICTMENTS (76%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (76%); ARMED FORCES (75%); RELIGION (73%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (50%);   LAW OF WAR (89%);

PERSON: SIMONS, MARLISE; KRAJISNIK, MOMCILO  BILL CLINTON (73%); JACQUES CHIRAC
(73%);

LOAD-DATE: April 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Momcilo Krajisnik attending a hearing yesterday in The Hague.
(Pool photo by Serge Ligtenberg)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1572 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 9, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

APRIL 2-8;
NATO Finally Catches One

SECTION: Section 4; Page 2; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 137 words


The accused war criminal Momcilo Krajisnik was arrested at his parents' Bosnian
home by French NATO troops and flown to the international tribunal in The Hague,
where he pleaded not guilty to war crimes for his role in Serbia's ethnic
cleansing campaign in Bosnia.

Mr. Krajisnik, a close ally of the Bosnian Serb leader Radovan Karadzic, is
considered the most important war crimes suspect yet captured by NATO, which has
been criticized for not pursuing more aggressively those responsible for the
atrocities committed in the Bosnian war.

Richard C. Holbrooke, the American ambassador to the United Nations said of
Krajisnik's capture, "This is possibly the most important day since the Dayton
agreement on Bosnia," which ended the war in 1995. Mr. Krajisnik, 55, faces a
maximum sentence of life in prison.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (92%);
NETHERLANDS (90%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (95%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (95%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SERBIA (92%);

 NETHERLANDS (90%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); SENTENCING (88%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); ETHNIC
CONFLICTS (88%); ARRESTS (88%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); JAIL
SENTENCING (73%); ARMED FORCES (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (72%); UNITED
NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (72%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (71%);

PERSON: RICHARD HOLBROOKE (56%);

LOAD-DATE: April 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH



GRAPHIC:
Photo


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1583 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                April 12, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Swiss Holocaust Sentence

BYLINE: By The New York Times

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 102 words

DATELINE: GENEVA, April 11


A Swiss man who denied that the Nazi gas chambers existed was sentenced today to
a year in jail for violating a 1995 law that makes it a crime to "deny, grossly
minimize or seek to justify genocide or other crimes against humanity."
Prosecutors said the man, Gaston-Armand Amaudruz, had denied, in books and in a
magazine, the existence of Nazi gas chambers, and insisted that the killing of
six million Jewish civilians during World War II was impossible. "For my part, I
maintain my position," said Mr. Amaudruz, who was convicted in Lausanne after a
three-day trial. "I don't believe in the gas chambers."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SWITZERLAND (92%);

STATE: VAUD, SWITZERLAND (58%);

CITY: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SWITZERLAND;   SWITZERLAND (92%);   VAUD, SWITZERLAND (58%);
GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (58%);

SUBJECT: NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES  HOLOCAUST (92%); SENTENCING
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); LITIGATION (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (88%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (88%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (88%); JAIL
SENTENCING (88%); WORLD WAR II (86%); JEWS & JUDAISM (86%);   CORRECTIONS (90%);



PERSON: AMAUDRUZ, GASTON-ARMAND  GASTON-ARMAND AMAUDRUZ (85%);

LOAD-DATE: April 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1585 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 13, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Talks on Stalled U.N. Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 412 words

DATELINE: HAVANA, April 12


The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, and the Cambodian prime
minister, Hun Sen, met today in Havana, where both were attending a Group of 77
summit meeting, to discuss issues blocking a United Nations-backed tribunal
judging crimes against humanity in a Cambodian court.

As a result, the United Nations announced today, Cambodian and United Nations
diplomats will meet soon in an effort to end a deadlock over the prosecution of
former Khmer Rouge leaders on genocide charges.

Cambodia and the United Nations have bickered for more than a year over which
side should control trials of Khmer Rouge leaders accused of causing the deaths
of an estimated 1.7 million Cambodians during their brutal rule in the late
1970's.

While Cambodia has tentatively agreed to a jointly administered tribunal, it has
rejected United Nations demands for a foreign prosecutor with powers to issue
independent indictments.

Cambodia wants indictments to be handled by co-prosecutors -- one Cambodian, one
foreign -- fearing that a foreign prosecutor may seek to try too many former
Khmer Rouge members and upset the country's newfound peace.

The Khmer Rouge waged a civil war after being driven from power in a Vietnamese
invasion in 1979, and the last Khmer Rouge holdouts surrendered two years ago.
Many are believed to have secured promises from the current government that they
would not be prosecuted.

The Cambodian foreign minister, Hor Namhong, said this week that although
Cambodia and the United Nations accepted the idea of joint indictments, there
had been no consensus on how to resolve disagreements between the two
prosecutors.

Mr. Annan and Mr. Hun Sen "are seeking a compromise formula," the United Nations
statement read. "The two working groups will have to meet one more time, and the
expectation is that this will happen in the shortest amount of time."

United Nations officials said it had not been decided when, or whether the
meeting would occur in New York or Phnom Penh.

Mr. Hun Sen told diplomats last week that one possible solution was to have the
court's panel of judges settle any prosecutorial squabbles. But some legal
experts have balked at involving judges in indictments.

The radical Communist Khmer Rouge have evaded justice for nearly 25 years since
they seized power and forced Cambodia's entire population into crude farming
collectives. Overwork, starvation, disease and mass executions claimed nearly
one in four lives.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%);

COMPANY: KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA); UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (99%); UNITED STATES (79%);   NEW YORK, USA
(79%);   PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); GENOCIDE (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%);
INDICTMENTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (90%); WAR
& CONFLICT (90%); WAR CRIMES (89%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (71%);

PERSON: ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN); HUN SEN (PRIME MIN)  HUN SEN (92%);

LOAD-DATE: April 13, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1610 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Colombians Flee Into Panama as War Fears Rise

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1429 words

DATELINE: JAQUE, Panama


Bertilda Castro Tejada and her family are living in this small Panamanian
village where time and trouble are all they have. The place may be dreary, but,
unlike the home they left in Colombia, it is not deadly. At least not yet.

They fled to Panama from their home in Jurado, Colombia, soon after leftist
guerrillas overran the police station and military barracks there in December.
After enduring an 18-hour siege, they feared that they would not survive the
inevitable: right-wing paramilitary death squads that were sure to arrive,
dispensing vengeance on those who had helped the guerrillas.

"There are no police in Jurado," Mrs. Castro said, sitting outside a friend's
cramped home, where she and her family live for now. "The guerrillas are in the
mountains. When the paramilitaries come they beat up the peasants, asking,
'Where are the guerrillas?' We are defenseless. They do whatever they want with
you because a town without law is not worth anything."

Faced with endless fighting, hundreds of Colombians -- 800 by official estimates
-- have found refuge in Panama's dense jungle province of Darien, crossing over
the sprawling border as they did in more peaceful times when Panamanians and
Colombians alike went looking for commerce and companionship.

So too have the guerrillas from the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia,
known by the Spanish acronym FARC, as have the paramilitary squads, searching
for refugees they suspect of giving medicine, food or shelter to the guerrillas.

The arrival of more than 500 frightened refugees here just before Christmas
placed a sudden burden on Panamanian officials who, lacking resources, turned to
international relief agencies and the Roman Catholic Church for help.

But the more unsettling question is whether the chaos and violence from Colombia
will spill over the unsecured border, especially if an American program to help
Colombia battle narcotics trafficking escalates the country's civil war.

"The border between Panama and Colombia is at this moment the most dangerous,
conflicted and vulnerable one of Latin America," said Bishop Romulo Emiliani of
the Diocese of Darien. "The Colombian conflict has been spilling into our sector
because the effects of the war are extending into Panama."

While officials said that neither the Panama Canal nor Panama City, the capital
some 200 miles from the border, face any imminent danger, the incursions have
become a nettlesome test for Panama's ability to control the land over which it
now has total sovereignty.

Panama abolished its army after an American invasion ended the dictatorship of
Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega 10 years ago. And since December, when the United
States gave Panama the canal, the country has lacked the deterrent of having
American troops on hand.

"It represents a danger that is restricted for now to Darien," said Ricardo
Arias Calderon, a former vice president, and it "creates more of a socioeconomic
problem than a security problem. But there is also a feeling among some people
that we are not enforcing our national sovereignty. We are not able to make our
borders respected and give security to the population."

Only about 30 miles from Colombia, Jaque is close enough that the Panamanian
border police say they often overhear radio transmissions made by frantic
Colombian forces under guerrilla attack.

It was one such attack last December that set off the exodus to Panama.
Throughout the night and halfway into the next day, residents hid under beds or
pressed themselves against walls during a battle that claimed the lives of
almost two dozen soldiers, about twice as many guerrillas and one civilian.

"When it cleared up, they started to say that the soldiers were defeated," said
one Jacque refugee, who would give only his first name, Pedro, for fear of
reprisals. "We looked out and recognized a few of the guerrillas. They came into
my home. It was raining, and we cooked for them. They said not to worry, nothing
would happen to us."

But after they left, the military arrived with reinforcements, and that is when
many Colombians decided to leave.

An officer accused them of having helped the guerrillas. "Then a military patrol
came by and said, 'After us, the bad ones are coming,' " Pedro said, referring
to the paramilitaries. "They told us we should leave for a while, five or six
months, so we did."

He and five relatives each paid about 30,000 Colombian pesos, or $15, for the
three-hour boat ride to Jaque. Others risked the tangled jungle paths. When they
arrived, many of the refugees had friends or family who took them in.

Life since then has hardly been easy. Although a few of the older men who are
experienced farmhands cut bananas each morning, most of the refugees have not
found work. Children are not allowed to attend Panamanian schools. Except for
emergency medical treatment, none of the refugees are allowed to travel outside
of the town.

Like Jose Perez, who arrived in December, all they can do is wait.  Mr. Perez
stood on the shore recently watching as some of the townspeople clambered aboard
boats that would make the overnight trip to Panama City. It was a teasing
diversion from his otherwise boring routine. In Jurado, he was successful enough
as a jack-of-all-trades to keep himself and his family comfortable in a
two-story house with an electrical generator. "I had a house with everything,"
he said. "Here, I sleep on a piece of cardboard on the floor."

He watched the boats and wondered when he might go home. But he and the others
will stay here until the Colombian government, with the help of the United
Nations and human rights monitors, can assure their safety back home. That may
take as much as eight months, since that is how long Colombian officials said it
would take to rebuild the police station.

In Jaque, about 15 Panamanian border policemen patrol the town, walking at night
in pairs with assault rifles slung over their shoulders. Residents said they
were worried that the police force could be overwhelmed if Colombian guerrillas
or paramilitaries came to the area.

Last year armed groups attacked a settlement on the Caribbean coast, burning
several houses. In 1997, according to Bishop Emiliani, 40 paramilitary troops
went to the Panamanian town of Yape and stayed there for three days until they
found their target, a Colombian doctor who had treated guerrillas, and executed
him.

"There is a vast stretch without any police presence," the bishop said. "It is
very dangerous. Little by little, Darien can become a path for crime if this is
not stopped."

By various estimates, there are about 1,000 members of armed groups in Darien.
"The Panamanians just don't mess with them, and for good reason, because they
would get their clocks cleaned," a diplomat said.

Panamanian officials are beefing up border police units with helicopters and
other equipment. The measures are part of the country's first national security
plan, which has been stalled for months by political bickering. "Panama has got
to step up to the plate in that this is their border," said the United States
ambassador to Panama, Simon Ferro.

Panamanian officials said they would welcome foreign assistance, but they also
do not want to re-establish their own army, nor do they want a return of foreign
troops.

"We as a government have a firm policy not to remilitarize our country," said
Foreign Minister Jose Miguel Aleman. "As a political party, we lived a traumatic
history under the military dictatorship. We suffered a lot with exile, jail and
no freedom of expression. We do not want to reinstate the military in our
country. We do not want the border, given all that has happened, to be an excuse
to remilitarize our country."

Indeed, one approach the Panamanian government has undertaken is to begin an $80
million development project in Darien, building roads and providing services
that would make the area seem less isolated.

At the same time, Mr. Aleman said his government was supporting the peace effort
started by Colombia's president, Andres Pastrana. He also said no refugees would
be returned to Colombia until Mr. Pastrana's government could assure their
safety. But few people here in Jaque think peace will come soon.

"I do not think it will ever be resolved here," said Silda Segura, a nurse who
lives here. "This is the border, and it will always be like this. In this town
you always had Colombians. If before they came here when they had no problems,
imagine what would happen if the situation becomes difficult over there."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (99%); PANAMA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN AMERICA (79%);



CITY: PANAMA CITY, PANAMA (57%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH  REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (72%);

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH  REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(72%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA;   COLOMBIA (99%); PANAMA (99%); UNITED STATES (94%); LATIN
AMERICA (79%);   PANAMA CITY, PANAMA (57%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PANAMA;
COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-US; IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES  REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (90%); REFUGEES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY
ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); RELIGION (88%); CHRISTIANS
& CHRISTIANITY (86%); ARMIES (77%); ARMED FORCES (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
(76%); CIVIL WAR (76%); POLICE FORCES (76%); IMMIGRATION (71%); CHRISTMAS (71%);

 CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (68%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (64%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (63%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (62%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (62%); CONTROLLED
SUBSTANCES CRIME (62%); CANALS & WATERWAYS (60%);

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID

LOAD-DATE: April 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A family of Colombian refugees while away the hours outside
their rented hut. The refugees are not permitted to leave Jaque except for
medical emergencies. Few have found jobs, and their children are not allowed to
attend Panamanian schools. Townspeople in Jaque, who travel regularly to Panama
City by boat to buy and sell goods, load canoes that will take them to a boat
headed for the capital. (Photographs by Alex Quesada/Matrix, for The New York
Times)

Map of Panama highlighting Jaque: Caught in Colombia's civil war, many Jurado
residents fled to Jaque.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1621 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 April 27, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

JUSTICES EXPLORE SCOUTS' EXCLUSION OF GAY MEMBERS

BYLINE: By LINDA GREENHOUSE

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 1288 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, April 26


The question before the Supreme Court today was whether the Boy Scouts have a
constitutional right to exclude gay members, but the justices did not seem
particularly interested in either Boy Scout policy or the future of gay rights.

Rather, what clearly concerned the court were the implications of ruling for one
side or the other. If the Boy Scouts cannot exclude gays, can they still exclude
girls, the justices wanted to know. Would a Jewish social group be forced to
accept non-Jewish members, or a gay organization to include heterosexuals?

More generally, the justices asked, if an organization deems a particular kind
of exclusivity to be central to its identity, must courts take that assertion at
face value? If not, by what standard are they to judge it? If so, might that not
be the equivalent of giving a free pass from the anti-discrimination commands of
civil rights law?

The questions came thick and fast for the lawyers representing the Boy Scouts of
America and James Dale, who was an Eagle Scout assistant scoutmaster when his
troop in Monmouth County, N.J., expelled him 10 years ago, after learning from a
newspaper article that he is gay.

The Boy Scouts "specifically forbid membership to homosexuals," he was told. Mr.
Dale, who as the article reported was co-president of a student gay rights
organization at Rutgers University, sued under New Jersey's anti-discrimination
law, which includes protection for sexual orientation. Last year the New Jersey
Supreme Court ruled that the Boy Scouts are a "public accommodation," to which
the state law applies, and rejected the argument that the First Amendment
guarantee of freedom of association shielded the Scouts' policy.

The justices' questions today reflected their effort to decide where to slot
this case into an array of First Amendment precedents that offer ammunition to
both sides. For example, several justices asked in different ways whether Mr.
Dale's termination reflected the simple fact of his sexual orientation, as
opposed to scouting officials' conclusions that he was engaged in "public
advocacy," as Justice Anthony M. Kennedy put it.

"It's about the message that would go to youth in the program," replied George
A. Davidson, the Boy Scouts' lawyer. "Being openly homosexual communicates the
concept that this is O.K.," he said, adding that "coming out" as a gay person,
"in the culture in which these statements are made, is a statement fraught with
moral meaning."

The issue of whether being gay inherently conveys a message is important, given
one of the court's precedents, a 1995 decision that the organizers of Boston's
St. Patrick's Day parade had a First Amendment right to exclude gay marchers.
The court ruled in that case, which the Boy Scouts have cited prominently, that
the organizers did not have to turn their parade over to an unwanted message, in
that instance to an expression of gay pride.

But Mr. Dale's lawyer, Evan Wolfson of the Lambda Legal Defense and Education
Fund, maintained that what was at issue in Mr. Dale's case was "identity-based
discrimination, the equation of a human being with an assumed message," without
reference to anything Mr. Dale had said or done.

"A human being is not speech, other than 'I am who I am,' " Mr. Wolfson said.

His assertion that there is no message inherent in Mr. Dale's sexual orientation
was an effort to invoke, rather than the case of the St. Patrick's Day parade, a
trio of sex discrimination cases from the 1980's. In those cases, the court
rejected claims that all-male organizations, including the Jaycees and the
Rotary Club, had a constitutional right to exclude women, with the court noting
that the women simply sought to join and were not trying to change the essential
nature of groups organized around business networking.

The lesson from those cases, Mr. Wolfson said, is that scouting must show that
its own "expressive purposes in bringing its members together are significantly
burdened" by a requirement to admit gays. The Scouts have failed to meet that
test, he said, because the Boy Scouts are not organized around a principle of
opposition to gay rights.

"Who," Justice Kennedy said to Mr. Wolfson, "is better qualified to determine
the expressive purpose of the Boy Scouts: the Boy Scouts or the New Jersey
courts?"

Mr. Davidson, representing the Scouts, conceded that excluding gays did not
appear in the organization's official manuals. But that makes no difference, he
said, noting that "the Boy Scouts are so closely identified with traditional
moral values that the phrase 'He's a real Boy Scout' has entered the language."

Mr. Davidson said the policy was based on the Scouts' "moral code," as expressed
in the phrase "morally straight" in the Scout Oath and the word "clean" in the
Scout Law.

Justice John Paul Stevens asked whether the Boy Scouts took the position that a
person who engages in homosexual activity "cannot fit that definition."

"That's correct," Mr. Davidson replied.

The lawyer said the Scouts were in an even stronger position than the organizers
of the St. Patrick's Day parade, who won their case even though, he said, there
was "no readily apparent message in the parade."

"Here we have a moral code," Mr. Davidson said.

But Justice David H. Souter, who wrote the court's unanimous opinion in that
1995 case, Hurley v. Irish American Gay Group of Boston, disputed Mr. Davidson's
analysis.

"The problem in simply drawing a parallel to Hurley," Justice Souter said, "is
that we're not at the point where anyone is proposing to use the Boy Scouts" for
expressing his own message. Mr. Dale wanted to rejoin scouting and was "not
proposing to carry a banner," the justice said.

Mr. Davidson replied: "He put a banner around his neck when he appeared in the
newspaper.."

Mr. Wolfson, arguing for Mr. Dale, said the Boy Scouts, "one of the least
private public accommodations in the country," had not justified an exclusion
from a "neutral civil rights law of general applicability."

Some justices suggested that perhaps none of the court's precedents was really a
good fit for this case.

Justice Sandra Day O'Connor told Mr. Wolfson that "I can well understand" why
public accommodations law should apply to organizations that have a commercial
purpose, like the Jaycees or the Rotary Club in the earlier cases. "But should
the weight we give it in the context of a First Amendment claim be the same for
private organizations?"

Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist asked whether members of a Roman Catholic
organization could limit the group to Catholics on the basis that "we just feel
much more comfortable with Catholics, and we do Catholic work." He asked Mr.
Wolfson whether, in light of the Constitution's protection for freedom of
association, "they need a more expressive message than that."

Mr. Wolfson replied that freedom of association was not "free floating" but
rather was entitled to recognition only to the extent that it served the ability
of an organization's members to express their message. As simply a free-floating
right, he said, it could be invoked "as a defense against civil rights laws that
would swallow civil rights laws."

While most members of the court appeared uncertain how to decide this case, Boy
Scouts v. Dale, No. 99-669, Justice Antonin Scalia left little doubt of his
view.

"To require the Boy Scouts to have as a scoutmaster someone who embodies a
contradiction of their message -- how can that be?" Justice Scalia asked Mr.
Wolfson.

He said the Constitution "prevents a state from diluting or imperiling the
message an organization wants to convey, whether by speech or by dropping a
bomb."

A decision is expected by early summer.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%);

COMPANY: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US)  BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA  (92%); BOY
SCOUTS OF AMERICA (92%); MONMOUTH UNIVERSITY  (55%); MONMOUTH UNIVERSITY (55%);
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY  (54%); NEW JERSEY SUPREME COURT  (54%); RUTGERS UNIVERSITY
(54%); NEW JERSEY SUPREME COURT (54%);

ORGANIZATION: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US)  BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA  (92%); BOY
SCOUTS OF AMERICA (92%); MONMOUTH UNIVERSITY  (55%); MONMOUTH UNIVERSITY (55%);
RUTGERS UNIVERSITY  (54%); NEW JERSEY SUPREME COURT  (54%); RUTGERS UNIVERSITY
(54%); NEW JERSEY SUPREME COURT (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW JERSEY;   UNITED STATES (92%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: DISCRIMINATION; HOMOSEXUALITY; FREEDOM OF SPEECH AND EXPRESSION  GAYS &
LESBIANS (94%); LGBT RIGHTS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); SUPREME COURTS
(90%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (90%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (90%); DISCRIMINATION
(90%); DECISIONS & RULINGS (89%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (89%); LITIGATION
(89%); LAWYERS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (78%); FREEDOM OF
EXPRESSION (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%);
FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION (73%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (70%); PARADES &
MARCHES (60%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (73%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (90%);



PERSON: GREENHOUSE, LINDA; DALE, JAMES  ANTHONY KENNEDY (58%);

LOAD-DATE: April 27, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: James Dale, expelled as an assistant scoutmaster of the Eagle
Scouts 10 years ago because he is gay, outside the Supreme Court building
yesterday with his mother, Doris Dick, and his lawyer, Evan Wolfson. (Associated
Press)(pg. A20)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1628 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  April 30, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Cambodia Agrees to Tribunal Setup for Khmer Rouge Trials

BYLINE: By SETH MYDANS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 408 words

DATELINE: HO CHI MINH CITY, Vietnam, April 29


Senator John Kerry said today that Cambodia and the United Nations had reached a
compromise that would allow the creation of an international court to try former
leaders of the Khmer Rouge.

Speaking to reporters in Phnom Penh, Mr. Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, said
Prime Minister Hun Sen had embraced a United Nations formula that would allow
foreign judges to make independent indictments.

Mr. Hun Sen has resisted previous proposals that would reduce his ability to
keep personal control of the process. The United Nations has insisted that
Cambodia is not equipped politically or technically to manage complex trials for
crimes against humanity.

Mr. Kerry, who left Phnom Penh today after meeting with Mr. Hun Sen to mediate
on the issue, said both sides had agreed to "exert best efforts to complete all
the tasks necessary to be able to have a formal agreement by June 15."

Political analysts reacted to his announcement with caution. "Let's keep cool
because there are still many things that can happen between now and June 15,"
said a Western diplomat who has watched Mr. Hun Sen seem to agree several times
in recent months, then back off citing new complications.

Sixteen months have passed since the last surrender of a former leader of the
Khmer Rouge, whose brutal regime was responsible for the deaths of more than a
million people when they ruled Cambodia, from 1975 to 1979. All but two
prominent Khmer Rouge figures remain free, some as the result of personal deals
with the prime minister.

Mr. Kerry said there were "no obstacles" left to the signing of an agreement in
June on a formula for a tribunal. He said the time frame is a concession by the
United Nations that will allow Cambodia's National Assembly to meet first to
approve a law on the tribunal.

In what he described as a new and untested model, Mr. Kerry said that
co-prosecutors -- one foreign, one Cambodian -- would issue indictments, but
that the foreign prosecutor would dominate the process.

The model involves a compromise proposed by the United States that would allow a
foreign prosecutor to issue an indictment independent of his Cambodian
colleague, subject to the veto of both foreign and Cambodian judges.

The United Nations had tentatively agreed to an American proposal that would
allow Cambodia to hold a majority on a panel of judges. But there is concern
that Cambodia could then block any politically sensitive indictments.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CAMBODIA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%); VIETNAM (79%); VIET NAM (79%);

STATE: MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%);

CITY: PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%); HO CHI MINH CITY, VIETNAM (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED
NATIONS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS; KHMER ROUGE (CAMBODIA)  UNITED NATIONS  (94%);
UNITED NATIONS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CAMBODIA;   CAMBODIA (98%); UNITED STATES (92%); VIETNAM (79%); VIET
NAM (79%);   MASSACHUSETTS, USA (92%);   PHNOM PENH, CAMBODIA (93%); HO CHI MINH
CITY, VIETNAM (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS  LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
GENOCIDE (89%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); PRIME
MINISTERS (89%); TALKS & MEETINGS (79%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (78%); VETO (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); POLITICS (77%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (73%); APPROVALS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%);

PERSON: MYDANS, SETH; KERRY, JOHN F (SEN); HUN SEN (PRIME MIN)  JOHN KERRY
(92%);

LOAD-DATE: April 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1649 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 8, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Northern Ireland Peace Progress

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 589 words


The Irish Republican Army's commitment over the weekend to subject its secret
arsenal of weapons to international inspection should reopen the path to peace
in Northern Ireland. By ending its longstanding refusal to make a meaningful
gesture toward disarmament, the I.R.A. has removed a critical barrier to
fulfilling the two-year-old Good Friday peace agreement and establishing a new
political order in Ulster. Catholic and Protestant political leaders must now
work together -- and with paramilitary leaders on both sides -- to translate
this hopeful development into a durable peace.

The I.R.A.'s statement came just 12 hours after the British and Irish
governments announced that they had agreed on a new formula to restart the
suspended home-rule government in Belfast. Under the plan, the power-sharing
arrangement that Britain suspended in February after only eight weeks in
operation would resume on May 22. The February deadlock was due in large part to
the I.R.A.'s intransigence over disarmament. At the time, David Trimble, the
pivotal Protestant leader, was threatening to give up his post over the arms
issue.

The I.R.A.'s new proposal meets the British and Irish governments' demand that
paramilitary groups state clearly that they will put their arms "completely and
verifiably beyond use." The group said some arms dumps would be open for
inspection within weeks as a confidence-building measure and would be subject to
re-inspection at regular intervals by representatives of an international
disarmament commission to verify that weapons are not being used. The I.R.A.
also said it would reappoint representatives to the commission.

To move from confidence-building steps to a broader disarmament, the I.R.A. will
have to devise long-term timetables for setting aside all of its explosives,
hand grenades, assault rifles and pistols, subject to verification. The
Protestant paramilitaries must do the same.

The I.R.A.'s long-awaited commitment was not an easy one for the group to make.
Its leaders deserve credit for overcoming doubts about disarmament among the
organization's most militant members. Reciprocal steps must be made by the
Unionist side. Mr. Trimble greeted the I.R.A.'s announcement cautiously, but he
conceded that it "does appear to break new ground." He must now follow through
on his recent promise to bring his party back into a home-rule government if the
I.R.A. made a firm commitment to disarm, without waiting for actual disarmament
to begin.

The British and Irish governments have postponed by a year the deadline for
completing a number of additional measures that are needed to insure peace. They
include development of a new police force with a more balanced membership among
Roman Catholic and Protestant officers and new provisions for respecting human
rights. These goals should not be neglected in the months ahead.

Both Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and his Irish counterpart, Bertie
Ahern, have shown admirable persistence in reviving the Good Friday agreement.
Mr. Trimble and Gerry Adams, the leader of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political
wing, have each shown courage in making the compromises necessary to end three
decades of sectarian conflict that has cost more than 3,600 lives. The I.R.A.
and the Protestant paramilitary groups have maintained cease-fires for nearly
three years now. With the prospect of renewed self-rule, there are grounds for
optimism in Northern Ireland among the overwhelming majority who yearn for a
fair and lasting peace.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); IRELAND (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%);

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);

COMPANY: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (93%); IRISH REPUBLICAN
ARMY (93%);

ORGANIZATION: IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (93%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: NORTHERN IRELAND;   NORTHERN IRELAND (94%); IRELAND (93%); UNITED
KINGDOM (93%);   BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES
(90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (90%); ARMS
CONTROL & DISARMAMENT (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); PROTESTANTS &
PROTESTANTISM (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); FIREARMS (78%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%); DISARMAMENT (78%); CIVIL WAR
(78%); WEAPONS INSPECTIONS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); APPOINTMENTS (75%);
DELAYS & POSTPONEMENTS (74%); EASTER SEASON (71%); RELIGION (71%); POLICE FORCES

 (60%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (56%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%);

PERSON: DAVID TRIMBLE (76%);

LOAD-DATE: May 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1655 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 10, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Federal Judge Bars U.S. From Deporting Boy to Thailand

BYLINE: By BARBARA WHITAKER

SECTION: Section A; Page 24; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: LOS ANGELES, May 9


A federal judge delayed the deportation of a 2-year-old boy to Thailand today,
saying that he had questions about the boy's safety.

The judge, Dickran Tevrizian of United States District Court, acting at the
request of lawyers for the boy, Phanupong Khaisri, issued a temporary
restraining order against the Immigration and Naturalization Service that
prevented the agency from deporting him for 10 days.
 Judge Tevrizian said he had concerns about the boy's safety in Thailand, and
scheduled a hearing for May 23.

"I can't, as a parent . . . just simply return this child back to Thailand after
what this child has been through," The Associated Press quoted him as saying.

He said he would appoint two doctors to examine Phanupong, who had suffered an
ear infection and flu after he arrived in the United States.  The restraining
order came shortly after members of the Thai community here had gone to court to
block Phanupong's return as they sought custody safeguards similar to those
afforded Elian Gonzalez, the Cuban boy whose case has inflamed passions in
Miami.

Phanupong had been taken into custody on April 11 by the immigration service,
which said he was being used as a decoy by a group smuggling women into the
United States. The boy had been detained at Los Angeles International Airport
with a man and woman posing as his parents.

Advocates representing the child said they feared that sending him back to
Thailand without more investigation could put him in jeopardy.

The Thai government, working with the immigration service, had intended to
return the boy to Thailand today. But advocates refused to give the boy to Thai
officials this morning and filed a lawsuit.

After he arrived in the United States, the boy had been placed with a social
worker through the Thai Community Development Center, a nonprofit organization
that serves the Thai residents in California.

According to the lawsuit, the boy's mother was sold into sexual slavery at the
age of 12, and Phanupong had been in the care of his maternal grandmother until
February, when his mother sold him for about $260. It is believed that he had
been used as a decoy at least two other times.

The father, according to the lawsuit, had contracted H.I.V., the virus that
causes AIDS, and had committed suicide when the boy was just a few months old.

Although the paternal grandparents have agreed to adopt Phanupong, advocates for
the boy said they believed the case was being rushed in a way that could further
traumatize him. They said they feared that the boy would be placed in an
orphanage while his adoption was processed.

"Given the widespread nature of corruption, bribery and child trafficking in
Thailand, we are very concerned that unless custody is transferred to his
paternal grandparents he may find himself back in the stream of illicit child
trafficking once again," said Peter A. Schey, president of the Center for Human
Rights and Constitutional Law, who filed the lawsuit.

The lawsuit had asked that the immigration service provide a formal hearing
before the boy leaves the country, that his parole status be extended
temporarily if the request is not granted and that he be given temporary asylum
while custodial arrangements are finalized.

Mr. Schey said the United States Attorney's Office has agreed to try to resolve
the case in the next two days.

Sharon Gavin, a spokeswoman for the immigration service, said officials have
been working with the Thai government to assure the boy's safe return.

"We're all working toward the same goal: to ensure the safety and well being of
the young boy," Ms. Gavin said.

Chanchanit Martorell, executive director of the Thai Community Development
Center, said that given the child's background and what he had been through,
extra care was needed in the transition to a new home.

Advocates for the boy question why the type of scrutiny that was given to Elian
Gonzalez, whose father was interviewed and brought to the United States, was not
being given to this child.

They speculate that the United States is less inclined to go against a country
with which it shares political and economic ties as opposed to a country such as
Cuba.

While there are few similarities between the two cases, Phanupong has no
relatives in the United States and no one is seeking permanent residency for
him, advocates feel that his case should have been given similar scrutiny.

"Elian has been treated with kids gloves by the Attorney General, the I.N.S. and
the president," Mr. Schey said. "This child is being treated completely
different."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7383 NEWS SYNDICATES (56%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%); THAILAND (93%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%);

CITY: LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); MIAMI, FL, USA (79%);

COMPANY: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  ASSOCIATED PRESS (56%);
IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (84%); IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION
SERVICE (84%);

ORGANIZATION: IMMIGRATION AND NATURALIZATION SERVICE  IMMIGRATION &
NATURALIZATION SERVICE  (84%); IMMIGRATION & NATURALIZATION SERVICE (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: THAILAND;   UNITED STATES (94%); THAILAND (93%);   CALIFORNIA, USA
(92%); FLORIDA, USA (79%);   LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (92%); MIAMI, FL, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; DEPORTATION; SMUGGLING; SUITS AND LITIGATION

 DEPORTATION (92%); IMMIGRATION (92%); JUDGES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(90%); GRANDPARENTS (89%); CHILD TRAFFICKING (89%); LITIGATION (89%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (89%); ORPHANS (78%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (78%); BRIBERY (78%);
RESTRAINING ORDERS (77%); LAWYERS (75%); EAR NOSE & THROAT DISORDERS (75%);
REFUGEES (73%); APPOINTMENTS (73%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (71%); SMUGGLING
(70%); AIDS & HIV (70%); CORRUPTION (69%); INVESTIGATIONS (69%); INFLUENZA
(68%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (66%); SLAVERY (61%); SUICIDE (50%); AIRPORTS (50%);
CHILD RESIDENTIAL HOMES (75%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (73%);

PERSON: TEVRIZIAN, DICKRAN (JUDGE); WHITAKER, BARBARA; PHANUPONG  PHANUPONG
KHAISRI (92%); ELIAN GONZALEZ (62%); PETER A SCHEY (58%);

LOAD-DATE: May 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Phanupong Khaisri, 2, was used by smugglers, federal agents
said. (Kirk McKoy/The Los Angeles Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1659 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 12, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Czech Gypsies Knock Harder on the Closed Doors

BYLINE: By STEVEN ERLANGER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1462 words

DATELINE: PRAGUE, May 10


Monika Horakova, a sparky psychologist of 26, is a member of the Czech
Republic's Parliament -- the only one who is a Roma, or Gypsy. But she is still
seeking criminal prosecution of the club in her hometown, Brno, that barred her
because of her race.

"It's happened many times to me," she said. "But the problem is the process.
When you want to get your rights and fight, it's very difficult. It's hard to
prove discrimination, and it's up to the state prosecutor."

Once, in 1998, the club owner simply said the place was full and, after she
complained to the police, abouncer told them that she had been "drunk and
arrogant," she said, laughing. The police did not bother to investigate her
charges further. Last autumn, she said, she was told explicitly, "You can't go
in because you're a Gypsy."

She paused. "You know, it's really unbelievable in the 21st century. But the
biggest problem in this country remains racism."

Still, with the Czech Republic's move toward the European Union, Ms. Horakova
decided to sue in a civil court, for violation of her civic rights. Recently,
she said, still delighted, the civil court agreed with her and awarded her
damages from the club owner. If the money is finally paid, she said, she will
give it to children's homes and hospitals.

"This is a precedent for the Czech Republic," she said. "I was -- God! -- I was
very happy about it. It gave me a bit of hope that my children will live in a
free country, in a country where you can get your rights." She stopped, quickly
answering the imminent question, "And I hope it's not just because I'm a member
of Parliament."

Ondrej Gina, 49, who runs the Roma Cultural Union from a trailer in his
hometown, Rokycany, is not so sure. He has brought many cases of discrimination
against restaurant and bar owners but has never won.

The Czech Republic has a big problem in its treatment of its 200,000 or so
Gypsies, he says, and while policies are slowly improving in the capital, huge
problems persist in the countryside.

"I was born here, but the town doesn't like me," he said wryly. His relations
with town hall are so bad that the mayor refuses to see him.

Mr. Gina started his protest activity in 1988, under the Communists, when he
went on hunger strike for eight days. The next year, with the Velvet Revolution,
he started a branch of the pro-democracy Civic Forum in Rokycany, a town near
Pilsen with 13,500 people, about 800 Gypsies among them -- 90 percent of whom
are unemployed.

Open discrimination in public places and restaurants is common, he said. "It's
illegal, but the town silently tolerates it, or says it's a problem for the
restaurant owners."

For five years, he has been engaged in a court case against one restaurant.
Local courts throw out his case. Higher courts, when he appeals, send the case
back down for another round. His goal, he says, is to get the state prosecutor
to enforce the article in the criminal code that forbids such discrimination.

"I want the precedent," he said. Asked about Ms. Horakova's case in civil court,
he said: "In civil court, we bring the case as individuals. I want the state to
do it."

He has even had an American-style sit-in, with the press invited. "But nobody
would serve us," he said. "The staff just walked around."

Part of his problem with the mayor stems from a 1997 meeting on housing, when
city officials would not talk to the Gypsies as a group, but only as
individuals. The Gypsies lay on the floor and would not leave. The police came
and filmed the protest, Mr. Gina said. "Then they showed it on television, to
show the whole nation what a mess the Roma can make when they are allowed to
meet with public officials," he said. "Now the mayor says he'll never negotiate
with Gina again."

But Mr. Gina has another reason to be proud. His son, Ondrej Gina Jr., 29, is
the first Gypsy news announcer on the nightly prime-time state television news.

Instead of going to college, "I was trained to be a cook and a waiter, but I
never worked in this field," the younger Mr. Gina said, smiling. "It didn't
interest me."

What has shaped his life is having his father as a model, he said. "Everything I
have in me I have thanks to him." But he also took advantage of Communism's
fall, working for a nongovernmental foundation and then leaving, in 1992, for
Germany, where he worked for a Gypsy group run by one of the few radical Gypsy
advocates, Rudko Kawczynski.

Mr. Gina was a press officer for three years, became interested in journalism
and then was chosen to study at the Council of Europe and the Central European
University in Budapest, financed by George Soros. Hired by Czech Radio in 1998,
Mr. Gina did so well that a television producer asked him to try television, and
he quickly became an anchor.

"Viewers reacted very positively to seeing a Romany on the screen," he said. "I
was pleasantly surprised. Of course, I received some negative letters as well,
but everyone has the right to an opinion, right?"

To his proud father, the television job has helped all the Gypsies. "It's made
us more visible," he said. "They can see a Romany on television every day. And I
think it surprised a lot of people. The idea still prevails that Roma can only
work with their hands and a shovel." And Gypsies themselves started watching the
news.

The elder Mr. Gina has seen the sharp change from Communism, when life for most
Gypsies was better here, if only because they had jobs and income. The goal of
the Communist state was assimilation, "to turn us into working socialist
citizens of Gypsy origin," he said. That meant the repression of language, songs
and culture, as well as a controversial birth-control program involving paid
sterilization.

But it also meant a certain legal equality, guaranteed jobs, however poor, and
the repression of overt racism. Skinheads and neo-fascists are post-Communist
phenomena, Mr. Gina said.

The government was slow to take these seriously, he said, and then worried about
the country's image. Political parties "sensed the negative sentiment toward
Roma and were afraid they would lose voters if they pressed Roma issues, so they
played it both ways, doing enough to have something to say abroad, but not to do
so much as to lose votes."

But with a recent wave of criticism from the United States Congress, the State
Department and the European Union about Gypsy policies here -- beginning with
negative human-rights reports in 1997 -- the Czech government began to deal more
seriously with a worsening situation.

Some Gypsies had been killed by skinheads, unemployment among Gypsies was
skyrocketing, the percentage of Gypsy children put into special schools for the
retarded -- after taking tests tilted toward Czech language and culture -- had
increased. "They could no longer ignore it or talk around it," Mr. Gina said.
"Now they admit that racism and discrimination are big problems in the Czech
Republic, and they are beginning to do something about it."

At the same time, he said, the Gypsies have learned to organize and to publicize
their grievances, not just here but abroad. There are more indigenous Czech
foundations involved with helping Gypsies, not just foreign organizations like
Mr. Soros's Open Society Institute, which helps Mr. Gina's organization.

But there is also too much paternalism, Ms. Horakova said, with too many Czechs
who speak no Romany making a living by helping a people they do not understand,
while Gypsies themselves go jobless. "I call it the Roma industry," she said.

Now, under pressure, the government is moving to create fairer tests for
children that do not depend so much on Czech-language skills and culture.
Because of a change Ms. Horakova initiated in the law, entrance into secondary
school is now by examination, open to anyone, even those assigned to the special
schools.

The younger Mr. Gina thinks that life is slowly improving here, that the new
openness must eventually filter down from the capital to the countryside. "There
are still many xenophobes," he said. "But many people realize there is a problem
that needs to be solved. I consider the Czech Republic my homeland. I couldn't
live anywhere else."

For Ms. Horakova, there is still the sense of a double life, in the outer world
and in the Gypsy one, but she enjoys the tension.

"I'm a great example of integration here, but I didn't know how to describe it,"
she said. "Then a friend told me, 'You have a permanent oscillation between
Czech and Roma culture.' It's true. Sometimes in an hour, I can switch between
thinking in Romany and thinking in Czech. It gives me a richer life."

"I'm proud I'm Roma, and we're a part of this nation," she said. "It's not about
chauvinism. But you must never bow your head."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CZECH REPUBLIC (96%); EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%);



CITY: PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CZECH REPUBLIC; BRNO (CZECH REPUBLIC); ;  CZECH REPUBLIC (96%);
EUROPE (92%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (91%);   PRAGUE, CZECH REPUBLIC
(79%);

SUBJECT: GYPSIES; DISCRIMINATION; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
DRINKING PLACES (90%); ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); EUROPEAN UNION

 (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); RACE & RACISM
(70%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (66%); MAYORS (65%); CITIES (64%); CHILDREN (64%);

 RESTAURANTS (60%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (78%);

PERSON: ERLANGER, STEVEN; HORAKOVA, MONIKA  ONDREJ GINA JR (90%); MONIKA
HORAKOVA (64%);

LOAD-DATE: May 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: May 16, 2000, Tuesday

CORRECTION:

A map on Friday with an article about Czech Gypsies who are fighting
discrimination mislabeled the country east of Slovakia and Hungary. It is
Ukraine, not Belarus.




GRAPHIC: Photo: Monika Horakova, a 26-year-old psychologist who is the only
Gypsy member of the Czech Parliament, says that the country's biggest problem
remains racism. "It's really unbelievable in the 21st century," she said. (Julie
Denesha for The New York Times)

Map of the Czech Republic highlighting Brno: A Brno club owner must pay damages
for violating a Gypsy's rights.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1663 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 14, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The Way We Live Now: 5-14-00: Questions For Sajeda Hayat And Sehar Saba;
Tearing at the Veil

BYLINE: By Katha Pollitt

SECTION: Section 6; Page 23; Column 1; Magazine Desk

LENGTH: 669 words


Q: Sajeda and Sehar -- and we should say that we aren't using your real names
here, they're the names you use to travel, because of the danger in which your
work places you -- you're both members of the Revolutionary Association of the
Women of Afghanistan. Many Americans hear the word "revolutionary" and they
think "Communist" and "violent." Can you tell me about RAWA?

SABA: RAWA was founded in 1977 as an organization of women who support women's
rights and human rights for both men and women. We opposed the Russian invasion.
Today we oppose all the fundamentalists, not just the Taliban. We're for
education, health care, equality for women, secular democracy. In Afghanistan,
that's revolutionary.

And you're based in Pakistan, where there is a vast population of Afghan
refugees. What kind of work does RAWA do?

SABA: In the refugee camps we have schools for girls, and boys too. In
Afghanistan, since schools for girls were banned by the Taliban, we run
underground home-based classes for girls and literacy courses for women. And we
have mobile health-care teams. But all the courses and all the home-based
classes are completely underground, because of the Taliban. And also we have
some income-generating projects for women, like carpet weaving.

Some people argue that Islamic fundamentalism is part of Afghan culture. What
would you say to those who accuse you of trying to impose alien, Western values?

HAYAT: In some ways, yes, we want to secure women's rights in Afghanistan, maybe
for the first time. But before the Taliban, about 40 percent of Afghan doctors
and 60 percent of teachers were women. People confuse Afghan culture with the
Taliban, when in fact the people of Afghanistan hate the Taliban.

Working underground in Afghanistan to fight the Taliban regime is an incredibly
dangerous undertaking, is it not? Have you two ever been subjected to violence?

HAYAT: At demonstrations against the fundamentalists we were attacked twice --
hit with sticks, arrested, put in prison. Our male supporters beat them back. We
women fought, too. I was also beaten by the Pakistani police. We've been
arrested selling our magazine.

You're both in your 20's. What do your families think about political
involvements?

SABA: My mother wasn't much educated. When I came back from RAWA school after
three years my family was in a refugee camp. I encouraged her to learn to read.
In two years she learned how. Now she works as a RAWA nurse. My brother is a
bodyguard for us when we go to give interviews. But my older relatives still
think I should stay home and not let strange men look at me in the streets.

HAYAT: My mother is in RAWA also.

And is it the same with your older relatives? Do some of them say you should
lead more conventional lives?

HAYAT: Oh, yeah. They say I'm young, I should be thinking about nice things,
enjoy life, get married, think about fashion. I say, sure, but how can you think
about clothes when people are being raped and killed, and they're so poor
they're selling their children on the streets? Maybe some people could think
about fashion, but we can't.

Do you talk among yourselves about the harm that might befall you?

HAYAT: Of course. We make jokes, we pretend to make up our wills. Older, more
experienced members say we should have all preparations. But we don't talk much
about it. When you think about what's going on in Afghanistan, you stop caring
so much about your own safety. And we have ways of staying cheerful. We read
books by women who've been brave -- Iranian, Vietnamese, even Joan of Arc. If I
get depressed and lose hope, then what will other women and girls my age have to
look to?

SABA: If the Taliban caught me inside Afghanistan they would definitely torture
and kill me, stone me as a quote-unquote prostitute. So the punishment has
already been decreed. But I can do it. I'm ready for everything. Someday we will
die but maybe it will be a prouder death than from some natural cause.   Katha
Pollitt


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%);
PAKISTAN (79%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ASSN OF THE WOMEN OF AFGHANISTAN; TALIBAN (AFGHAN GROUP)

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ASSN OF THE WOMEN OF AFGHANISTAN; TALIBAN (AFGHAN
GROUP)

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; RUSSIA;   AFGHANISTAN (95%); UNITED STATES (92%);
RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); PAKISTAN (79%);

SUBJECT: INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES;
POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; WOMEN  WOMEN (92%); TALIBAN (90%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (90%); RELIGION (90%); REFUGEES (89%); FUNDAMENTALISM (88%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (79%); GENDER EQUALITY (76%); PROTESTS & DEMONSTRATIONS (74%); FAMILY
(74%); REFUGEE & RELIEF CAMPS (73%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (71%); ARRESTS (69%);
TEACHING & TEACHERS (64%); INTERVIEWS (64%); POLITICS (60%);

PERSON: POLLITT, KATHA

LOAD-DATE: May 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo (Photograph by Dana Smith)

TYPE: Interview

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1669 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 15, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

A Bungling U.N. Undermines Itself

BYLINE: By Michael Ignatieff;  Michael Ignatieff is the author of "Virtual War:
Kosovo and Beyond."

SECTION: Section A; Page 19; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 641 words


While a demoralized United Nations force in Sierra Leone awaits the rebel
advance on the capital, Freetown, the U.N. system's astounding inability to
learn from past mistakes is on display once again.

As in Bosnia, the Security Council dispatched peacekeepers to enforce a peace
that did not exist. As in Rwanda, member countries supplied troops without the
capacity to defend themselves. As in Somalia, forces have been sucked into a
civil war without the means and the will to prevail. Once again, peacekeepers
have been taken hostage. In 1995, the Bosnian Serbs at least chained them to
buildings in full view of cameras. In Sierra Leone, the U.N. can't even find
them. And as if that were not enough, U.N. forces have made common cause with a
vicious local militia that it was supposed to disarm.

The U.N. seems to survive only by forgetting. By forgetting, it manages to
repress a legacy of shame. In 1994, peacekeepers were forced to watch as Rwandan
civilians were hacked to death near their compound. In 1995, a Dutch battalion
at Srebrenica allowed thousands of civilians to be massacred by the Bosnian
Serbs. Only last autumn, Secretary General Kofi Annan vowed to learn from these
catastrophes. Now a new catastrophe unfolds.

The U.N.'s department of peacekeeping operations knew that the contingents in
Sierra Leone were under-strength and poorly equipped, yet failed to protest
publicly when the Security Council sent them anyway. Now the U.N. forces in
Freetown have to defend themselves against rebels armed with heavy machine guns
seized from the U.N. hostages.

Institutional amnesia locks the United Nations system into a fatal compulsion to
repeat. An incorrigible moral narcissism about its own good intentions makes it
unable to recognize that its central ideal and instrument -- peacekeeping -- is
so flawed that it must be abandoned altogether. The idea of interposing soldiers
in blue berets and side arms between two sides had some uses in the interstate
wars of the cold war era. It has bankrupted itself in the civil wars since.
Traditional peacekeeping only works when states at war want peace. It only works
when peacekeepers maintain neutrality.

Wars like Sierra Leone's are about the destruction of states and the creation of
new forms of ethnic majority tyranny, backed by ethnic cleansing. To be neutral
here is to be an accomplice in crime. To keep the peace here is to ratify the
conquests of evil.

It is time to bury peacekeeping before it buries the U.N. The Security Council
should remain the ultimate source of legitimacy for the use of military force,
but the Secretariat should stop running peacekeeping operations, and blue-beret
forces should stop going where armed resistance can be expected. Where peace has
to be enforced rather than maintained, what's required are combat-capable
warriors under robust rules of engagement, with armor, ammunition and
intelligence capability and a single line of command to a national government or
regional alliance.

Since Africa lacks a NATO of its own, the chain of command must be led by a
regional power, like Nigeria.  In Sierra Leone, the U.N. contingent will have to
hold on until it can be evacuated. Once the blue helmets are out of the way,
green helmets can go in. The Security Council could then declare the rebels a
threat to peace and authorize a mission, led by Nigeria, with Western logistical
help, to crush the rebels and restore order.

Sierra Leone demonstrates the futility of neutrality itself. There are a few
cases -- and Sierra Leone is one of them -- when the international community has
to take sides and do so with crushing force. But the largest lesson of all is
that peacekeeping is destroying the United Nations itself. If it still values
its own survival, it must abandon an ideal it has so comprehensively betrayed.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); RWANDA (93%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (92%); SOMALIA (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (95%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%);
RWANDA (93%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%); SOMALIA (92%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%); WAR
& CONFLICT (91%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); CIVIL WAR (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); HOSTAGE TAKING
(89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); COLD WAR (73%);
WEAPONS DECOMMISSIONING (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (60%);

PERSON: IGNATIEFF, MICHAEL

LOAD-DATE: May 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1685 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
A Chance to Give Evil Its Rewards

BYLINE: By JANE PERLEZ

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1009 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


FODAY SANKOH, the Sierra Leone warlord whose thugs made a tactic of hacking off
the hands and limbs of children and others, ended the week a prisoner under the
guard of British soldiers, but that is just the beginning of the story for the
rest of the world.

Will other nations now insist he be brought to justice? Or will there be another
diplomatic pact with him, forged for a short-term goal of pacifying his troops?

Here, then, is a stark situation that may compel democracies to answer a bitter
question that haunted most of the last century: How much business can good guys
afford to do with bad guys?

The oft-expressed presumption in democratic societies these days is that
strongmen who inflict terrible crimes, whether on their neighbors or on their
own people, should pay for their wrongdoing. But the reality has not been so
simple. As the 1990's spawned warlords from Yugoslavia to Haiti, from Cambodia
to Africa, the principle was often sacrificed to the pragmatic goal of striking
peace deals, no matter how shaky.

"Diplomats look to the short term, they tend to think any agreement is good,"
said Morton I. Abramowitz, a veteran American envoy. "Diplomats like to export
problems to the future."

Even in Mr. Sankoh's case, there are divisions in the Clinton administration.
While some officials argue strongly for bringing the warlord to justice, others
seem to believe that he still may have a role to play in the evolving efforts to
bring peace to Sierra Leone -- or at least in freeing United Nations
peacekeepers whom Mr. Sankoh's rebels have taken hostage. The Administration's
envoy, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who is in the region now, is on good terms with
Mr. Sankoh's companion warlord, President Charles Taylor of Liberia, and Sierra
Leone officials have criticized him for suggesting -- before Mr. Sankoh was
detained -- that the he be included in reconciliation efforts.

What might be the logic of that? Consider past experience. In Haiti, there was
clear benefit when an American-brokered deal allowed a strongman, Gen. Raoul
Cedras, to go into exile in exchange for a peaceful landing of American troops
sent to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power.

In the former Yugoslavia, the benefits were not so clear. In 1994, Western
powers dealt with the Serbian leader Slobodan Milosevic even though they knew he
was responsible for war crimes in the Balkans. His value as a guarantor of the
Dayton peace accords was considered more vital than serving justice, and the
accords did stop the killing in Bosnia. But they also left Mr. Milosevic in a
position to start the next war, in Kosovo. Only during that war was he finally
indicted by the United Nations tribunal for Balkan war crimes. And he still
remains in power.

Will a pact be made with Mr. Sankoh? In the end, probably not, most diplomats
think. His crimes are too egregious and public outrage too intense. But the
possibility cannot be dismissed.

Just days before Mr. Sankoh broke the Lome accord for peace in Sierra Leone, an
agreement that had granted him an amnesty and a strong position in the Sierra
Leone government, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright spoke as though
another deal with any such warlord could not be imagined. She told a conference
on war crimes: "We have to keep our eye on the prize: justice for the
perpetrators of genocide and crimes against humanity."

But last week, faced with the collapse of United Nations peacekeeping operations
and another hellish descent into war in Sierra Leone, the State Department
sounded a different note. Richard Boucher, the department's spokesman,
repeatedly evaded questions about whether Mr. Sankoh was a candidate for trial
as a war criminal. Part of the reason was concern for the safety of several
hundred United Nations peacekeepers who remain hostages of Mr. Sankoh's rebels.
In other words, the rebels can still create havoc, and Mr. Sankoh's presumed
power to control that group, the R.U.F., remains a bargaining chip -- just as
Mr. Milosevic's power to fix problems he had created was his strongest card in
Dayton.

Still, diplomats this time appear to be shrinking from dealing with Mr. Sankoh,
partly because of the nature of his crimes and partly because he has such a bad
record of keeping peace bargains he has made.

"You have all the reasons to prosecute firmly established," said Diane
Orentlicher, professor of law and director of the war crimes research office at
Washington University. "There is no doubt that the R.U.F. committed atrocious
war crimes and violated international law. There is no question that Sankoh is
not useful as a peacemaker. And he's in custody."

Ms. Orentlicher says there are a number of ways Mr. Sankoh could be prosecuted
-- either in Sierra Leone, in a foreign country or, less likely, by a new United
Nations war crimes tribunal for Sierra Leone. "One of the most remarkable
developments in recent years has been the willingness of states to explore novel
mechanisms to ensure accountability," she said.

One of the most celebrated such approaches was called to mind by the fact that
Mr. Sankoh was being guarded by soldiers from Britain, whose courts ruled that
Gen. Augusto Pinochet could be extradited to Spain to face trial for crimes
committed in Chile.

ONE of Britain's most prominent barristers, Geoffrey Robertson, argued last week
that a prosecution of Mr. Sankoh in Britain would be a natural followup to the
Pinochet case. Because Mr. Sankoh was now effectively in British hands, Mr.
Robertson said, "Pinochet has opened the door to a Sankoh trial -- this is the
challenge that human rights law now throws down to the diplomats." It should be
remembered, though, that in the Pinochet case, Britain's legal authorities were
more enthusiastic about allowing extradition than was the British government,
which would have had to face the political and diplomatic consequences. And now,
the government of Prime Minister Tony Blair has yet to show any enthusiasm for
hauling Mr. Sankoh into the Old Bailey for trial.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA (93%); HAITI (92%);
UNITED KINGDOM (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO (79%); AFRICA (79%);
LIBERIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); SERBIA
(93%); HAITI (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); KOSOVO
(79%); AFRICA (79%); LIBERIA (79%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS;
WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; HOSTAGES  WAR CRIMES (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (86%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (78%); PEACEKEEPING (77%); CIVIL WAR
(77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); INDICTMENTS

 (76%); PEACE PROCESS (74%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (74%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%);
TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); US PRESIDENTS (70%); HOSTAGE TAKING (68%);
CORRECTIONS (90%);

PERSON: SANKOH, FODAY; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); PERLEZ, JANE  JESSE JACKSON (50%);

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Mutilation of civilians like these children has been a hallmark
tactic of the rebels in Sierra Leone who are led by Foday Sankoh. (Associated
Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1686 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

The World;
Wanted, but How Badly?

BYLINE: By STEVEN LEE MYERS

SECTION: Section 4; Page 4; Column 2; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 500 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


WHEN French troops in Bosnia captured Momcilo Krajisnik last month, making him
the highest-ranking Bonsian Serb in the custody of the war crimes tribunal in
The Hague, Western officials said his arrest was a warning to those suspects
still at large that they could not sleep so easily any more.

Last week, officials here and in The Hague sounded a lot less smug.

Gen. Dragoljub Ojdanic, the Yugoslav defense minister who was indicted for
crimes committed during Serbia's campaign against Kosovo's Albanians, had just
spent five days in Russia, where he was received as a dignitary despite the fact
that international law obliged Russia to arrest the man.

General Ojdanic's visit dismayed supporters of the tribunal, but there was
little they or the State Department could do beside issue public condemnations.

In fact, the visit underscored the fundamental frustration facing the tribunal.
Despite its recent successes in arresting and trying war crimes suspects from
the former Yugoslavia, the most senior military and political figures under
indictment remain safely out of reach, starting with President Slobodan
Milosevic of Yugoslavia.

While they may have curtailed some activities -- Mr. Milosevic is unlikely to
risk a trip abroad -- their status as the world's most wanted men has not scared
them completely underground.

A few weeks after Mr. Krajisnik's arrest, a respected Bosnian newsweekly
published a detailed account of the comings and goings of Radovan Karadzic, the
political leader of Bosnia's Serbs and also a wanted man. The same report said
that Ratko Mladic, who commanded the Bosnian Serb army, often traveled from
Serbia to visit his farm in Bosnia, where he keeps bees, despite the presence of
20,000 NATO-led peacekeepers. A month before, he had appeared at a soccer match
in Belgrade -- with bodyguards.

Frustration over the failure to catch these men prompted the State Department to
print up thousands of "Wanted" posters, to be distributed in Bosnia, that
offered $5 million for information about their whereabouts. The effort drew
immediate derision -- and not just because the first batch was printed in
English (a Serbo-Croatian version appeared later), or because it included a
toll-free 800 telephone number that would work only in the United States.

Sen. Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina, wrote to Secretary of State
Madeleine K. Albright saying he had "the information you are looking for." He
noted the most recent sightings of Mr. Milosevic and Mr. Mladic and even gave
Mr. Milosevic's address: 15 Uzicka Street in Belgrade, the president's official
residence. (Mr. Helms asked that the reward money go to a charity in North
Carolina.)

To be fair, it's natural that Serbia would become a haven for wanted Serbs. But
Mr. Helms and some human-rights advocates accuse wary NATO peacekeepers of
letting parts of Bosnia become havens too, out of fear that arrests would
provoke retaliation from nationalists who support the suspects.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); FRANCE (92%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED
STATES (92%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (91%);

COMPANY: BOSNIA'S SERBS (57%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%); STATE
DEPARTMENT (57%);

ORGANIZATION: BOSNIA'S SERBS (57%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (57%);
STATE DEPARTMENT (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; RUSSIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (97%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO

 (94%); NETHERLANDS (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);

 FRANCE (92%); KOSOVO (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); ALBANIA (79%); CROATIA (79%);
   NORTH CAROLINA, USA (92%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(91%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  WAR CRIMES (91%);
ARRESTS (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); PEACEKEEPING (89%); ARMED FORCES (78%);
CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); ARMIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%);
INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (74%);

 POLITICS (72%); CHARITIES (69%); NEWS BRIEFS (66%); SOCCER TOURNAMENTS (50%);
SOCCER (50%);

PERSON: MYERS, STEVEN LEE; OJDANIC, DRAGOLJUB (GEN); MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES)

 SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (69%); STEVEN J LEE (59%);

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: The State Department's wanted poster. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1687 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   May 21, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

MUSIC;
Wading Into Depths of Memory and Repression

BYLINE: By JAMES R. OESTREICH

SECTION: Section 2; Page 41; Column 1; Arts and Leisure Desk

LENGTH: 2048 words

DATELINE: VIENNA


CITY of Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms, sundry Strausses, Mahler,
Schoenberg, Berg and Webern. City of Freud, Adler and Reich. A burnished
nostalgia crosses paths with a studied forgetfulness, and myth lurks at every
turn.

When the Vienna Philharmonic performed Beethoven's Ninth Symphony recently in
the quarry of a former Nazi concentration camp in Mauthausen, Austria, 120 miles
to the west, it knowingly waded into deep waters of memory and repression,
meaning and association, hope and delusion. And all of that is to reckon without
the late-breaking international fracas over Jorg Haider and the Freedom Party,
as the orchestra did through most of its four years of planning.

Seizing on the symbolism of the year 2000, the event was intended as a
Janus-headed look backward, with remorse and a hope for healing, and forward,
with resolve and a hope for renewal. Crucial to each point was a frank
acknowledgment of a shameful past, the orchestra's and the nation's as a whole,
something that has been slower to emerge here than in Germany. Austria likes to
portray itself as the first victim of Nazi Germany, pointing to the Anschluss of
1938, despite its widespread embrace of annexation to the Third Reich. As has
often been noted, Austrians figured among SS forces in concentration camps all
out of proportion to their percentage of the Reich's Germanic population.

Inevitably, the concert raised questions about the uses and abuses of music.
Although some saw the orchestra's venture as misguided, many considered it a
tool for good. Still, any confusion of aesthetics with morality, the cherished
notion that at least the loftiest music is invariably a force for human
edification and communication, must fall before even the most cursory reflection
on the place of music in the Third Reich.

Some of these themes have, coincidentally, taken on added resonance with
publication of Richard Newman's new book, "Alma Rose: Vienna to Auschwitz," the
story of a noted violinist who went on to direct a women's orchestra at
Auschwitz-Birkenau. To a lesser extent, it also tells the story of her father,
Arnold Rose, the leader of the celebrated Rose Quartet through several
transformations, a revered concertmaster of the Vienna Philharmonic and of its
parent Vienna State Opera Orchestra for 57 years, and a brother-in-law of
Mahler. The book encapsulates the plunge from dizzying heights of Viennese
culture to fathomless depths of Nazi depredation. And through it all, there is
every reason to believe, the Vienna players performed Beethoven brilliantly.

"My Beethoven," Arnold Rose, a thoroughly assimilated Romanian-born Jew who
identified himself completely with Austrian culture, liked to call the composer.
"To go to a better world, take the Beethoven piano sonatas and play them
through," he advised his son, Alfred, who had fled to Cincinnati, from his own
exile in London. The elder Rose's unstinting service to Beethoven, to the
orchestra and to society availed him nothing. He was summarily dismissed from
the orchestra at the time of the Anschluss. A dozen or so other Jewish members
quickly followed.

Alma Rose saw her father safely to London, then, against advice from friends,
traveled to the Netherlands, where she worked to support herself and her father,
never to return. Arnold Rose sank into loneliness and despair. The Vienna
Philharmonic offered to reinstate him as concertmaster in January 1946, but he
was no longer in any position to accept. He died in that year, at 82.

With this context in mind, it is eerie to return to a familiar EMI recording of
Beethoven's Ninth Symphony by the Vienna Philharmonic and the Vienna Singverein,
which also performed at Mauthausen, from 1947. The conductor, Herbert von
Karajan, and the soprano soloist, Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, it later emerged, had
both been members of the Nazi party. So had half the members of the orchestra,
in the estimate of Werner Resel, a cellist now in the Philharmonic who, as its
president in 1996, set the Mauthausen project in motion.

In early 1946, Mr. Newman writes in a similar vein, Arnold Rose reported "an
unsubstantiated claim from Vienna that 56 Nazis remained in the Vienna
Philharmonic, as opposed to six in the Berlin Philharmonic." During that year
the Vienna Philharmonic sought permission from American military authorities to
tour France and was turned down. The Americans branded it a "Nazi orchestra," a
term that continues to haunt it.

Karajan's recorded Ninth of the next year is rousing, to say the least. (Does a
listener hear or only imagine an almost militaristic aggression at times?) The
orchestra, of course, plays brilliantly, though the amateur Singverein in no
sense rivals it, as that chorus's latter-day counterpart did in a recent
performance of the work here in the Vienna Musikverein. In the years that
followed, the classical-music world, which had retreated into an ivory tower of
its own by midcentury, proved as adept as Austria in overlooking, excusing and
ultimately forgetting unpleasant historic facts.

Alma Rose, meanwhile, trapped in the occupied Netherlands, failed in an attempt
to escape to Switzerland. Arrested and imprisoned in France, she was eventually
sent to Auschwitz, where she took over a scrappy little women's band and, by all
accounts, turned it into a crack orchestra, the pride of Maria Mandel, the SS
commandant of the women's camp at Birkenau. The Nazi murderers, there is every
reason to believe, appreciated the orchestra's playing just as much as their
victims did.

In addition to presenting concerts, the orchestra played marches for
forced-labor contingents leaving the camp in the morning and returning at night.
Mr. Newman casts doubt on reports that the orchestra entertained as trainloads
of new prisoners arrived, with many being immediately "selected" for death in
the gas chambers.

Alma Rose was a stern taskmaster, believing that only by maintaining the highest
musical standards could the orchestra insure its survival and that of its
members. Yet she appears to have acquitted herself with whatever dignity and
humanity the circumstances allowed: more so than depicted in Fania Fenelon's
1977 book about the orchestra, "Playing for Time," and the CBS film of the same
name. The orchestra members, in any case, received preferential treatment and
did buy time. Most, like Fenelon, survived. Alma Rose herself died in the camp
in 1944, at 37, apparently from botulism.

What role, then, can music, so obviously ambiguous and amoral in its meanings
and so debased by some of its makers and users, or the Vienna Philharmonic, so
compromised in its integrity, play in the quest for a brighter future? A crucial
one, in the view of Leon Zelman, who first presented the idea for the Mauthausen
event to Mr. Resel and the Philharmonic: that of remembrance.

"People don't understand that the tragedy in Europe did not begin with
Mauthausen and Auschwitz," Mr. Zelman said. "It began with words, with hatred,
with annihilation. The young generation in Austria after us must be reminded,
and music has a power to translate. It helps us to remember."

Mr. Zelman, 73, directs the Jewish Welcome Service of Vienna, which invites
refugees to revisit the city they once fled. Born in Poland, he himself passed
through Auschwitz and other camps on his way to Mauthausen: actually one of its
many satellite camps in Austria, Ebensee, from which he was liberated 55 years
ago this month. He remained in Vienna after the war and eventually developed
friendships with members of the Philharmonic, including Mr. Resel and Clemens
Hellsberg, a violinist and the orchestra's current president and archivist, who
himself did much to lay bare the orchestra's Nazi past in his 1992 history,
"Demokratie der Konige" ("Democracy of Kings"), not yet available in English.

Mr. Zelman has no particular connection to music. The references to music in his
touching memoir of 1998, "After Survival," are mainly to the melancholy songs
his mother sang before her disappearance from the Lodz ghetto in Poland to an
unknown but certain death. He chose Beethoven's Ninth Symphony, with its
concluding chorus based on Schiller's "Ode to Joy," he said, "because it
represents the idea of Mauthausen, the vision we had that when we survived, it
would be in a world of freedom."

Around 105,000 prisoners died at Mauthausen in unspeakably brutal conditions:
not only Jews but also non-Jews from Eastern Europe and elsewhere, homosexuals,
Communists and "antisocials." Many others besides Mr. Zelman survived, and
opposition to the Mauthausen event arose primarily from them, not from Mr.
Haider's Freedom Party. (But Mr. Zelman is hardly sanguine on that score; he is
obviously still shaken by the shouts of "Heil Haider!" and the Nazi salutes he
encountered at a rally in St. Stephen's Square last December, before the
election.)

Some survivors opposed the very idea of presenting a musical event on what, they
insisted, should be preserved as holy ground. Some protested the nature of the
music: the triumphal "Ode to Joy" in a place of such sorrows. Some objected to
the participation of the Vienna Philharmonic, with its tainted past.

BUT Mr. Zelman finds nothing of that past in the current orchestra. He said he
was gratified at its unanimous acceptance of his proposal and its readiness to
waive fees.

For Beethoven, said Simon Rattle, who conducted the Mauthausen performance, joy
was always hard-won and thus aptly symbolic of this occasion. In the case of the
Ninth Symphony, the music historian Richard Taruskin suggested in a 1989 essay,
"Resisting the Ninth," the joy of the finale has to be pried from the sublimity
that characterizes the first three movements.

Edmund Burke "contrasted the smallness, the lightness and the pleasurableness of
the Beautiful with the vastness, the obscurity, the painfulness of the Sublime,"
Mr. Taruskin writes. "All the adjectives Burke applies to the 'great' -- vast,
rugged, negligent, dark, gloomy, solid, massive -- suit its first three
movements to perfection, even as the adjectives applied to 'beauty' -- small,
smooth, polished, light, delicate -- seem altogether alien to it." In the same
senses the occasion and the place, in the quarry of Mauthausen, were truly
sublime.

"Having music here is a very good thing," said Thomas Quasthoff, the baritone
soloist in the Beethoven Ninth, who pointed to a personal meaning in the
occasion, since, physically deformed by his mother's use of Thalidomide during
pregnancy, he would have been among the first slain in Nazi times. "But is it
necessary to have so many speakers? The music is important. Speakers don't
change anything."

Mr. Zelman is surely right that remembrance can no longer be entrusted merely to
survivors, most of whom will soon be gone. There must be a way for future
generations to connect to the events of the Holocaust on a visceral level, and
this is indeed a function music can serve.

"It helps open our hearts," Mr. Zelman said. And it brings to bear its
tremendous power of association, through which the memories of musical
experiences fuse viscerally with extramusical circumstances.

"This sort of thing is important, because it gives people something to attach
to," said Wolfgang K. Aulitzky, the director of the medical program of the
American Austrian Foundation. "The Vienna Philharmonic is accomplishing
something the Austrian government should have done long ago, making Austrians
aware of their history. They should do this concert every year."

Back to that notion of joy: to judge from one visit, the Mauthausen quarry is
steadily filled with joyous sounds, the songs of birds. They must have seemed a
cruel mockery to prisoners at the time, but from this vantage point they seem to
speak of natural renewal. Having learned to destroy more efficiently than
nature, can humans settle for less when it comes to repairing the damage? Hope
and resolve, if not joy, may be the only appropriate responses.

Beethoven's Ninth Symphony "still awakens in us longings for what we can no
longer believe in, but wish we could," Mr. Taruskin writes, going on to
elaborate on a phrase coined by the musicologist Joseph Kerman. "We are still in
the valley of the Ninth. And so there's hope."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AUSTRIA (94%); GERMANY (70%); ENGLAND (64%); CANADA (64%); CENTRAL
EUROPE (58%);

STATE: ONTARIO, CANADA (64%);

CITY: VIENNA, AUSTRIA (91%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: VIENNA PHILHARMONIC

ORGANIZATION: VIENNA PHILHARMONIC

GEOGRAPHIC: AUSTRIA; MAUTHAUSEN (AUSTRIA);   AUSTRIA (94%); GERMANY (70%);
ENGLAND (64%); CANADA (64%); CENTRAL EUROPE (58%);   ONTARIO, CANADA (64%);
VIENNA, AUSTRIA (91%); LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: MUSIC; NAZI POLICIES TOWARD JEWS AND MINORITIES  CLASSICAL MUSIC (90%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MUSIC GROUPS & ARTISTS (90%); MUSIC (90%);
HOLOCAUST (89%); OPERA (78%); KEYBOARD INSTRUMENTS (77%); SINGERS & MUSICIANS
(77%); MUSIC COMPOSITION (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (60%);

PERSON: OESTREICH, JAMES R; BEETHOVEN, LUDWIG VAN (1770-1827)  ARNOLD ROSE
(66%);

LOAD-DATE: May 21, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Arnold Rose and his daughter, Alma Rose, in May 1939, after
fleeing Vienna and arriving in England. (Mahler-Rose Collection, University of
Western Ontario)(pg. 45); Listeners pay tribute to victims of the Nazis as the
Vienna Philharmonic performs Beethoven in the quarry of a concentration camp at
Mauthausen. (Photographs by Associated Press)(pg. 41)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1693 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 May 24, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

RETREAT FROM LEBANON: THE TRIUMPHAL PROCESSION;
Israelis Out of Lebanon After 22 Years

BYLINE: By DEBORAH SONTAG

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 6; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1478 words

DATELINE: BINT JBAIL, Lebanon, May 23


Draped with bandoleers, Shiite Muslim guerrillas reclaimed the Israeli-occupied
zone in southern Lebanon today, and as they giddily rode abandoned Israeli tanks
through village after village, they laid waste to Israel's plan for an orderly,
scheduled withdrawal.

Six weeks before the Israelis planned to shut down the military buffer zone they
controlled along the border, the Lebanese guerrillas accelerated their enemy's
departure. By day's end, Israel held only Beaufort Castle, on a bluff in Lebanon
overlooking northern Israel.

Before dawn Wednesday, the Israelis abandoned that and all of their outposts in
Lebanon, and were bringing home their last troops, Israeli military officials
said. Shortly after sunrise, the last tank rumbled across the frontier behind a
column of armored vehicles, and the border fence was locked.

With the troops leaving, Israel's occupation of a swath of Lebanon, maintained
since 1978, was ending in a far quicker and more improvisational way than anyone
predicted.

"There is only one headline in Lebanon tonight," a broadly smiling anchorwoman
said on the official state television channel. "The liberation of the land. The
slinking, servile withdrawal by Israel."

The Israeli prime minister, Ehud Barak, has protested assertions by the
Hezbollah, or Party of God, guerrillas that Israel was being chased out. He made
a campaign pledge last year, he said repeatedly, to end Israel's "misguided"
involvement in Lebanon, which has divided and troubled Israelis from the start.

Today in Jerusalem, Mr. Barak declared an end to the "18-year tragedy" dating
from Israel's large-scale invasion of Lebanon in 1982, and his government
declared that it has regained the initiative in the halting Middle East peace
efforts.

Israel said that from now on it would hold the governments in Beirut and
Damascus, Syria, responsible for any attacks on northern Israel from Lebanese
territory, and said it would not rule out retaliatory strikes.  Page A13.

But Lebanon, flashing a nationwide victory sign, would have none of that sort of
talk today.

All day long, traveling with Hezbollah into the land so long held by its Israeli
enemies, a celebratory procession grew as it wound its way from west to east
through the rugged countryside. By the road, elderly Lebanese women ululated and
sprinkled the cars with rose petals and rice as if at a wedding.

Flashing V's and waving the yellow flags of their Iranian-backed Hezbollah
movement, the guerrillas trailed a miles-long parade of supporters, including
villagers returning to the south for the first time in two decades. "You know
when birds fly out of a cage?" said Abu Jaffa, a 26-year-old Hezbollah officer.
"That's how we feel." Like sports announcers, local radio reporters gave a
village by village account of the "liberation" of the nine-mile-deep zone over
the course of the day. "Yarun is now liberated," one said this morning, "and I'm
looking over into occupied Palestine."

Israel accelerated the disintegration of its control over the zone by pulling
out its troops and equipment in stages and turning over many posts to the
Lebanese Christian militia it has armed and trained, the South Lebanon Army. But
town by town, the militia soldiers caved in to local pressure. Those who did not
seek to cross into Israel turned themselves over to Hezbollah leaders.

The tumble of events began last Thursday when the South Lebanon Army deserted a
small village. It picked up steam on Sunday, when the militia left behind a more
significant post. And then it snowballed, catching everyone by surprise,
including Lebanese journalists, who scrambled to set up television links in the
town of Bint Jbail so that they could record the event that most had been
waiting a career to capture.

By tonight about 620 of the 2,000-member militia had defected, Lebanese
officials said. Many face charges of treason. Although it was announced that the
Lebanese Army was now detaining them, no mention was made of where or of what
might become of them.

Presumably, the Israelis planned to blow up their posts before completing the
withdrawal, as they had done in the village of Jezzin, abandoned last year. But
the situation changed before they could carry out their plans. In at least one
instance today, the militia soldiers disappeared so quickly that they left tanks
with their motors running and stoves with rice cooking on them.

Hezbollah fighters quickly foraged through the deserted posts, stocking up on
Israeli rocket launchers, ammunition and gear before Israel had a chance to stop
them. In some cases, Hezbollah guerrillas squabbled with members of Amal, the
other Lebanese Shiite resistance group, over the Hebrew-inscribed equipment.

At the Mediterranean port of Naqura this morning, Hezbollah worked quickly,
fearful that the seaside post, which featured twin wall paintings of the Israeli
Star of David and the cedars of Lebanon, was booby-trapped.

As a honking convoy of newly captured Israeli tanks headed to Bint Jbail, in the
zone's center, Israeli helicopters began buzzing overhead. Soon they were
bombarding some of their own abandoned posts. They also released heat bombs to
deflect fire, and their aerial raids briefly detained the sweep through the
countryside.

One man, Abed Taqoush, 50, died in the bombing. He was a veteran taxi driver for
the foreign press who helped reporters cover the conflict in Lebanon for 23
years.

As it resumed, the convoy converted a narrow road into a traffic jam directed by
gun-toting Hezbollah crossing guards. The Hezbollah fighters, who kept a low
profile in Lebanon as they fought the Israelis, launching mortar attacks from
citrus groves, surfaced spontaneously and talked relatively freely.

"They have run in the end," said a youth who gave his name as Jawad, speaking of
the Israelis. "We always knew they would, but no one would have guessed it could
happen so quickly."

Asked whether the battle was over, the young men said that decision was up to
Hezbollah's leader, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah. "Our purpose is to be told what to
do," one said. "If Nasrallah says the fight is on, it's on. And if it's off,
it's off."

His fellow fighter, though, said they had gotten as far as they had because
"Jerusalem twinkles in our eyes" -- a comment that would chill many Israelis to
the bone.

Until today the southern zone was off limits to most Lebanese. Starting at
midmorning, Lebanese Army officers opened the tightly controlled checkpoints,
and packed cars began rolling past the gates that have divided the country.

Many cars contained Hezbollah's fighters and its true believers, like Hala
Smayel and a gaggle of young women -- friends of hers -- who alternated jumping
up and down with yelling, "Nasrallah forever!" They dragged out his name into
four syllables, so that it sounded like "Nasser-Allah," a play on the name's
literal meaning, since nasser means victory and Allah is God.

"We are going village to village to give congratulations," Miss Smayel said.
"Hezbollah was able to bring the most important military force in the Middle
East to its knees. Every drop of blood from the martyrs will grow into a child,
and this child will grow into an adult, and this adult will fight Israel and
become another martyr."

By late afternoon villagers had stormed the Khiam prison, which was run by the
Israeli-backed militia and notorious internationally for reports of human rights
abuses. The militia guards had run away, turning the prisoners over to the
International Committee of the Red Cross.

United Nations officials said they were surprised that the day had gone as
peacefully as it had. They attributed that partly to the advance work of
Hezbollah and Amal leaders. The guerrilla leaders had been spending time in
Christian communities in the south, trying to convince them that all the people
would stand together, the officials said.

Over the years the guerrilla leaders have become part of the political
establishment here, and they spoke today of using the moment to unite Lebanon's
divided population.

"Liberation is the gift of the resistance movement to the Lebanese people," said
Nabih Berri, the speaker of Parliament and leader of Amal. "It is especially a
message to our Christian population in what was the occupied zone. They are part
of us, no different from anyone else."

Lebanese political leaders said the military battle would now become a
diplomatic one. They said they would fight for an Israeli pullout from the
Shebaa Farms area at the foot of the Golan Heights, even though the United
Nations said this week that it would certify the withdrawal as complete without
it.

"Whatever difficulties happen in life, after every one there is a catharsis, a
joyous moment of release," Foda Ramadan, a returning villager, said today. "And
then there are new difficulties."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); LEBANON (94%); SYRIA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);

CITY: DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (79%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH  HEZBOLLAH (94%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH  HEZBOLLAH (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; LEBANON;   ISRAEL (99%); LEBANON (94%); SYRIA (79%); MIDDLE
EAST (79%);   DAMASCUS, SYRIA (79%); BEIRUT, LEBANON (79%); JERUSALEM, ISRAEL
(79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (92%);
HEZBOLLAH (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); PARADES & MARCHES (78%); WAR & CONFLICT
(78%); ARMED FORCES (77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (66%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (52%); PEACE
PROCESS (51%);

PERSON: SONTAG, DEBORAH; BARAK, EHUD (PRIME MIN)  EHUD BARAK (78%);

LOAD-DATE: May 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Israeli soldiers guarded the border yesterday as hundreds of
Lebanese waited to enter Israel at the Metulla crossing, top. Hezbollah
guerrillas triumphantly rode a tank abandoned by Israeli-allied Lebanese
militias. (Associated Press); (Agence France-Presse)(pg. A1); Israeli-allied
Lebanese militias abandoned vehicles, equipment and weapons as the Israelis left
South Lebanon. A Lebanese woman holding a Hezbollah flag scavenged antiaircraft
ammunition near Bint Jbail yesterday. (Associated Press)(pg. A12)

Map of Lebanon shows the location of Bint Jbail: Bint Jbail is in the center of
Israel's former buffer zone in Lebanon. (pg. A12)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1703 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  May 30, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Terror Trial Evidence

SECTION: Section A; Page 22; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 177 words



To the Editor:

You missed the approach that I and others advocated at the House Judiciary
Committee hearings on "secret evidence" (news article, May 23).

The F.B.I. wants to retain the current system, under which certain aliens
suspected of terrorism may receive no information about the evidence against
them. The A.C.L.U. and others testified in support of an extreme proposal that
would require that these aliens receive all the evidence against them, including
classified information.

We proposed that, if national security might otherwise be jeopardized, the law
should always require disclosure of the nature of the charges and an appropriate
summary of the evidence sufficient to permit the alien to prepare a defense.

Any Congressional effort to refine existing immigration practices involving
suspected terrorists must appropriately balance national security concerns with
traditional constitutional safeguards of due process.

THOMAS C. HOMBURGER
Vice Chairman, National Commission
Anti-Defamation League
Chicago, May 24, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (90%);

COMPANY: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE  FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (84%); FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (84%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE  (83%); ANTI-DEFAMATION
LEAGUE (83%);

ORGANIZATION: ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE  FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (84%);
FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (84%); ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE  (83%);
ANTI-DEFAMATION LEAGUE (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES;   UNITED STATES (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(90%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; LAW AND LEGISLATION  EVIDENCE
(90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); IMMIGRATION (90%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES
(88%); LEGISLATION (88%); NATIONAL SECURITY (87%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%);
DUE PROCESS (73%); REFUGEES (66%);

PERSON: HOMBURGER, THOMAS C

LOAD-DATE: May 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1707 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 3, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. War Crimes Prosecutor Declines to Investigate NATO

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 503 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 2


The United Nations' chief war crimes prosecutor said today that there was no
basis for a formal investigation into whether NATO committed war crimes during
the bombing of Yugoslavia a year ago.

"Although some mistakes were made by NATO, I am very satisfied that there was no
deliberate targeting of civilians or unlawful military targets by NATO during
the bombing campaign," the prosecutor, Carla Del Ponte of Switzerland, told the
Security Council. She said a detailed statement on her decision would be
released as early as next week.

A parliamentary commission from Russia, Yugoslavia's strongest international
supporter, and Western lawyers working for the Yugoslav government had brought
allegations of NATO war crimes to the tribunal last year. Several rights groups
have also raised questions about NATO attacks on civilian targets.

The 11-week NATO bombing campaign was intended to stop Yugoslav repression of
Albanians in Kosovo, the Serbian province now under the administration of NATO
and the United Nations.

Among the NATO actions taken to the Balkans tribunal by critics alleging war
crimes were an airstrike on a passenger train crossing a targeted bridge; the
bombing of a Serbian television center; killing of refugees in a convoy mistaken
for soldiers; the use of cluster bombs that can fragment over a wide area, in
one case hitting grounds of a hospital; and the use of depleted uranium in
weapons. There were also more general allegations of genocide and deliberate
environmental destruction.

"I am now able to announce my conclusion, following a full consideration of my
team's assessment of all complaints and allegations, that there is no basis for
opening an investigation into any of those allegations or into other incidents
related to the NATO bombing," Ms. Del Ponte, a former Swiss attorney general,
told the council. She did not discuss the allegations themselves.

The Balkans war crimes tribunal, based in The Hague, has played down the
importance of these charges since they were first made public late last year.
Officials have said that the tribunal was formed to charge individuals, not
institutions or organizations, with war crimes. NATO officials have answered or
dismissed the charges, but have said errors were committed.

Among these they include the bombing of the Chinese Embassy in Belgrade.
American officials subsequently said that the bombing was an accident resulting
from the use of outdated maps and incorrect intelligence information, but China
has rejected this explanation.

Ms. Del Ponte, also chief prosecutor of a war crimes tribunal for Rwanda,
conducted only an informal study of the allegations against NATO, officials
said. She has been more deeply involved in formal charges against Yugoslavia's
president, Slobodan Milosevic, who was indicted by the tribunal last year.

But she told the council that she felt she had to examine the allegations
against NATO because it was her "obligation and responsibility" to look into all
complaints.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); KOSOVO (92%); SWITZERLAND
(92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS  NORTH ATLANTIC
TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS  NORTH ATLANTIC
TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%);
KOSOVO (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%); RWANDA (79%); ALBANIA (79%);

   BELGRADE, SERBIA (79%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE  WAR CRIMES (96%); BOMBINGS (91%); INVESTIGATIONS
(91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); MILITARY OPERATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); WAR &
CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); GENOCIDE (73%);
REFUGEES (73%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (73%); ATTORNEYS GENERAL (73%); ARMED
FORCES (71%); RAIL CROSSINGS (52%); TRAINS (52%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS

 (71%);

PERSON: DEL PONTE, CARLA; CROSSETTE, BARBARA  CARLA DEL PONTE (68%);

LOAD-DATE: June 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1731 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 14, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Russian Prosecutor Detains TV Tycoon, a Kremlin Critic

BYLINE: By MICHAEL WINES and MICHAEL R. GORDON

SECTION: Section A; Page 12; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1203 words

DATELINE: MOSCOW, June 13


The Kremlin's chief prosecutor today arrested and jailed Vladimir A. Gusinsky,
head of a media empire that has sharply criticized the government.

The arrest roused fears of suppression of the press. But President Vladimir V.
Putin, traveling abroad, insisted that the arrest was an unwelcome surprise to
him.

The prosecutor said Mr. Gusinsky had been arrested on suspicion of embezzling at
least $10 million in federal property, apparently related to the purchase of a
government-owned television station in St. Petersburg in the mid-1990's.

His detention capped weeks of government-orchestrated pressure on his Media-Most
news organization, which includes Russia's lone independent television network
and numerous newspapers. The pressure included attempts to call in loans and a
spectacular police raid last month on the company headquarters here.

The arrest loosed a torrent of protest from Mr. Gusinsky's supporters and
enemies, many of whom worried aloud that the move signaled a new era of
repression under Mr. Putin. But Mr. Putin suggested that he was as shocked by
the detention as almost anyone else. Mr. Gusinsky was seized hours after Mr.
Putin had left Moscow on a weeklong diplomatic tour. After landing in Madrid,
his first stop, Mr. Putin called the arrest "a dubious present for me" and
insisted that he had no advance knowledge of it.

"I hope the prosecutor has sufficient reasons for this step," he said. "I will
find out all the circumstances tonight, and I will have my own viewpoint."

Mr. Putin's comments left open various explanations for the arrest and its
timing. One was that the president was trying to insulate himself from what was
certain to be a sharp reaction from Western leaders whom he is to meet this
week. Another explanation was that Kremlin officials had ordered the arrest
behind Mr. Putin's back, either to punish Mr. Gusinsky or to embarrass the
president.

Last month, after the raids on the Media-Most office, Mr. Putin insisted that
the actions had to do with possible crimes, not press freedoms, and he
criticized the company for contending otherwise. "No attempt at blackmail in
relation to law enforcement is permissible," Mr. Putin said at that time. "Just
as limits on freedoms of speech and of the mass media are not permissible."

Mr. Putin has attacked journalists as unhelpful and, in the context of the
Chechnya war, even traitorous. In recent weeks, Kremlin officials have closed a
television station in St. Petersburg and announced plans to require the
licensing of all newspapers.

A spokesman for Media-Most, Dmitri Ostalsky, called the arrest a pretext for
further curbs on press freedoms. "It is obvious that this has been drummed up,"
Mr. Ostalsky said. "And we can make no other evaluation than to say that the
authority has launched an outright repression against the owners of the
independent media."

Mr. Gusinsky's jousting with Kremlin critics has made Media-Most something of a
cause celebre among Western advocates of press freedom.

President Clinton indirectly expressed support for Mr. Gusinsky during his visit
here last week by giving his sole interview to a radio station owned by
Media-Most.

In Washington, reacting to the arrest, a spokesman for the White House, Joe
Lockhart, said: "We do have a concern about press freedom in Russia, and that
concern was expressed directly to President Putin in his meeting with President
Clinton. We're going to want to take a look at this and understand the details.
But we are quite concerned about some of the steps that have been taken against
the free media."

A former theatrical producer, Mr. Gusinsky built his empire after the Soviet
Union collapsed. Besides the NTV television network, the only one outside state
control that has a national reach, his holdings include a Moscow newspaper,
Sevodnya; a newsmagazine, Itogi, a joint venture with Newsweek; and Ekho Moskvy,
the popular Moscow newsradio station that Mr. Clinton visited.

The empire includes a publishing house and a film production company. Plans for
a multiplex movie theater in downtown Moscow are in the works, although they had
been suspended after the financial crisis in 1998.

Mr. Gusinsky is also a leader of the Jewish minority who has often been a target
of anti-Semitic attacks. He has taken his business to Israel, where he also
holds citizenship, and to the United States. Media-Most bought a 42 percent
stake in the Internet business of Israel's state telephone company together with
its Israeli partner, Maariv Holdings. NTV International began broadcasting last
year to viewers in the United States.

Mr. Gusinsky has clashed with the government before. In the early 90's,
President Boris N. Yeltsin's officials raided Media-Most. But the conflict has
seldom been as sharp as now.

Why is a matter of speculation. One school suggests that Mr. Putin's seemingly
sure purchase on the reins of government is nowhere near as strong as it is made
to seem and that he is actually beholden to insiders, holdovers from the clan
that ran the Kremlin under Mr. Yeltsin and that is linked to tycoons and vested
interests. In that view, the arrest today was muscle flexing by a group that has
run Russia through Mr. Putin for some time.

Either way, it shows "incredible stupidity" on Mr. Putin's part, said Michael
McFaul, a Russian political expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International
Peace. "It shows either that he is not in control -- and that's a bad sign -- or
that he is in control. And that is a bad sign."

Some, including Mr. Gusinsky, tie the actions against Media-MOST to the Kremlin
chief of staff under both Mr. Yeltsin and Mr. Putin, Aleksandr Voloshin. Mr.
Voloshin is considered an ally of tycoons opposed to Mr. Gusinsky, including a
major financier and legislator, Boris Berezovsky.

Mr. Gusinsky supported Mr. Yeltsin's re-election campaign in 1996 against
Communist opposition -- and benefited handsomely. After Mr. Yeltsin had won a
second term, NTV received a license for daytime broadcasting.

But Mr. Gusinsky's support soured as Mr. Yeltsin's second term degenerated into
intrigue and economic collapse. In the last two elections, for Parliament and
the presidency, Media-Most outlets have been consistently skeptical of, if not
outright opposed to, Mr. Putin and his allies.

Mr. Gusinsky recently contended that Mr. Voloshin had sought to bribe him to
support the Kremlin in the campaigns, and failed. Mr. Gusinsky recounted:
"Voloshin said, as if he was joking: 'Let's pay you $100 million so that you
won't be in our way while the election is on. You could go on a vacation.' "

Tonight, Boris Nemtsov, a market reformer and a former Kremlin aide, faulted Mr.
Voloshin for the arrest. "There is complete chaos in the Kremlin
administration," Mr. Nemtsov said. "This was done by Voloshin. And if Putin is
not a hypocrite, he has to fire him."

Tonight, NTV broadcast a stream of accusations and complaints about the arrest,
many by top political and business figures. A senior official under Mr. Yeltsin,
Oleg Sysuyev, said the move was politically motivated. "In the eyes of the
public," Mr. Sysuyev said, "this will look like a political execution."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);   SPAIN (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (91%); SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(72%);

COMPANY: MEDIA-MOST (CO)

ORGANIZATION: MEDIA-MOST (CO)

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%);   SPAIN (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN
FEDERATION (91%); SAINT PETERSBURG, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (72%);

SUBJECT: EMBEZZLEMENT; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; TELEVISION; CENSORSHIP; NEWS AND
NEWS MEDIA  ARRESTS (90%); TELEVISION INDUSTRY (90%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (89%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); CENSORSHIP (78%); ARREST WARRANTS (78%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (78%); EXTORTION (73%); POLITICS (72%); EMBEZZLEMENT (71%); WRITERS
(69%); FREEDOM OF SPEECH (65%); INTERNATIONAL TOURISM (57%);

PERSON: GUSINSKY, VLADIMIR A; WINES, MICHAEL; GORDON, MICHAEL R; PUTIN, VLADIMIR
V (PRES)  VLADIMIR PUTIN (93%);

LOAD-DATE: June 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Vladimir A. Gusinsky, at his offices in May, was arrested
yesterday. (Associated Press)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1735 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 17, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Africa's Swelling Refugee Crisis

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 688 words


The recent fighting between Ethiopia and Eritrea and the war in Sierra Leone are
adding to Africa's outcast multitudes. Refugees and the internally displaced --
those who flee their homes without crossing borders -- are among the saddest
byproducts of the continent's wars. Africa has more than 3 million refugees and
some 15 million internally displaced, a much higher number than 10 years ago.
These outcasts are straining the resources of their host communities and the
good will of donors, and yet there is no end to the stream of people fleeing for
their lives.

The average refugee from Kosovo received more than $1 a day from the
international community. In Africa, the average refugee gets 11 cents. The
internally displaced, who are only now starting to receive assistance from the
outside world, most often get nothing. In many refugee camps, the only
nourishment provided by the World Food Program and the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees is flour and oil. Powdered milk is sometimes
available, and nutritional biscuits are given to malnourished children. Because
donor nations are giving less, the refugee agency has had to cut back on health
care and education, which only goes through age 10 or 12. Some refugees from
Somalia and Sudan have lived in these conditions for 20 years, unable to return
until their homelands are at peace.

Yet some of these refugees are not much worse off than their hosts. Guinea, a
very poor country, now has more refugees per capita than any other nation. Some
countries, such as Sudan, produce refugees in one region and shelter them in
another.  Host nations get some reimbursement from the U.N. and sometimes get
food aid, but they must provide land and some social services and keep order in
the camps. African countries, historically generous to refugees -- especially
when they were fleeing colonial oppression -- are now balking at the burden.
Many politicians are finding it profitable to restrict refugees' rights and
blame them, rightly or wrongly, for problems like crime.

The exodus from the Rwandan genocide in 1994 illustrated a new, debilitating
obstacle to protecting refugees. Perpetrators of the genocide fled to the camps
across the border, turning them into internationally funded military bases.
Rwanda was an extreme example, but many camps -- which host countries tend to
build on the border to emphasize their temporary nature -- become recruiting
zones or rest stops for combatants. It is common for camps to be controlled by
one side in the conflict. Some camps of refugees from Sudan in Ethiopia, for
example, are essentially run by the Sudan People's Liberation Army, and relief
workers must carefully negotiate their access.

The U.N.'s refugee relief agency is weakly managed and needs more oversight --
in part because member nations use it as a patronage pit -- and its dependence
on host countries to provide services is another breeding ground for corruption.
But the agency is struggling with a difficult and dangerous mission: 24 members
of its staff, and 23 workers for the World Food Program, have been killed since
1992. The reluctance of donors has also crippled the agency, which finds it
easier to raise money for emergency appeals than to alleviate the chronic
miseries of most African refugees.

Although current refugee aid is meager, its most important shortcoming is that
it does not go to the vast majority who have not crossed a border. The
internally displaced should get aid when countries request it, or when a state
has collapsed to the point where no one can give permission.

Improving the lives of refugees also requires new attitudes within Africa. Host
governments should not build camps close to borders. Countries such as Tanzania,
Kenya and South Africa have joined many European nations and the United States
in passing or considering laws that would turn away refugees or restrict their
rights. These laws are pernicious everywhere. But what refugees need most is
what all Africans need most -- an end to the wars that have diverted the
continent's resources and created so much suffering.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: AFRICA (97%); SUDAN (94%); ETHIOPIA (93%); ERITREA (92%); SIERRA LEONE
(92%); RWANDA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); SOMALIA (79%); GUINEA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (92%); UNITED NATIONS
WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME  (56%); UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS HIGH COMMISSIONER FOR REFUGEES (92%); UNITED
NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME  (56%); UNITED NATIONS WORLD FOOD PROGRAMME (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFRICA;   AFRICA (97%); SUDAN (94%); ETHIOPIA (93%); ERITREA (92%);
SIERRA LEONE (92%); RWANDA (92%); KOSOVO (79%); SOMALIA (79%); GUINEA (79%);

SUBJECT: IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES; EDITORIALS; FOREIGN AID  REFUGEES (97%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); DISPLACED PERSONS (90%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REFUGEE &
RELIEF CAMPS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); FOOD CHARITIES

 (88%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (88%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%);
MALNUTRITION (78%); IMMIGRATION (78%); CHILDREN (77%); GENOCIDE (74%); MILITARY
BASES (73%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (70%);   LIVING CONDITIONS (77%);   FOOD
ASSISTANCE (88%);

LOAD-DATE: June 17, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1766 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 June 28, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A.C.L.U. Sues Michigan, Citing Bias in Giving College Aid

BYLINE: By NICHOLE M. CHRISTIAN

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 863 words

DATELINE: DETROIT, June 27


The American Civil Liberties Union today accused the State of Michigan of
discriminating against minority students by awarding thousands of merit
scholarships solely on the basis of standardized state test scores.

In the lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Detroit, A.C.L.U. lawyers
asked that the state be prevented from using scores from the Michigan
Educational Assessment Program to award onetime scholarships of up to $2,500 to
college-bound high school seniors. The lawsuit said the practice violated Title
VI of the 1964 Civil Rights Act.

The group also wants a judge to order the Michigan Merit Award Scholarship
Program to re-evaluate students who were denied awards this year and to include
other gauges like grade point averages and extracurricular activities in its
selection process. The A.C.L.U. filed its suit today on behalf of five high
school graduates, all members of minorities, who did not earn passing scores on
the reading, writing, science and math exams that make up the voluntary Michigan
test.

The A.C.L.U. maintains that the Michigan test is flawed because students in poor
schools rarely receive the same amount of preparation for the tests as students
from wealthier districts and private schools.

"This is not an attack on the MEAP test," the executive director of the Michigan
A.C.L.U., Kary Moss, said in a news conference. "What it is an attack on is the
misuse of the MEAP. By using the MEAP test alone, the state is essentially
punishing students for the schools they attend."

The state plans to give more than $100 million this fall to colleges and
universities that have accepted the roughly 40,000 Michigan high school students
who won scholarships. While states are increasingly tying grade promotion and
graduation to student test scores, Michigan is considered the only one to base
college tuition scholarships solely on test scores. Experts say most states use
a combination of measures in awarding tuition.

The A.C.L.U.'s lawsuit, which comes at a time of intense national debate over
standards in education and the use of test scores, could set a precedent, much
like a 1989 case in New York State. In that case, a federal judge forbade
officials to use SAT scores to award the prestigious Regents and Empire
scholarships, and the A.C.L.U.'s Women's Rights Project said girls were
disproportionately discriminated against.

"A defeat in Michigan should stop other potential test-score abusers in their
tracks," said Robert Schaeffer, public education director for the National
Center for Fair and Open Testing, a nonprofit advocacy group.

State officials here insisted that the test scores offered a clear picture of
academic achievement.

"A 2-point grade average is not the same in every school," said State Treasurer
Mark Murray, whose office administers the program. "We have a uniform, unbiased
assessment instrument that is the same in every school. No student has an
advantage or disadvantage."

The program is paid for with money from the state's settlement with tobacco
manufacturers. Students who attend Michigan colleges are eligible for $2,500 in
aid, while those who go out of state receive $1,000.

To further ensure equal access to a scholarship, Mr. Murray said students who
failed the test have two chances to retake it, and can qualify by passing two of
the four sections of the MEAP and receiving at least a 24 on the ACT or 1170 on
the SAT. The program was created by the Legislature in 1999.

Donald Heller, an assistant professor of education at the University of Michigan
who spent a year researching the legislation's impact, said such allowances did
little to close the gap. Based on his research, Mr. Heller said 1 in 3 white
students who took all 4 of the tests in spring of 1999 received a scholarship,
whereas only 1 in 14 blacks, and 1 in 5 Hispanics and Indians received awards.

"Michigan is the only state that uses a test like the MEAP test as the sole
criterion for awarding these scholarships," he said. "In all other state
measures such as high school rank, grade point average or those in combination
with a test like the SAT or ACT are used to determine who is awarded these
scholarships."

The A.C.L.U. lawsuit was based in part on Mr. Heller's research, which was
conducted independently months before the lawsuit.

"The vast majority of these awards are likely to go to students who would have
attended college anyway," Mr. Heller said.

After maintaining a 3.45 grade point average through high school and graduating
sixth in her class at Beecher High School in Flint, Bianca Kelly was certain
that she would be selected as a Michigan Merit Scholar. Even after learning she
had scored a 19 on the ACT and passed all but one of the MEAP tests -- science
-- she thought her record and extracurricular activities would help snare an
award. After all, Howard University had found reason enough to accept her.

But Michigan's scholarship program did not.

Bianca is applying for loans and depending on help from her family to pay
tuition, room and board at Howard. "It's just that I worked so hard and it's
like it still wasn't good enough," she said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

STATE: MICHIGAN, USA (97%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: DETROIT, MI, USA (93%);

COMPANY: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  MICHIGAN A C L U (93%);   AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  (93%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%);

ORGANIZATION: AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(93%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (93%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MICHIGAN;   UNITED STATES (97%);   MICHIGAN, USA (97%); NEW YORK,
USA (79%);   DETROIT, MI, USA (93%);

SUBJECT: EDUCATION AND SCHOOLS; TESTS AND TESTING; SCHOLARSHIPS AND FELLOWSHIPS;
SUITS AND LITIGATION; RATINGS AND RATING SYSTEMS; BLACKS; MINORITIES (US);
COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES  STUDENTS & STUDENT LIFE (93%); SCHOLARSHIPS & GRANTS
(92%); SUITS & CLAIMS (92%); LITIGATION (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%);

 ACADEMIC TESTING (90%); STUDENT FINANCIAL AID (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (89%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (89%); TUITION FEES (89%); HIGH
SCHOOLS (89%); STANDARDIZED ACADEMIC TESTING (89%); US STATE GOVERNMENT (89%);
EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (89%); GRADES & GRADING (78%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CIVIL RIGHTS (78%); PRIVATE SCHOOLS (78%); JUDGES (77%);
PUBLIC SCHOOLS (76%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (75%); WOMEN (75%); ACADEMIC
STANDARDS (73%); STUDENT DISCIPLINE (73%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (72%);
TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (72%); EXECUTIVES (70%);   SCHOOL ENTRANCE EXAMS (78%);

PERSON: CHRISTIAN, NICHOLE M  DONALD HELLER (66%);

LOAD-DATE: June 28, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1772 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Gains a Compromise On War Crimes Tribunal

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 5; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 914 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, June 29


The United States won an agreement today to keep the door open to further talks
on its demand that no American official or soldier be surrendered to the world's
first permanent court for war crimes as long as Washington has not signed the
treaty creating the court.

European and other nations are determined to keep the United States from being
frozen out of the biggest change in international law in decades. With their
help, the Clinton administration's ambassador at large for war crimes, David
Scheffer, won an agreement letting his delegation return to the final round of
negotiations on the form and functions of the court, in November. Without the
deal today, the United States' participation would have ended.

The deal was immediately criticized by many independent legal experts and
official delegates here, who say that no exceptions should be made for the
United States. Exempting Americans, they argue, only opens the way for officials
of other nations -- some of them ruled by dictators -- to avoid prosecution.

The United States voted against the creation of the tribunal, the International
Criminal Court, two years ago because the Pentagon and a Republican-controlled
Congress opposed it.

The court will deal with war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. In
principle, the court will have universal jurisdiction, regardless of which
individual countries voted for the treaty to form it. That power makes
Washington nervous, feeling it would be vulnerable to unfair or frivolous
prosecution.

Mr. Scheffer said the United States would take the criticism into account and
would try to devise safeguards as it prepares for further negotiations. In the
meantime, he said, it is important for the United States to stay involved with
the court as it comes into operation over the next few years.

"The world needs a permanent international criminal court," he said in an
interview with several reporters today. "We need it because the perpetrators of
these heinous crimes must be brought to justice, and we need it as a deterrent
over the generations that follow. The international system simply cannot
continue to deal with these problems in an ad hoc manner indefinitely.

"This court has tremendous potential for being a vehicle for international
justice, and we want to be able to see that potential," he said. "We should be
able to assist the court and cooperate with it when it's in our national
interest to do so."

But Mr. Scheffer, who helped create war crimes tribunals for the Balkans and
Rwanda, is in danger of being hamstrung over the next few months by a bill
recently introduced in the Senate by Jesse Helms, Republican of North Carolina,
and John W. Warner, Republican of Virginia, that seeks to block any American
cooperation with the International Criminal Court as long as the United States
does not sign and ratify the treaty. Mr. Helms, chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, has vowed never to allow ratification.

"It is clearly a locomotive coming down on us," Mr. Scheffer said of the bill
today. "But I would hope that the locomotive stops, because it's recognized that
we are making progress in these negotiations to achieve the very objective that
is behind this legislation. It is a counterintuitive piece of legislation
because it is undermining the very negotiating efforts that we are undertaking
to achieve the objective that we all agree must be achieved."

On Friday, delegates from more than 100 nations who have been meeting here for
three weeks are expected to approve two main components of the court's business,
the rules of procedure and a document called "the elements of crimes." These
elements are a compendium of legal definitions that Mr. Scheffer called a
checklist for prosecutors considering indictments.

The Clinton administration, which once spoke more forcefully for membership in
the court, was instrumental in calling for more specific criteria for war
crimes, genocide and crimes against humanity.

"Never before have war crimes and crimes against humanity and genocide been
defined with such precision as we now have in the elements of crimes," Mr.
Scheffer said. "This will be the document that guides prosecutors not only in
the I.C.C. but also in national and military courts for decades to come."

He added: "And defense counsel will look at this document to determine where
exactly their rights are in the defense of their clients with respect to any
particular crime. It's a truly historic document. We invested a tremendous
amount of our talent in it."

In a November-December session, the last at which countries that do not sign the
treaty establishing the court will have the right to participate in its affairs,
the United States will argue for a provision that allows specifically for an
exemption from prosecution. The accord today generally paved the way for that
debate by raising the general question of international agreements outside the
court's treaty.

In Washington, another American official was more cautious than Mr. Scheffer in
welcoming the move today. "Proponents of the court are certainly not speaking
for the American people," the official said. "It is inconceivable that the
American people would support the hauling of an American official before a court
that is not accountable to the American government when we are not party to the
underlying treaty. Ultimately we're going to have to address this more
fundamental question."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (79%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (82%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (82%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (82%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (82%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (79%);   NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED
STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; TREATIES  WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (91%); TALKS & MEETINGS (90%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); US
REPUBLICAN PARTY (89%); INTERVIEWS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (77%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (77%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS
(77%); FOREIGN POLICY (75%); GENOCIDE (72%); MILITARY WEAPONS (71%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  JOHN WARNER (58%);

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1773 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  June 30, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

A Case the Scouts Had to Win

BYLINE: By Steffen N. Johnson;  Steffen N. Johnson is a lawyer.

SECTION: Section A; Page 25; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 625 words

DATELINE: CHICAGO


To the dismay of gay rights groups and some civil libertarians, the Supreme
Court ruled on Wednesday that it is unconstitutional for the state to require a
Boy Scout troop to admit a gay scoutmaster. The court's decision, however, goes
to the heart of the First Amendment's guarantee of free association. It may be a
civil right to have access to employment, or to transportation, or to hotels and
restaurants. But it is not a civil right to assist in raising other people's
children.

In the past, the court had understandably ruled that society's interest in
ensuring access to certain opportunities like jobs, school and other basic
necessities must sometimes override the right to associate with whomever one
pleases. Everyone needs to make a living. Everyone needs an education. Thus, the
court ruled that businesses or commercial gatherings like the Rotary Club cannot
exclude women from their ranks.

But serving as a role model for young children whose parents share common values
is not the same sort of privilege as a job or an education. It is a service, and
one entrusted to few people.

To extend the reach of anti-discrimination laws to private groups whose purpose
is not to make a profit, but to bring together people with similar values, would
destroy the nation's diverse tradition of voluntary collaboration for common
causes. And a world in which the government could declare which causes and which
moral positions benefit society, and which do not, could only be described as
Orwellian.

The case arose when the Scouts informed James Dale that he could not serve as a
leader of a troop in Monmouth County, N.J. Mr. Dale sued, claiming that the
Scouts had unlawfully discriminated against him because he was gay, and the New
Jersey courts agreed. But the Supreme Court, in a 5-4 ruling, said that forcing
a group to accept certain members may impair its ability to "express those
views, and only those views, that it intends to express."

Exercising the right to exclude others may seem intolerant, but such a right is
indispensable to private groups seeking to define themselves, to chart their own
moral course, and to work together for common ends. If the Boy Scouts were
required to admit leaders who advocated a position contrary to its own, then men
could assert the right to lead the Girl Scouts, gentiles could assert the right
to head Jewish groups and heterosexuals could assert the right to lead gay
groups.

Mr. Dale's supporters said that the case was about status-based discrimination
and that enforcing anti-discrimination laws against voluntary groups like the
Scouts was valid because anti-gay beliefs are not what brought the Scouts
together. But a group should not need to have an anti-gay agenda to hold the
view that homosexual behavior is wrong. Many churches, for example, teach that
homosexual activity is immoral while affirming that gay people should be treated
with equal dignity and respect. That does not mean that they have given up their
right not to appoint homosexuals to leadership.

Like many Americans, the Boy Scouts attempt to walk the line between tolerance
of everyone and disapproval of certain types of conduct. That they wish to
express their view by example or by quiet persuasion, rather than an outspoken
campaign, does not diminish their right to take a position on moral issues.

As the court's majority understood, people's rights to hold moral positions, to
associate with others who share the same views, and to instill those views in
their children without threat of outside interference are liberties that belong
as much to gay men and lesbians as to the Boy Scouts, as much to those who
advocate alternative lifestyles as to those who advocate traditional morality.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (92%);

COMPANY: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US)  SCOUT ASSOCIATION  (84%); SCOUT
ASSOCIATION (84%);

ORGANIZATION: BOY SCOUTS; SUPREME COURT (US)  SCOUT ASSOCIATION  (84%); SCOUT
ASSOCIATION (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (92%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; CHILDREN AND YOUTH; HOMOSEXUALITY; SUITS AND
LITIGATION  DECISIONS & RULINGS (92%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (92%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (90%); LGBT RIGHTS (90%); SUPREME COURTS (90%); LITIGATION (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); GAYS & LESBIANS (90%);
CHILDREN (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); YOUTH CLUBS & ACTIVITIES (89%); RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); VERDICTS (78%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY &
ASSOCIATION (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); RESTAURANTS (71%); VOLUNTEERS (66%);
RELIGION (63%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (89%);

PERSON: JOHNSON, STEFFEN N  JAMES DALE (73%);

LOAD-DATE: June 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1781 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Word for Word/Pop Quiz;
History 101: Snoop Doggy Roosevelt

BYLINE: By SCOTT VEALE

SECTION: Section 4; Page 7; Column 1; Week in Review Desk

LENGTH: 1358 words


LISTEN up, class. We hate to spoil your holiday weekend, but an alarming new
survey of American history knowledge 2/3-- released just days before
Independence Day, no less 2/3 -- suggests that the nation is in desperate need
of summer school. The report, sponsored by the American Council of Trustees and
Alumni, a Washington-based nonprofit group that promotes liberal-arts study,
posed 34 high-school level questions randomly to 556 seniors at 55 leading
colleges and universities, including Harvard, Princeton and Brown.

Only one student answered all the questions correctly, and the average score was
a sobering 53 percent -- even with a couple of gimmes about cartoon characters
and rap stars tossed in. But maybe it's not too surprising: according to the
survey, none of the schools examined require American history courses for
graduation.


So put down those tube steaks and sharpen your pencils. It's time to match wits
with tomorrow's leaders.   SCOTT VEALE

1. When was the Civil War?
 a. 1750-1800
 b. 1800-1850
 c. 1850-1900
 d. 1900-1950
 e. after 1950

2. Who said Give me liberty or give me death?"
 a. John Hancock
 b. James Madison
 c. Patrick Henry
 d. Samuel Adams

3. What is the Magna Carta?
 a. The foundation of the British parliamentary system
 b. The Great Seal of the monarchs of England
 c. The French Declaration of the Rights of Man
 d. The charter signed by the Pilgrims on the Mayflower

4. The term Reconstruction refers to:
 a. Payment of European countries' debts to the United States after the First
World War
 b. Repairing of the physical damage caused by the Civil War
 c. Readmission of the Confederate states and the protection of the rights of
black citizens
 d. Rebuilding of the transcontinental railroad and the canal system

5. Are Beavis and Butthead . . .
 a. A radio show
 b. Television cartoon characters
 c. A musical group
 d. Fictional soldiers

6. The Scopes trial was about:
 a. Freedom of the press
 b. Teaching evolution in the schools
 c. Prayer in the schools
 d. Education in private schools

7. The Emancipation Proclamation issued by Lincoln stated that:
 a. Slaves were free in areas of the Confederate states not held by the Union
 b. The slave trade was illegal
 c. Slaves who fled to Canada would be protected
 d. Slavery was abolished in the Union

8. The purpose of the authors of the Federalist Papers was to:
 a. Establish a strong, free press in the colonies
 b. Confirm George Washington's election as the first president
 c. Win foreign approval for the Revolutionary War
 d. Gain ratification of the U.S. Constitution

9. Sputnik was the name given to the first:
 a. Telecommunications system
 b. Animal to travel into space
 c. Hydrogen bomb
 d. Man-made satellite

10. The Missouri Compromise was the act that:
 a. Funded the Lewis and Clark expedition on the upper Missouri River
 b. Granted statehood to Missouri but denied the admission of any other states
 c. Settled the boundary dispute between Missouri and Kansas
 d. Admitted Maine into the Union as a free state and Missouri as a slave state

11. Which document established the division of powers between the states and the
federal government?
 a. The Marshall Plan
 b. The Constitution
 c. The Declaration of Independence
 d. The Articles of Confederation

12. When was Thomas Jefferson president?
 a. 1780-1800
 b. 1800-1820
 c. 1820-1840
 d. 1840-1860
 e. 1860-1880

13. What was the lowest point in American fortunes in the Revolutionary War?
 a. Saratoga
 b. Bunker Hill
 c. Valley Forge
 d. Fort Ticonderoga

14. In his farewell address, President George Washington warned against the
danger of:
 a. Expanding into territories beyond the Appalachian Mountains
 b. Having war with Spain over Mexico
 c. Entering into permanent alliances with foreign governments
 d. Building a standing army and strong navy

15. The Monroe Doctrine declared that:
 a. The American blockade of Cuba was in accord with international law
 b. Europe should not acquire new territories in Western Hemisphere
 c. Trade with China should be open to all Western nations
 d. The annexation of the Philippines was legitimate

16. Who was the European who traveled in the United States and wrote down
perceptive comments about what he saw in Democracy in America?
 a. Lafayette
b. Tocqueville
 c. Crevecoeur
 d. Napoleon

17. Identify Snoop Doggy Dog.
 a. A rap singer
 b. Cartoon by Charles Schultz
 c. A mystery series
d. A jazz pianist

18. Abraham Lincoln was president between:
 a. 1780-1800
 b. 1800-1820
 c. 1820-1840
 d. 1840-1860
 e. 1860-1880

19. Who was the American general at Yorktown?
 a. William T. Sherman
 b. Ulysses S. Grant
 c. Douglas McArthur
 d. George Washington

20. John Marshall was the author of:
 a. Roe v. Wade
 b. Dred Scott v. Kansas
 c. Marbury v. Madison
 d. Brown v. Board of Education

21. Who was the Father of the Constitution?
 a. George Washington
 b. Thomas Jefferson
 c. Benjamin Franklin
 d. James Madison

22. Who said, I regret that I have only one life to give for my country?
 a. John F. Kennedy
 b. Benedict Arnold
 c. John Brown
 d. Nathan Hale

23. What was the source of the following phrase: Government of the people, by
the people, for the people?
 a. The speech: I have a Dream
 b. Declaration of Independence
 c. U.S. Constitution
 d. Gettysburg Address

24. Who was the second president of the U.S.?
 a. Thomas Jefferson
 b. James Madison
 c. John Adams
 d. Benjamin Franklin

25. Who was president when the U.S. purchased the Panama Canal?
 a. Theodore Roosevelt
 b. Jimmy Carter
 c. Franklin D. Roosevelt
 d. Woodrow Wilson

26. Who was the leading advocate for the U.S. entry into the League of Nations?
 a. George C. Marshall
 b. Woodrow Wilson
 c. Henry Cabot Lodge
 d. Eleanor Roosevelt

27. Who said, Speak softly but carry a big stick?
 a. William T. Sherman
 b. Sitting Bull
 c. John D. Rockefeller
 d. Theodore Roosevelt

28. The Battle of the Bulge occurred during:
 a. The Vietnam War
 b. World War II
 c. World War I
 d. The Civil War

29. Which of the following was a prominent leader of the Abolitionist Movement?
 a. Malcolm X
 b. Martin Luther King Jr.
 c. W.E.B. Du Bois
 d. Frederick Douglass

30. Who was the president of the United States at the beginning of the Korean
War?
 a. John F. Kennedy
 b. Franklin D. Roosevelt
 c. Dwight Eisenhower
 d. Harry Truman

31. When the United States entered World War II, which two major nations were
allied with Germany?
 a. Italy and Japan
 b. Italy and Poland
 c. Italy and Russia
 d. Russia and Japan

32. Social legislation passed under President Lyndon B. Johnson's Great Society
program included:
 a. The Sherman Antitrust Act
 b. The Voting Rights Act
 c. The Tennessee Valley Authority
d. The Civilian Conservation Corps

33. Who was First in war, first in peace, first in the hearts of his countrymen?

 a. George Washington
 b. Woodrow Wilson
 c. Dwight Eisenhower
 d. Abraham Lincoln

34. Who was the leader of the Soviet Union when the United States entered World
War II?
 a. Peter Ustinov
 b. Nikita Khrushchev
 c. Marshal Tito
 d. Joseph Stalin

(The study was based on telephone interviews conducted by the Center for Survey
Research and Analysis at the University of Connecticut in December 1999. The
answers follow, along with the percentage of respondents who answered
correctly.)

1.C/60; 2.C/66; 3.A/56; 4.C/29; 5.B/99; 6.B/61; 7.A/26; 8.D/53; 9.D/89; 10.D/52;
11.B/60; 12.B/45; 13.C/38; 14.C/52; 15.B/62; 16.B/49; 17. A/98; 18.E/44;
19.D/34; 20.C/33; 21.D/23; 22.D/40; 23.D/22; 24.C/73; 25.A/53; 26.B/69; 27.D/70;
28.B/37; 29.D/73; 30.D/35; 31.A/67; 32.B/30; 33.A/42; 34.D/72

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); ENGLAND (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); EUROPE (79%);



GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); ENGLAND (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%); EUROPE
(79%);

SUBJECT: COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES; HISTORY  COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (90%);
HOLIDAYS & OBSERVANCES (90%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY (90%); HISTORY (90%); POLLS &
SURVEYS (90%); CIVIL WAR (89%); SLAVERY (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (88%); HUMANITIES
& SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS (77%); HIGH
SCHOOLS (77%); PUBLIC DEBT (77%); EDUCATION SYSTEMS & INSTITUTIONS (77%); HIP
HOP CULTURE (76%); NEWS BRIEFS (74%); RAP MUSIC (74%); SECONDARY SCHOOLS (72%);
PRIVATE SCHOOLS (72%); BRITISH PARLIAMENT (70%); ANIMATED TELEVISION (69%);
BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (67%); WORLD WAR I (67%); BRITISH MONARCHS (65%);
CANALS & WATERWAYS (62%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (62%); WRITERS (61%);
TELECOMMUNICATIONS (60%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (50%); EVOLUTION THEORY (50%);

PERSON: VEALE, SCOTT

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1783 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                   July 2, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Israeli Incursions Add to Friction Over Border

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section 1; Page 4; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 859 words

DATELINE: BORDER POST 34, Lebanon, June 29


The quick deployment of United Nations peacekeepers and Lebanese forces into the
stretch of southern Lebanon that Israel abandoned in May after 22 years of
occupation has been thrown into doubt with the controversy over a series of
apparent Israeli incursions across a border line drawn in 1923.

When the United Nations Security Council voted two weeks ago to endorse
Secretary General Kofi Annan's certification that Israel had indeed pulled out
its troops, opening the way for an additional force of peacekeepers to fill the
security vacuum along the border, Lebanon protested the findings. But Mr. Annan
brushed aside Lebanese objections, saying there were only a couple of border
violations by Israel and they would be cleared up swiftly.

But then there were more transgressions, and United Nations relations with both
Lebanon and Israel became strained. Newspapers in the region have reported an
angry exchange, including curses, between Mr. Annan and Prime Minister Ehud
Barak of Israel, as well as as a lengthy, middle-of-the-night telephone call in
which Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright reportedly shouted at President
Emile Lahoud of Lebanon to send his army into the south to replace the Hezbollah
guerrillas who are now the only force of local order.

The United Nations has sent officers from the peacekeeping force that has
patrolled the south for more than 20 years to survey and map the border, with
orders to report back to New York headquarters daily.

This week, the surveyors found nine violations by Israel, United Nations
officials said at their headquarters in Naqura.

Most of the violations, they said, were minor. One, for instance, involved a
lone Israeli soldier at an observation post on a hill a few dozen yards over the
nominal line, although the next day he was joined by two armored personnel
carriers.

But the violations have become a political issue, and have drawn a threat from
the leader of the Hezbollah militia to take unspecified action if the United
Nations does not resolve the dispute.

Here along a lonely stretch of road through the stony hills where the border
marches sharply north to swing around the Israeli settlement of Metulla are
several problems that have evolved during the two decades Israel maintained what
it called a "security zone" in southern Lebanon with the help of Lebanese
militias.

Border Post 33 -- a cement stake marking a point along the line -- is atop Sheik
Abad Hill, a little way south. It had been a South Lebanon Army and Israeli gun
position. B.P. 34 is in a creek bed below a cliff where a Lebanese family serves
thick coffee in a makeshift cafe of a truck and awning. B.P. 35 is on another
hill running north.

Across the creek bed is the Israeli hilltop settlement of Misgavan. Over the
course of the occupation, the Israelis moved their security fences forward, and
the settlement spread over the old border. Thus, if the original border were
followed, the settlement would be cut in half.

To the north in Addaiseh, the border line drawn in 1923 -- which runs down a
hill and then turns alongside the main road -- would, if strictly followed, put
about 10 Lebanese houses in Israel. Just to the south, the border runs so close
to a road alongside the Israeli settlement of Manara that it would be impossible
to build a security fence.

Like many of the problems of the modern Middle East, this one dates back to the
way the Western powers divided up the defeated Ottoman Empire after World War I.
Two lieutenant colonels, one French, one British, trudged up and down the hills
from the coast to below Mount Hermon, marking what was to be the border of Syria
and Palestine with piles of whitewashed rocks. Over the years, it shifted here
and there.

"This is a border on wheels," a United Nations official said.

But the Lebanese government, which takes its cues from Syria, has declared every
inch sacred. Israel, for its part, wants to retain high ground, which in much of
the area provides a commanding position overlooking its north.

Beirut newspapers quoted President Lahoud as saying that Mr. Annan had promised
him by telephone on Tuesday that the Israeli encroachments would be cleared up.
"Annan promised me to end the violations in three days and to send radar systems
and helicopters to monitor any future Israeli violations," Mr. Lahoud was quoted
as saying.

                             --------------------


Military Sentences 30

BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 1 (Agence France-Presse) -- Amid rising concern over the
conduct of the trials, a military court today sentenced 30 Lebanese convicted of
collaborating with Israel to prison terms ranging up to 120 years.

The 120-year term was handed to Emile Yussef Nasr, who led a brigade of the
Israeli-allied South Lebanon Army. The court sentenced 42 others Friday night,
to terms ranging from several months to 15 years. The court has sentenced 605
people since it began work June 5 and intends to try about 2,200 Lebanese.

Amnesty International, the London-based human rights group, has called the
trials "a parody of justice" that "can in no way help national reconciliation."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (98%); LEBANON (94%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%);
HEZBOLLAH (55%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%);
UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (58%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (58%);
HEZBOLLAH (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; LEBANON;   ISRAEL (98%); LEBANON (94%);

SUBJECT: PEACEKEEPING (91%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (89%); ARMIES (89%); HEZBOLLAH (89%);
ARMED FORCES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); BORDER CONTROL (77%); PROTESTS &
DEMONSTRATIONS (75%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); VEHICLE & BODY ARMOR (71%);
PLATFORMS & ISSUES (71%);

PERSON: KIFNER, JOHN  EHUD BARAK (58%); EMILE LAHOUD (58%);

LOAD-DATE: July 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Lebanon shows the location of Naqura: Border violations are
monitored by the United Nations at Naqura.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1790 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 4, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 928 words



ASIA

MONGOLIA: FORMER COMMUNISTS WIN
The country's former Communist rulers won a landslide victory in elections on
Sunday and vowed to push ahead with economic reforms while doing more to combat
the social costs of the painful 10-year transition from Soviet satellite to a
free market. Unofficial results showed the Mongolian People's Revolutionary
Party won 72 out of the 76 open parliamentary seats. The party had ruled
Mongolia from the 1920's until 1996, when it was ousted by a democratic
coalition.   (Agence France-Presse)


INDIA: SRI LANKA PEACE PLAN
India said it had devised a package to end fighting in Sri Lanka and was ready
to take part in talks between the Sri Lankan government and Tamil rebels. Junior
Foreign Minister Ajit Panja said India favored a united Sri Lanka but did not
disclose details of the proposed package. Officials said Sri Lanka's president,
Chandrika Kumaratunga, would send a special envoy to India this week.
(Reuters)

JAPAN: U.S. MARINE ARRESTED IN OKINAWA
The police arrested a United States marine for allegedly molesting a 14-year-old
girl, threatening to stir up already tense relations between local residents and
American forces weeks before a meeting of the world's leading industrialized
economies. The 19-year-old marine, accused of breaking into a home and molesting
the girl in her room, denied the charge.   (Agence France-Presse)

THE AMERICAS

COLOMBIA: TRUCE TALKS
Government officials and leaders of the country's main guerrilla movement, the
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, met in Los Pozos, 435 miles south of the
capital, to exchange proposals aimed at bringing an end to decades of fighting.
Their plans for an eventual cease-fire, however, were expected to contrast
sharply.   (Agence France-Presse)

EUROPE

SWITZERLAND: MOSSAD AGENT ADMITS SPYING
An Israeli secret service agent testified that he took part in a bungled
wiretapping two years ago in the Swiss capital, Bern. The agent, using an alias
for the trial, is accused of having tried to bug the apartment of a suspected
Hezbollah sympathizer.   Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

SLOVAKIA: PRESIDENT'S POWERS TRANSFERRED
Prime Minister Mikulas Dzurinda and the Parliament speaker, Jozef Migas, have
assumed the powers of President Rudolf Schuster, 66, who remains hospitalized in
Austria after emergency abdominal surgery.   (AP)

LITHUANIA: NAZI CRIMES TRIAL HALTED
A court called an indefinite halt to the country's first Nazi-era war crimes
trial, citing the poor health of 93-year-old defendant, Aleksandras Lileikis.
Mr. Lileikis, a former American citizen stripped of his passport, has denied
charges that he turned over Jews to Nazi executioners during the German
occupation of Lithuania.  (Reuters)

NORTHERN IRELAND: VIOLENCE OVER MARCH
Dozens of Protestant militants attacked police in Drumcree, Northern Ireland,
with bricks and bottles after the province's Parades Commission barred members
of the Protestant Orange Order from parading after services this Sunday. The
commission said they could march at a future date if they agreed to speak with
Catholic residents who object to the march coming through their neighborhood.
Warren Hoge (NYT)

AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: WHITE FARMERS' BID
Zimbabwe's white farmers union said more than 200 white-owned farms would be
offered for immediate sale to President Robert Mugabe's government for black
resettlement. The offer came on the last day for commercial farmers to object to
Mr. Mugabe's plan to seize 804 white-owned farms for redistribution to landless
peasants.   (Reuters)

SOUTH AFRICA: DISPUTE ON CAUSE OF AIDS SWIRLS
President Thabo Mbeki's administration fired back at 5,000 scientists who signed
a letter affirming H.I.V. as the cause of AIDS, saying their declaration was a
"waste of time" and a distraction days before the International AIDS Conference
opens in the South African city of Durban. Mr. Mbeki, whose country has more
H.I.V.-positive people than any other, has angered many AIDS researchers and
activists by his position.   Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

EGYPT: PROTESTS OVER ARRESTS
Human rights groups called for the release of Saad Eddin Ibrahim, an
American-Egyptian sociologist who was arrested Friday night. Mr. Ibrahim, a
professor at the American University in Cairo and head of an Egyptian think
tank, said he was charged with preparing a documentary about elections that
harms Egypt's image and receiving foreign funds without government permission.
   (AP)

ISRAEL: MILITARY EXEMPTION BILL
After long debate, Parliament passed a preliminary bill that would legalize a
practice of granting draft exemptions for ultra-Orthodox seminary students. The
bill, sponsored by Prime Minister Ehud Barak, would change the present system,
which keeps some religious men in school and out of the workforce well into
middle age to keep their exemptions. It would allow religious students who left
school to serve four months in a special unit in place of three years of
mandatory service.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)

PACIFIC

FIJI: CIVILIAN GOVERNMENT
Defying the gunmen holding the deposed government hostage, the military leader
appointed a temporary civilian government but said he would retain power until
the captives are freed. Commodore Frank Bainimarama, who took power 10 days
after rebels stormed Parliament on May 19 and seized top officials, appointed
the new government without consulting the gunmen, who demanded a role.   (AP)


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (57%);

COUNTRY: MONGOLIA (96%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SRI LANKA (94%);
COLOMBIA (92%); LITHUANIA (92%); ASIA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND

 (92%); ISRAEL (79%); SLOVAKIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (79%); JAPAN (79%);
AUSTRIA (56%); CENTRAL EUROPE (53%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (79%);

CITY: BERN, SWITZERLAND (79%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (57%);   LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (56%);
LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM (56%);

ORGANIZATION: LIBERATION TIGERS OF TAMIL EELAM  (56%); LIBERATION TIGERS OF
TAMIL EELAM (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: MONGOLIA (96%); INDIA (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); SRI LANKA (94%);
COLOMBIA (92%); LITHUANIA (92%); ASIA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND

 (92%); ISRAEL (79%); SLOVAKIA (79%); EUROPE (79%); GERMANY (79%); JAPAN (79%);
AUSTRIA (56%); CENTRAL EUROPE (53%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA (79%);   BERN,
SWITZERLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  EMERGING MARKETS (90%); CHILD ABUSE (90%);

 POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); REBELLIONS &
INSURGENCIES (89%); SEX OFFENSES (87%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (87%); PRIME MINISTERS
(78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); POLITICS (78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT
(78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); ECONOMIC POLICY (77%); ECONOMIC NEWS (77%);
PEACE PROCESS (76%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (75%); FOREIGN
RELATIONS (74%); WAR & CONFLICT (74%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA
(74%); TALKS & MEETINGS (89%); ARRESTS (72%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (72%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (72%); ESPIONAGE (71%); TESTIMONY (70%); HEZBOLLAH (69%);
WIRETAPPING (68%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (67%); JEWS & JUDAISM (62%); WAR
CRIMES (60%); POLICE FORCES (53%); SURGERY & TRANSPLANTATION (50%);

PERSON: SAAD EDDIN IBRAHIM (56%); ROBERT GABRIEL MUGABE (56%);

LOAD-DATE: July 4, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

Map of Mongolia highlighting Ulaan Baatar.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1795 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 2; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 946 words



EUROPE

BRITAIN: CURBING HOOLIGANS
The government proposed emergency laws to give the courts and the police power
to restrict suspected soccer hooligans from attending domestic matches and
prevent them from traveling to games outside England. With expected Conservative
support, the bill should become law before the end of the month. More than 950
English fans were arrested in Belgium during the just-ended Euro 2000
tournament, and organizers threatened to evict England from the competition.
Warren Hoge (NYT)


BRITAIN: ROYAL FREEZE
Queen Elizabeth II's taxpayer-supported income will be frozen at $12 million a
year for the next decade thanks to cost-cutting by her family and low inflation,
Prime Minister Tony Blair told Parliament. The payout, called the Civil List, is
reviewed every 10 years.  Warren Hoge (NYT)

GREECE: WITNESS PROTECTION
Witnesses to the June 8 terrorist attack against Britain's top military envoy to
Athens, Brig. Stephen Saunders, left, will be given special protection,
including third-country relocation, according to a government spokesman.
Dimitris Reppas said the move "will pave the way for a string of ad-hoc
counterterrorism measures" that Washington and the European Union have been
urging Greece to adopt in its fight against terrorism.  Anthee Carassava (NYT)

AUSTRIA: SANCTIONS REFERENDUM
Austria will hold a referendum in the fall on citizens' opinions of European
Union sanctions. The curbs, more symbolic than financial, were imposed to punish
Austria for letting the rightist Freedom Party into government. Citizens will be
asked whether the government should push for an end to sanctions, which amount
to a refusal by European ministers to meet their Austrian counterparts formally.
Donald G. McNeil Jr. (NYT)

LITHUANIA: UNFIT, BUT ON TRIAL
Judges and prosecutors said the trial of a 93-year-old man indicted for aiding
the Nazi killing of Jews could proceed despite a ruling that he was mentally
unfit. A court said a medical commission had ruled that Kazys Gimzauskas,
charged with aiding the NazI genocide during World War II, was unable to stand
trial. The court said it would meet on Sept. 11 to rule on how to proceed.
(Reuters)

THE AMERICAS

BRAZIL: PRIEST WARNED ON CONDOMS
The Catholic church in Brasilia threatened to punish a priest for passing out
condoms to prevent the spread of AIDS, highlighting an internal split among
clergy in the world's most populous Catholic country over the Vatican ban.
Warning of unspecified punishment, Archbishop Claudio Hummus condemned the
priest's "incompatible" practice of passing out condoms to the poor in Sao
Paulo.  (Reuters)

ASIA

SRI LANKA: CENSORSHIP BACK
President Chandrika Kumaratunga, invoking an emergency decree, has reintroduced
censorship on local and foreign news media three days after a landmark Supreme
Court ruling that censorship was illegal. The decree will cover whatever the
government considers to be against national interests or detrimental to the
preservation of public order, officials said. Censorship of war-related news was
imposed under emergency regulations in May, but removed from foreign reporters a
month later.  P. J. Anthony (NYT)

KASHMIR: AUTONOMY REJECTED
The Indian Cabinet rejected a greater autonomy resolution passed by
Jammu-Kashmir state lawmakers last week. The resolution would have restored the
state's pre-1953 status, under which it had its own president, prime minister
and courts. The federal government would have had control of defense, foreign
affairs and communications. Similar autonomy demands were made by Assam in 1940,
Punjab in 1973 and Tamil Nadu in 1974.  P. J. Anthony (NYT)

JAPAN: CABINET SHUFFLE
Yoshiro Mori was reconfirmed as prime minister, a week after his Liberal
Democratic Party won a much narrower than predicted victory in legislative
elections. In what many analysts saw as a confirmation of his weak position, he
immediately picked a new cabinet in which the most powerful economic and foreign
policy positions were holdovers from his previous administration.  Howard W.
French (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: MISSILE REPORT RIDICULED
Iraq ridiculed a report in The New York Times that Baghdad had restarted its
missile program and flight-tested a short-range ballistic missile, but did not
say whether or not it possessed the missile mentioned in the report. The Times,
which attributed the report to administration and Pentagon officials, said Iraq
had carried out eight tests of a missile, including one last Tuesday, involving
a ballistic missile that could carry conventional explosives or chemical and
biological weapons. The missile does not violate United Nations restrictions.
(Reuters)

AFRICA

CHAD: HABRE CHARGES DROPPED
A court in Senegal dismissed charges of torture against Hissene Habre, left, the
former President of Chad who has lived in exile in Senegal since being ousted in
1990. Senegal's judiciary, which has been going through changes since a new
president, Abdoulaye Wade, was elected in March, gave no reason for its
decision. In February, Chadian and international rights groups took Mr. Habre to
court.  Norimitsu Onishi (NYT)

IVORY COAST: MILITARY PROTEST
Soldiers angry over pay took to the streets of Abidjan, firing in the air and
leaving the commercial capital deserted. The military government led by Gen.
Robert Guei, who seized power in a coup last December after an earlier protest
by disgruntled soldiers, said the disturbances were started by soldiers who had
been demanding $8,700 each for having supported the general.  Norimitsu Onishi
(NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: EUROPE (94%); ENGLAND (94%); BRAZIL (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES

 (92%); GREECE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); BELGIUM (92%); AUSTRIA (91%);
LITHUANIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ASIA (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%);   BRASILIA, BRAZIL (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%); WITNESS PROTECTION  (56%);

 WITNESS PROTECTION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  (82%); EUROPEAN UNION (82%); WITNESS PROTECTION
(56%); WITNESS PROTECTION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: EUROPE (94%); ENGLAND (94%); BRAZIL (93%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER
STATES (92%); GREECE (92%); UNITED KINGDOM (92%); BELGIUM (92%); AUSTRIA (91%);
LITHUANIA (79%); UNITED STATES (79%); ASIA (79%); SRI LANKA (79%);   NEW YORK,
USA (92%);   SAO PAULO, BRAZIL (79%); ATHENS, GREECE (79%);   BRASILIA, BRAZIL
(79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  LEGISLATION (90%); CHRISTIANS &
CHRISTIANITY (90%); EUROPEAN UNION (90%); CENSORSHIP (89%); LITIGATION (89%);
EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); TERRORISM (88%); CLERGY & RELIGIOUS (88%); RELIGION

 (88%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (84%); CONSERVATISM (78%); BRITISH MONARCHS
(78%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); SOCCER (78%); WITNESSES (78%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (78%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (78%); SPORTS & RECREATION EVENTS (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); TOURNAMENTS (78%);
INDICTMENTS (78%); WAR ON TERROR (74%); WORLD WAR II (73%); SUPREME COURTS
(73%); EVICTION (73%); ARRESTS (73%); BRITISH PRIME MINISTERS (73%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); JUDGES (73%); PRIME MINISTERS (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM
(73%); TALKS & MEETINGS (69%); GENOCIDE (68%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (68%);
HOLOCAUST (67%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (67%); REFERENDUMS (65%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(62%);   STATES OF EMERGENCY (78%);

PERSON: ELIZABETH II, QUEEN OF THE UNITED KINGDOM (73%); TONY BLAIR (58%);

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1797 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 5, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

A War Crimes Court

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 5; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 152 words



To the Editor:

Re "U.S. Gains a Compromise on War Crimes Tribunal" (news article, June 30):

The worsening isolationist streak in American politics poses a threat to world
security. First, the United States opposed an international criminal court,
preferring underfinanced ad hoc tribunals, a move that, as we have seen, results
in only spotty prosecution.

Now the United States is trying to establish a precedent for granting all people
from a country (Americans, in this case) blanket immunity from prosecution by
the court.

If this precedent goes through, countries ruled by people who do commit grave
crimes against humanity will seek similar loopholes, destroying the
effectiveness of the court as a prosecutor of crime and a deterrent against it.

It's time for the United States to take responsibility as a member of the world
community.

BRIAN O'MEARA
Medford, Mass., June 30, 2000

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(58%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  WAR
CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (88%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (73%);
IMMUNITY (71%);

PERSON: O'MEARA, BRIAN

LOAD-DATE: July 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1798 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 6, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

A Newspaper Apologizes for Slave-Era Ads

BYLINE: By PAUL ZIELBAUER

SECTION: Section B; Page 1; Column 3; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1140 words

DATELINE: HARTFORD, July 5


In March, a front-page article in The Hartford Courant reported that Aetna Inc.,
one of Connecticut's largest companies, had apologized for profiting from
slavery by issuing insurance policies on slaves in the 1850's. The next day, The
Courant, the state's largest newspaper, ran a second front-page article
speculating that Aetna's contrition might prompt many other American companies
to apologize "for having reaped profits at the cost of human freedom."

That prediction turned out to be accurate. On Tuesday, after a four-month
investigation into its own archives, The Courant ran yet another front-page
article, in which it apologized for having published advertisements in its pages
for the sale of slaves in the 18th and 19th centuries.

In that article, below a banner headline, "A Courant Complicity, an Old Wrong,"
a spokesman for the newspaper said it was sorry "for any involvement by our
predecessors at The Courant in the terrible practice of buying and selling human
beings that took place in previous centuries."

Such ads were common in newspapers of the 1700's and early 1800's, when slavery
was legal in many states, including Connecticut. But even at a time when many
companies are acknowledging past wrongs, The Courant's apology is unusual -- in
part because so few of those newspapers still exist. The Courant, founded in
1764, is the nation's oldest continuously published newspaper.

Though the article about the ads appeared on Independence Day, when many readers
may have been preoccupied with holiday plans, many blacks interviewed in
Hartford today reacted positively to news of The Courant's apology.

"I think it makes a big difference," said Aristede Hill, a youth program
director at Hartford's Y.M.C.A. "I appreciate it. It should be brought to the
forefront."

He said he would find the article, which he had not yet read, and show it to the
youths he works with. "I'll definitely bring it up," said Mr. Hill, 30, of
Bloomfield, a Hartford suburb. "It's something to talk about, debate about."

The existence of the slave ads was known by some Courant executives, but no one
discussed it, said Lou Golden, the newspaper's vice president and deputy
publisher. But after the Aetna article, editors in the news department began an
inquiry into The Courant's history. And when they presented their findings,
everyone agreed an apology was appropriate, Mr. Golden said.

"We hadn't really focused on it, but when it came up, we decided to act on it,"
he said. "If we had focused on it sooner, we would have apologized sooner."

The Courant is not the first American newspaper to confront its involvement with
slavery. The paper, which said it published ads for the sale of slaves and the
return of runaways from 1765 until at least 1823, is one of many across the
nation believed to have printed them.

"It would just have been a natural thing that newspapers would advertise slaves
the way they would advertise any other commodity," said David Brion Davis, a
Yale University history professor and author of "The Problem of Slavery in
Western Culture," noting how deeply rooted slavery was, even in Northern states
like Connecticut, which abolished slavery in 1848.

"That tradition in American journalism goes back very early," said Tom Leonard,
a professor of journalism at the University of California at Berkeley. "I've
seen it in Benjamin Franklin's Pennsylvania Gazette, even though he was an
opponent of slavery."

The New York Times was founded in 1851, after slavery was outlawed in New York
State. A spokeswoman for The Times, Catherine Mathis, said the paper did not
believe that it had run ads for the sale or capture of slaves.

Other newspapers have published, or are preparing to publish, articles on their
complicity in the slave trade. The forerunner of The Times-Picayune in New
Orleans, a newspaper called The Daily Picayune, also ran advertisements seeking
to sell slaves or to find runaways, a fact the paper noted in a long article in
1993, said Jim Amoss, the newspaper's editor.

An editorial at the end of that series of articles included a reference to the
newspaper's past practices that read in part: "The newspaper has had a long
history of racial intolerance and insensitivity. Like all histories, we carry it
with us. We have tried to acknowledge our own failings and, in so doing, to
speak more clearly to our readers about the complex subject of race."

The Web site www.Afrigeneas.com lists runaway-slave ads from newspapers that
regularly published them, including The Baltimore Sun. On Sept. 17, 1852, for
instance, The Sun ran an ad offering a $100 reward for "A Negro Boy named George
Stewart, a slave for life."

Asked about the newspaper's 19th-century practices, William K. Marimow, The
Sun's current editor, said: "I think we've shown in the work we do our
commitment to human rights and civil rights. What the newspaper did then in my
mind was one symptom of an atrocity in America."

He also pointed out that The Sun was a finalist for a Pulitzer Prize three years
ago for a series on modern slavery in Sudan.

The Courant's idea to look into its connection to slavery originated within the
news department, said Jeni Frank, an assistant managing editor. But she and Mr.
Golden offered slightly different explanations of how the article came about.

Mr. Golden said a reporter working on the Aetna article was reporting on the
follow-up article about other companies, "and one of the sources asked, 'Is The
Courant going to apologize,' and the reporter came to us and said, 'Is The
Courant going to apologize?' And we said, 'Yes.' "

But Ms. Frank said she thought of investigating The Courant's possible
involvement in the slave trade during a news meeting on the day the Aetna story
was published.

Publishing the article on a holiday was not meant to lessen its impact, Ms.
Frank said. "We were not trying to avoid publicity," she said, "nor were we
trying to get publicity."

But the article appears to have made an impression far beyond Connecticut's
borders. Mr. Golden spent most of today on the telephone, fielding calls from
reporters around the country. Ms. Frank said the newspaper had received about a
dozen calls, mostly from television and radio stations. "I've gotten calls from
Seattle, from MSNBC," she said.

Ms. Frank said her reporters had noticed many people in Hartford discussing the
article today.

Roger Vann, the president of the Connecticut chapter of the N.A.A.C.P., did not
return calls seeking comment.

Mr. Golden and Ms. Frank said they would be encouraged if other newspapers
decided to explore their own involvement in publishing slave ads. "I think it
would be a good thing," Mr. Golden said. "I think that corporations and
organizations all bear responsibility for what their ancestors and forefathers
did."


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: AET (NYSE) (94%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS524114 DIRECT HEALTH & MEDICAL INSURANCE CARRIERS (94%);
NAICS524113 DIRECT LIFE INSURANCE CARRIERS (94%); SIC6324 HOSPITAL & MEDICAL
SERVICE PLANS (94%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: CONNECTICUT, USA (94%);

CITY: HARTFORD, CT, USA (91%);

COMPANY: HARTFORD COURANT  AETNA INC (94%);

ORGANIZATION: HARTFORD COURANT

GEOGRAPHIC: CONNECTICUT; HARTFORD (CONN);   UNITED STATES (94%);   CONNECTICUT,
USA (94%);   HARTFORD, CT, USA (91%);

SUBJECT: SLAVERY; ADVERTISING; NEWSPAPERS; BLACKS  SLAVERY (91%); INVESTIGATIONS

 (89%); US INDEPENDENCE DAY (78%); PUBLISHING (77%); RESEARCH REPORTS (70%);

PERSON: ZIELBAUER, PAUL

LOAD-DATE: July 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: A Hartford Courant advertisement in 1810 offered a $5 reward for
the return of a runaway slave. (The Hartford Courant)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1806 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 8, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

For Lebanese Linked to Israel, a Quick March Through Court

BYLINE: By JOHN KIFNER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 922 words

DATELINE: BEIRUT, Lebanon, July 7


At the Military Tribunal, around the corner from the grand statue of a helmeted
and booted soldier clutching a book and the scales of justice, is a series of
bulletin boards with a list of 2,135 names.

These are the former members of Israel's proxy militia, the South Lebanon Army,
who turned themselves in after the Israeli Army abruptly pulled out of its
"security zone" in South Lebanon last month, or were caught by Hezbollah
guerrillas, and are now accused of collaborating with the enemy.

On Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, the military court sits in marathon session,
a half dozen senior officers on the bench led by Brig. Gen. Maher Safieddine,
plowing through the cases against the militiamen, issuing sentences overnight.

So far the court has handed down 667 verdicts in 13 batches of former
militiamen, largely Christians from an area that is predominantly Shiite Muslim.
About 1 percent of the defendants are acquitted, according to local news
reports.

Nearly all the men coming to trial appear to be minor players, rank-and-file
soldiers who say they were conscripted or joined because it was the only job
available. By their accounts, they mostly just moped about and never hurt
anyone.

With few exceptions, the sentences run about a year; some are as short as eight
weeks. And the militiamen are told they cannot go back to their home villages
for a time.

Gen. Antoine Lahd, the commander of the South Lebanon Army, escaped into Israel
along with other senior officers. They are expected to live abroad in
comfortable exile.

One of the few senior officers who was tried here, Maj. Emile Nasr, who was in
charge of operations in Jezzine, was sentenced to 13 jail terms of 10 years each
on multiple charges of collaborating with the enemy and disclosing army secrets.

He shelled Sidon in 1997 in revenge for the death of his niece and nephew in a
roadside bombing, killing 7 civilians and wounding 42. After several attempts on
his life, he reportedly cut a deal with Hezbollah to supply information, then
turned himself over to the Lebanese Army a month before the end of the
occupation.

Another officer, Etienne Saqr, who is believed to be in Israel, was given a
15-year sentence in absentia. Known as Abu Arz, he was the head of a notorious
far-right Christian militia, the Guardians of the Cedars.

For the most part, the trials seem perfunctory. On a recent day, when the court
was trying to get through 68 cases, most were adjourned because defendants had
no lawyers. The bar association has sent batches of lawyers, in their black
robes with white fur tassels, as public defenders, but they are unfamiliar with
the cases and ask for time to read the records. For the most part, they plead
for mercy, saying times were hard under the Israeli occupation.

One defense lawyer, Fadi Kanaan, asked for mercy and a general amnesty for all
the defendants, saying: "It was so dramatic for the inhabitants of the south to
live under occupation, isolated from their country and government. They did not
collaborate with the enemy out of principle, but were forced to do so as a
result of the occupation."

One defendant was convicted of being a double agent who turned his sister over
to the Israelis. Another, charged with giving false information to army
intelligence, said that he first had good information, but that as he was
pressed for more, he ran dry and started making it up. One man said he had risen
to the rank of sergeant in charge of transporting fuel, but was discharged for
stealing gasoline.

The lawyer for George Kawas, who was accused of being a longtime militiaman,
pleaded for mercy, saying, "You know what poverty is like, when money is put in
somebody's face like a carrot."

The trials have not been without criticism. Amnesty International has called
them a "parody of justice" that "can in no way help national reconciliation."

Hezbollah officials have criticized the court as too lenient, calling the trials
"ceremonial" and the sentences "scandalous." The leading newspaper, An Nahar,
has reported incidents in which villagers have beaten up returning militiamen
who received what they saw as light sentences. United Nations officials said
most of those attacked were Shiite Muslims who has worked with the mostly
Christian S.L.A.

On the Christian side, Cardinal Nasrallah Pierre Sfeir, the Maronite patriarch,
said he was forming a committee "to ensure that the trials are fair and unbiased
and that treatment of all prisoners is respectful of human rights."


                             --------------------


U.N. Poised to Move In

 BEIRUT, July 7 (Reuters) -- The United Nations expects to send troops to South
Lebanon as soon as it is assured that Israeli troops are no longer making forays
into Lebanon, the United Nations envoy to the Middle East said today.

The envoy, Terje Roed-Larsen, said at a news conference after a day's talks with
President Emile Lahoud and senior Lebanese officials that Israel was willing to
stop encroaching on Lebanon, a key condition set by the government before it
approves deployment of Unifil, the United Nations force.

"Unifil will only deploy with the full cooperation of the government of Lebanon,
and the decision of Lebanon is that there will be no deployment before the
violations are resolved," said Mr. Larsen, who held extensive talks in Israel on
Thursday. "There appears to be a will within the government of Israel to rectify
the violations, but it remains to be seen whether deeds follow words."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ISRAEL (99%); LEBANON (95%);

CITY: BEIRUT, LEBANON (92%);

COMPANY: HEZBOLLAH (57%);

ORGANIZATION: HEZBOLLAH (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; LEBANON;   ISRAEL (99%); LEBANON (95%);   BEIRUT, LEBANON
(92%);

SUBJECT: ARMAMENT, DEFENSE AND MILITARY FORCES  ARMIES (90%); MILITARY COURTS
(90%); LAWYERS (89%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SENTENCING (89%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (89%); HEZBOLLAH (89%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (87%); ARMED
FORCES (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); MILITARY WEAPONS (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); VERDICTS (75%); PUBLIC DEFENDERS (73%); BOMBINGS (73%);
BUSINESS & PROFESSIONAL ASSOCIATIONS (72%); ACQUITTAL (70%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(68%); RELIGION (68%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (62%); AMNESTY (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS &
ORGANIZATIONS (72%);

PERSON: KIFNER, JOHN

LOAD-DATE: July 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Relatives outside the Military Court in Beirut, where 2,000
ex-militiamen who aided Israel in the south are being briskly tried and
sentenced. (Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1825 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 16, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

COVER STORY;
Assessing Responsibility For Evil Beyond Imagining

BYLINE: By DINITIA SMITH

SECTION: Section 13; Page 4; Column 1; Television

LENGTH: 1090 words


It was to be the triumph of justice over vengeance. The Nuremberg trials, which
began in NOVEMBER(??) 1945, at the end of World War II, would establish the
principle that government leaders were accountable for crimes against humanity
and that no individual was exempt from guilt for committing atrocities in
wartime simply by claiming he was following orders.

Four justices, from the United States, England, France and Russia, presided over
the trial of 21 senior Nazi officials. Among those facing the court were the
wily, fat Luftwaffe chief Hermann Goering; Julius Streicher, publisher of the
anti-Semitic newspaper Der Sturmer, whose vile antics had brought him the
disfavor even of Hitler; the contrite Albert Speer, Hitler's favorite architect;
and the Nazi foreign minister Joachim von Ribbentrop, known as the Mad Hatter,
who babbled insanely.

In setting up the tribunal, the Allies had no body of law upon which to rely.
They had to invent a new system of legal procedures -- one that would form the
basis for future trials of those who commit crimes against humanity in the name
of war.

Tonight and tomorrow night, TNT presents "Nuremberg," the story of that
groundbreaking trial and of the powerful personalities who took part in it. The
film, written by David W. Rintels and directed by Yves Simoneau, is based on the
book "Nuremberg: Infamy on Trial," by Joseph E. Persico. Unlike the 1961 film
"Judgment at Nuremberg," the TNT drama uses testimony and other material from
the court transcripts. The producers also went to great lengths to reproduce the
actual courtroom in which the trials were held. The cast includes Brian Cox as
Goering; Christopher Plummer as the British prosecutor, Sir David Maxwell-Fyfe;
Max von Sydow as Sam Rosenman, who recruited Robert Jackson on behalf of Truman
to prosecute the trial; and Jill Hennessy as Jackson's secretary and love
interest.

The drama centers on Jackson, played by Alec Baldwin, who took the part, he
said, in order to introduce the Nuremberg trials to a new generation of young
people largely unfamiliar with them. "Most kids today born after 1980, their
awareness is all about popular culture," said Mr. Baldwin, also one of the
show's executive producers. "They don't know the things that you and I grew up
with."

The real Jackson was a small-town lawyer from Jamestown, N.Y., who had begun
practicing law when it was still possible to do so by apprenticing to another
lawyer instead of getting a law degree. A political liberal and a champion of
the Constitution, he was appointed solicitor general in 1938 by President
Franklin D. Roosevelt and chief justice in 1941.

"As a U.S. Supreme Court Justice, he had a nice, cushy job," said Mr. Baldwin,
who discussed the historical background of the trials in a recent interview in
New York. Jackson, he said, agreed to go to Nuremberg "when he was told it was a
chance to make history -- 'You're going to be the David Merrick of the trial and
produce the whole thing from straw.' "

Jackson was a great legal orator, and the role gave Mr. Baldwin (who is 42, some
10 years younger than Jackson was at the trial) a chance to utter some of the
grandest lines ever delivered in a courtroom. In his opening speech, Mr.
Baldwin, as Jackson, sets the premise for the proceedings: "That four great
nations, flushed with victory and stung with injury, stay the hand of vengeance
and voluntarily submit their captive enemies to the judgment of the law is one
of the most significant tributes that power has ever paid to reason."

Behind the scenes, though, there was squabbling between Jackson and the American
judge, Francis Biddle, who wanted to be president of the court. In the film, the
two men clash disceetly but repeatedly, until Jackson accuses Biddle of
sabotaging his prosecution of Goering.

But Jackson's chief antagonist in "Nuremberg" is Goering himself. In one scene,
Goering, who weighed 264 pounds when he surrendered, debates the question of
Nazi medical experiments with the prisoners' psychologist, Captain Gustav
Gilbert, played by Matt Craven.

"Let me ask you this: What was Hiroshima?" Mr. Cox's Goering asks. "Was it not
your medical experiment? And would America have dropped atom bombs on Germany as
easily as it did on Japan, making sure to kill as many civilians as possible? I
say not. Because to an American, a Japanese child seems less human than a
Caucasian child."

Goering was a cunning adversary in the courtroom as well. "He was speaking over
the head of the tribunal to the German people" about the glories of National
Socialism, Mr. Baldwin said. He attempted to stonewall the prosecutor's
cross-examination of him, and Jackson, who had not tried a case in years, was
accused of being unprepared.

The film follows the trajectory of Jackson's dawning awareness of the true
magnitude of the trial. "At the beginning, Jackson thought, 'Let's nail them on
this paper trail of broken treaties,' " Mr. Baldwin said.

At first Jackson, he added, thought that "putting people on trial for war crimes
was like handing out speeding tickets."

Then films of prisoners at death camps were screened for the court. At that
point in history, few had seen the photographic evidence of the crimes.
"Nuremberg" uses some of the same footage that was shown during the actual
proceedings. As the film flickers on the screen, there is no sound except the
projector's whirr, and the camera moves in on Mr. Baldwin's face as Jackson
himself realizes the full horror of the crimes.

By the trial's end, "Jackson's grasp of the significance of the war crimes has
overtaken Goering's rhetoric," said Mr. Baldwin. "Their crimes were not
committed by some rogue operation. This was administered by a government."
Jackson went on to deliver a Shakespearean summation: "They stand before the
record of this trial as bloodstained Gloucester stood by the body of his slain
king. He begged the widow, as they beg of you, 'Say I slew them not.' And the
queen replied: 'Then say they are not slain. But dead they are.' "

In 1946 Jackson resigned as prosecutor to return to the Supreme Court, and his
place was taken by Telford Taylor, who conducted the ensuing trials. During his
11 months at Nuremberg, he had helped forge a new principle of international
law: "No longer may the head of a state consider himself outside the law and
impose inhuman acts on the peoples of the world," the real Jackson said after
the trials. "It was a legacy infinitely more important than my work on the
Supreme Court."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); ENGLAND (92%); GERMANY (90%); FRANCE (88%); UNITED
KINGDOM (79%);

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: JAMESTOWN, NY, USA (66%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (93%); ENGLAND (92%); GERMANY (90%); FRANCE (88%);
UNITED KINGDOM (79%);   NUREMBERG, GERMANY (90%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);
JAMESTOWN, NY, USA (66%);

SUBJECT: TELEVISION; REVIEWS; NUREMBERG WAR CRIMES TRIBUNAL (1945-49); WAR
CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; WORLD WAR II (1939-45)  WAR CRIMES (91%); WORLD WAR II
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); LAWYERS (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(89%); TELEVISION PROGRAMMING (79%); SUPREME COURTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (78%); TRIAL & PROCEDURE (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (77%);
INTERVIEWS (75%); APPOINTMENTS (70%); FILM DIRECTORS (70%); TRANSCRIPTS (69%);
TELEVISION INDUSTRY (69%); APPRENTICESHIPS & INTERNSHIPS (60%);   RACISM &
XENOPHOBIA (76%);

PERSON: SMITH, DINITIA  ALEC BALDWIN (89%);

LOAD-DATE: July 16, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Scenes from "Nuremberg"; Alec Baldwin, above, as Justice Robert
Jackson; Jill Hennessy, below, as Elsie Douglas; the city ruins outside the
courtroom. (Photographs by Jan Thijs/TNT)(pg. 4); Brian Cox, front center, as
Hermann Goering and Christopher Plummer, below, as David Maxwell-Fyfe, with Mr.
Baldwin as Justice Jackson. (pg. 5)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1836 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Top Balkan Tribunal Upholds Ruling on Rape as War Crime

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 329 words

DATELINE: THE HAGUE, July 21


The Yugoslav war crimes tribunal today upheld a landmark ruling that established
rape as a war crime, rejecting an appeal by a Bosnian Croat commander convicted
of watching as a knife-wielding subordinate tortured and raped a female
prisoner.

The five-judge appellate chamber rejected every ground upon which the defense
contested the Dec. 10, 1998, judgment against the former commander, Anto
Furundzija, 31.

"The appeals chamber has not been persuaded as to the existence of any legal
errors which require it to intervene," the Guyanan presiding judge, Mohamed
Shahabuddeen, said for the tribunal's court of last resort.

Prosecutors hailed the decision.

"It demonstrates that people who are in a position of authority have a
responsibility to govern the behavior of people under their authority," said
Deputy Prosecutor Graham Blewitt.

Mr. Furundzija, head of the special military police unit called the Jokers,
stood by as one of his soldiers threatened a woman being detained, then raped
her during interrogation.

Mr. Furundzija received a 10-year sentence as a result of the attack, which
happened a year into the 1992-95 Bosnian war during a campaign to expel Muslims
from the Lasva River Valley. The soldier has been indicted but not captured.

Two international legal precedents were set. The tribunal admitted the victim's
testimony, even though she suffered from post-traumatic stress. It also expanded
the definition of sexual assault to be more easily punishable as an act of
torture.

A defense lawyer, Luka Misetic, had challenged the conviction on the grounds
that the presiding judge, Florence Mumba of Zambia, had not disclosed her
membership in a United Nations women's rights commission that advocated the
inclusion of rape as a war crime. The panel ruled that Ms. Mumba had not shown
bias in conducting the trial.

It also dismissed Mr. Misetic's claim that the sentence was excessive because
the crime did not result in loss of life.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (79%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA;   BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); CROATIA (92%);

 NETHERLANDS (79%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (79%);

SUBJECT: POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; SEX CRIMES; DECISIONS AND VERDICTS; WAR CRIMES
AND CRIMINALS  WAR CRIMES (95%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); DECISIONS &
RULINGS (90%); SETTLEMENTS & DECISIONS (90%); SEX OFFENSES (90%); SEXUAL ASSAULT

 (90%); TORTURE (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); JUDGES (89%); ARMED FORCES
(78%); VERDICTS (78%); SENTENCING (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY
(78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (78%); POST TRAUMATIC STRESS
DISORDER (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INDICTMENTS (78%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); JAIL SENTENCING
(78%); WOMEN (77%); LAWYERS (75%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S RIGHTS (72%); POLICE
FORCES (69%); RELIGION (51%);   CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: FURUNDZIJA, ANTO  FLORENCE MUMBA (76%); LUKA MISETIC (76%);

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1837 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Resists War-Crimes Court as Canada Conforms

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 758 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 21


When a majority of the world's nations decided two years ago to establish a
permanent court to try those charged with the most serious war crimes, political
opposition emerged in both the United States and Canada.

President Clinton and Prime Minister Jean Chretien were early supporters of the
permanent tribunal, now taking formal shape as the International Criminal Court.
But both faced problems in their respective legislatures, where members had to
approve the countries' participation.

In early July, Canada ratified the treaty creating the court, and announced that
it was the first nation to have brought its national laws in line with the new
tribunal.

The United States, on the other hand, is fighting a last-ditch battle to prevent
Americans from falling under the court's jurisdiction. Clinton administration
officials say America will not join the court in the foreseeable future because
the Senate Foreign Relations Committee -- especially its chairman, Senator Jesse
Helms, Republican of North Carolina -- has warned that its members will never
approve the treaty.

But the Canadian and American situations are different. Most important, Mr.
Chretien has a majority in the Canadian Parliament, while President Clinton must
deal with a Congress controlled by Republicans. Although Canada is active in
peacekeeping around the world, the United States, as the world's most powerful
nation, would be a bigger target for frivolous or politically motivated
lawsuits.

In a recent interview here, Canada's foreign minister, Lloyd Axworthy, said that
the Canadian government, unlike the United States, decided nevertheless to take
no chances with public opinion. It opened a national debate about the court and
began a campaign of "public diplomacy" to build support.

"It was a good debate," he said. "One party raised a number of objections to it,
about national sovereignty and individual rights, but it got approved
overwhelmingly."

"Our view," he said of the government's position, "was that if you have a
functioning national court system, then the international court is simply a
court of last resort."

Mr. Axworthy said that government leaders made acceptance of the court --
designed to bring trials on charges of genocide, war crimes or crimes against
humanity -- a top political priority.

"We sponsored a national forum across the country," he said. "Plus we have a
major Web site on the issue. Most important -- and I underline this -- is that
we enlisted the support of a number of key parliamentarians to do our work
internationally."

These members of the Canadian Parliament not only support the court in their
districts but also go to international meetings to build up wide backing in
organizations like the Inter-Parliamentary Union or NATO. Canadian diplomats
also promote the court, he said.

Canada also recently appointed a member of Parliament who is considered an
expert on the international court, Erwin Cotler of Montreal, as a special envoy
for this issue. "He's there to do the speeches, do the schmoozing," Mr. Axworthy
said. "He's a very popular spokesperson."

For Canada, the campaign is over domestically, and officials can turn to the
vexing questions of how to build more support in the United States for a court
that could be functioning within a year or two.

"It is no longer something that's going away; in fact it's probably something
that's coming quicker than most people would anticipate," Mr. Axworthy said.
"It's now taking form, shape and movement, plus some energy. That in itself
should be a message.

"Our strategy is to keep the U.S. engaged," said Mr. Axworthy, who meets
regularly with a dozen of his counterparts from around the world to discuss
issues of "human security," an area where the court ranks high, he said.

"Let's continue to work and massage and accommodate," he said of Washington's
fears. "But there has to be flexibility on the U.S. side. They have to adjust
their sights now too and recognize that they are not going to get an exemption
from this court. That's pretty clear. They've been told that."

Mr. Axworthy said that Canada and others would like to see a shift in American
thinking, but he added that they are aware that the American public is not high
on this issue. "It is so important, so crucial that the debate here shift its
focus from how you thwart it, frustrate it or stop it to how do we make sure
that your interests are looked after and that you can support probably what will
be the most significant new institution of this century."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); NORTH AMERICA (92%);

STATE: NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (83%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (83%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CANADA;   CANADA (99%); UNITED STATES (97%); NORTH AMERICA (92%);
NORTH CAROLINA, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  WAR
CRIMES (92%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY

 (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (89%); FOREIGN POLICY (88%); LITIGATION (78%); JURISDICTION (78%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%); POLITICAL DEBATES (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS
& FOREIGN SERVICES (77%); INTERVIEWS (77%); TALKS & MEETINGS (77%); APPOINTMENTS

 (77%); POLITICAL PARTIES (77%); PRIME MINISTERS (77%); APPROVALS (76%);
GENOCIDE (73%); SUITS & CLAIMS (73%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (73%); TREATIES &
AGREEMENTS (70%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (76%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  BILL CLINTON (90%); JEAN CHRETIEN (72%);

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1838 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

U.N. Urges New Rules to Help Children in War

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 473 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, July 21


The United Nations outlined recommendations today to better protect children
caught in war, saying they have increasingly become the "innocent victims of the
persistent gap between law and practice."

The 55 proposals cover a range of issues confronting children in war zones,
including their recruitment into armies, their risk of harm from land mines and
their vulnerability to sanctions applied in times of conflict.

The United Nations estimates that some 300,000 children have been recruited,
mostly by rebel groups, to fight wars from Sierra Leone to Sri Lanka. Data from
Unicef, the United Nations Children's Fund, indicate that between 1986 and 1996,
wars killed two million children, injured six million and orphaned one million.

Secretary General Kofi Annan said in a report to the Security Council that an
important starting point to reduce those numbers would be if all governments
ratified the core treaties and protocols on protecting children and for rebel
groups to also respect those standards.

He asked countries that support rebel factions -- with military, political,
financial or other aid -- to condition their assistance on compliance with those
norms. And he suggested that corporations be asked to develop voluntary codes of
conduct concerning trade with countries or other parties responsible for gross
violations of children's rights.

Mr. Annan stressed that people who commit genocide, war crimes and crimes
against humanity on children should not be offered amnesty as part of peace
negotiations.

His core recommendations are expected to be negotiated by the Security Council
and then translated into a resolution. In the report, Mr. Annan also urged the
council to take into consideration the "unintended consequences" of sanctions on
children when it debates whether to place embargoes on countries.

He suggested the council send assessment teams to targeted countries to
determine how embargoes might affect the civilian population.

"The potential long-term benefits of sanctions should be weighed against the
immediate and long-term costs to children," Mr. Annan said, citing the collapse
of education and health infrastructures and increase in infant mortality rates
associated with some sanctions regimes.

"The suffering of Iraqi children, as reported by Unicef, and of children in the
Balkans are troubling cases in point," he wrote.

The report also addressed ways the Security Council could help children recover
from wars. Mr. Annan urged that they be taken into account when designing peace
agreements.

Girls should be given particular attention to ensure that they receive equal
access to education and job training, Mr. Annan wrote.

He said children are disproportionately at risk from being maimed or killed by
land mines and urged more money for mine clearance and education.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SRI LANKA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S
FUND  (83%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (83%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND (83%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (94%); UNITED NATIONS (94%); UNITED NATIONS
CHILDREN'S FUND  (83%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (83%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (83%); UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SRI LANKA (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (92%);
CHILDREN (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); CHILD WELFARE (90%); CHILDREN IN ARMED CONFLICT (90%);
LANDMINES (89%); RELIEF ORGANIZATIONS (89%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (89%); ARMIES

 (78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); CHILDREN'S HEALTH (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); ETHICS (77%); MILITARY WEAPONS (76%); AMNESTY (76%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); GENOCIDE (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (73%); PEACE
PROCESS (72%); DEATHS & DEATH RATES (70%); INFANT MORTALITY (50%);

PERSON: KOFI ANNAN (92%);

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1840 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 July 22, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Where Suing for Libel Is a National Specialty;
Britain's Plaintiff-Friendly Laws Have Become a Magnet for Litigators

BYLINE: By SARAH LYALL

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1280 words


When she first heard about it, Deborah Lipstadt believed that David Irving's
threatened libel suit would be little more than a fleeting inconvenience.

"I thought, 'This is a classic nuisance suit,' " said Ms. Lipstadt, the author
of "Denying the Holocaust," which portrays Mr. Irving as a Holocaust denier who
manipulates history to further his own agenda. "I thought there would be a few
lawyers' letters, and then it would go away."

But it didn't go away. Five years later, Ms. Lipstadt, a professor of Modern
Jewish and Holocaust Studies at Emory University in Atlanta, won a drawn-out
court case along with her publisher, Penguin Books, but only after spending more
than $3 million and enlisting a formidable army of experts who had to prove that
what she had said about Mr. Irving was true. The victory left Ms. Lipstadt with
an unusually personal understanding of the vagaries of English libel law.

In the United States, with its ironclad belief in the First Amendment right to
free speech, libel plaintiffs like Mr. Irving need to prove not only that the
speech in question is false, but also that it was published with a reckless
disregard for the truth. In England, the burden is in exactly the other
direction: the offending speech is presumed to be false, and it is up to
defendants like Ms. Lipstadt to prove that it is in fact true.

That may sound reasonable, but it can be prohibitively difficult, said Helena
Peacock, the legal director of Penguin Books in Britain. "Quite often, things
are true, but it's very hard to provide evidence in court that shows they're
true," she said.

As a result, the British system tends to have a dampening effect on what
newspapers print and what publishers include in books, especially when the
material is likely to offend someone who is powerful, rich or particularly
litigious. "A lot of journalists feel very strongly that the libel laws support
the very people they are traditionally supposed to call to account -- those in
authority," said Bob Jones, an emeritus fellow in journalism at City University
in London. "In a profit-oriented, highly competitive media industry, managements
are not too keen on taking risks when it comes to powerful people, because they
know how expensive it is."

Part of the reason for the difference in laws is that England has never held
free speech in as high esteem as the United States has; English courts have
tended to regard it as subordinate to things like reputation, for instance.
"It's all connected with the English culture of deference," said Eric Barendt, a
professor of media law at University College London.

Meanwhile, because of its plaintiff-friendly libel laws, London is
not-so-affectionately known among lawyers as "a town called Sue." "We're
becoming the libel capital of the world," said Mark Stephens, a lawyer
specializing in free speech cases here. "The U.K. is probably the best plaintiff
jurisdiction anywhere, and as a consequence we get increasingly sophisticated
plaintiffs looking at which country is best to sue in and being increasingly
attracted to the U.K."

A recent ruling by the House of Lords, which serves as England's court of last
resort, has not helped. The case concerned the effort of a high-profile Russian
politician and businessman, Boris Berezovsky, to bring a libel suit against
Forbes, the American magazine, in England. A 1996 Forbes article said that Mr.
Berezovsky was followed by "a trail of corpses, uncollectible debts and
competitors terrified for their lives."

Lawyers for Forbes argued that since the case involved a Russian citizen and an
American publication with a circulation in England of less than 2,000, it had
nothing to do with England. When a lower-court judge agreed, Mr. Berezovosky
appealed to the House of Lords and won.

Forbes plans to bring up the matter with the European Court of Human Rights in
Strasbourg, whose decisions can overrule even those of the House of Lords. But
if the case ends up going to trial, Forbes will be put in a highly awkward
position.

"One will have to ship a sizable number of members of the Russian underworld
here to testify," said David Hooper, a lawyer on Forbes's English legal team.
"The whole thing is ridiculous."

When they do find themselves sued in English courts, American publications tend
not to fare well. In a recent case, The New York Times and The International
Herald Tribune lost a libel suit brought by Marco Pierre White, a celebrity chef
in London, who said that a generally favorable Times article from 1998,
reprinted in The Tribune, libeled him when it said he had had a "well-publicized
bout with drugs and alcohol."

The Times drew this inference from Mr. White's autobiography, in which he
referred to having embarked on a "big bender," only reforming his "decadent"
ways because "eventually I couldn't stand watching another person getting drunk
or someone else injecting smack into his veins." Had the case been heard in
America, The Times would have argued that its characterization was an honest
interpretation of what Mr. White himself had said and did not show a reckless
disregard for the truth. But in England, the jury took a dim view of the
American free-speech tradition. It found for Mr. White and ordered the papers to
pay him some $125,000 in damages, as well as his legal costs, which are likely
to be several hundred thousand dollars.

By the same token, when American courts have occasion to consider England's
libel laws, they are hard-pressed to contain their dislike for a system so
antithetical to their own. This was made abundantly clear in 1996, when -- asked
to enforce an English libel judgment because the defendant had moved to Maryland
-- the Maryland Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, refused. "The
signing of the Declaration of Independence, the adoption of state constitutions
and the later ratification of the First Amendment signaled a major departure
from English law and policy concerning free speech and freedom of the press,"
the court said.

The concern for American newspapers and magazines, lawyers say, is that the
recent Berezovsky ruling, as well as the growing availability of American
publications on the Internet, will make them increasingly vulnerable to
plaintiffs seeking to take their grievances to English courts. "In the Internet
age," said Patrick J. Carome, a specialist in defamation law in Washington,
"there is a worry that we're going to see more and more situations where foreign
defendants are being hauled into court in countries like England."

Why does England persist in holding on to its libel laws?

They certainly have few champions among newspapers in Britain. But because of
the news media's almost universal unpopularity among lawmakers (who know only
too well what it feels like to be on the wrong side of a tabloid article),
Parliamentary efforts to amend the system have generally failed.

There are some good aspects to the laws, argues David Price, a defamation lawyer
in England: "I would defend them on the basis that whether something is true or
false is a useful piece of information. A trial on whether a public figure has
or has not been guilty of wrongdoing is a much more useful exercise than one on
whether a newspaper believed he was guilty of wrongdoing."

Even Ms. Lipstadt believes that fighting Mr. Irving in court, as unpleasant as
it was, had an unforseen benefit: "In the U.S., this would have been thrown out
of court, but if it had been thrown out, Irving would have been able to say that
he never got his day in court. I thought, 'This British law is making me jump
through hoops.' But he was the one who was stripped naked."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS551112 OFFICES OF OTHER HOLDING COMPANIES (56%); NAICS511130 BOOK
PUBLISHERS (56%); SIC2731 BOOKS: PUBLISHING, OR PUBLISHING & PRINTING (56%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); ENGLAND (91%);

STATE: GEORGIA, USA (77%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (77%);

COMPANY: PENGUIN PUBLISHING CO LTD (56%);   HOUSE OF LORDS (58%);

ORGANIZATION: HOUSE OF LORDS (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: GREAT BRITAIN;   UNITED STATES (93%); UNITED KINGDOM (93%); ENGLAND
(91%);   GEORGIA, USA (77%);   LONDON, ENGLAND (92%); ATLANTA, GA, USA (77%);

SUBJECT: LIBEL AND SLANDER; SUITS AND LITIGATION  LIBEL & SLANDER (93%);
GENOCIDE (90%); LITIGATION (90%); WRITERS (89%); PUBLISHING (88%); FREEDOM OF
SPEECH (87%); FREEDOM OF PRESS (78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); HOLOCAUST (77%); LAW
SCHOOLS (76%); COLLEGES & UNIVERSITIES (75%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS
(75%); EVIDENCE (74%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (74%);

PERSON: LYALL, SARAH  DEBORAH LIPSTADT (76%); DAVID IRVING (68%);

LOAD-DATE: July 22, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: Above, judges arriving at the Court of Justice in London.
Insets: Deborah Lipstadt, an American author, won -- but only after spending
more than $3 million -- when the British historian David Irving sued her for
libel. (Neil Libbert; insets, Associated Press)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1845 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  July 24, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Editorial Observer;
How Slavery Fueled Business in the North

BYLINE: By BRENT STAPLES

SECTION: Section A; Page 18; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 899 words


The German Parliament hoped to discourage a wave of lawsuits -- and close the
door on an ugly past -- when it voted to support a fund through which
corporations will compensate people who worked as slave laborers in Germany
during World War II. But by agreeing to pay reparations, corporations like
DaimlerChrysler, Deutsche Bank, Siemens and Volkswagen are tacitly admitting
that German corporate wealth rests at least partly on slave labor extracted from
Jews during the commission of crimes against humanity.

This has been a big year for institutional contrition, with the Vatican
apologizing for misdeeds of the past -- extending back to the Inquisition -- and
Swiss banks seeking atonement for appropriating the accounts of Holocaust
victims. But in the United States Congress, a bill that would bring about a
similar reckoning with regard to two and a half centuries of slavery may never
see the light of day. Legislation sponsored by Representative John Conyers Jr.
of Michigan calling for a study of reparations has failed to reach the House
floor, even after being submitted to Congress every year for more than a decade.

The failure of Congress to take this bill seriously reflects the sense among
Americans as a whole that slavery has no economic bearing on the nation as it
exists today. But if a 34-year-old lawyer named Deadria Farmer-Paellmann has her
way, a broader debate about reparations and the links between modern
corporations and the slave economy may be on the way.

A part-time musician and amateur historian, Ms. Farmer-Paellmann attended law
school solely to develop a legal argument for reparations. After scouring
corporate archives, she has turned up connections between modern corporations
and predecessor companies that seem clearly to have profited from the slave
trade, in some cases obliquely but often quite directly.

Inspired by the German case, Ms. Farmer-Paellmann is planning to sue a dozen
corporations for "unjustly enriching" themselves and has already begun
distributing archival records that provide provocative examples of corporate
involvement in the trade. The planned lawsuits are novel. But the news articles
about her first few discoveries have already broadened public awareness of the
extent to which the United States depended on slaves to build the national as
well as the Southern economy.

Charles Ogletree, a Harvard Law School professor, is among those paying
attention. He says he is considering both litigation and legislation and is
helping to plan a conference scheduled this fall on the reparations issue.

Modern-day Northerners tend to view slavery as confined to the Confederacy,
thinking of the Northeast as made up of "free states." Americans are for the
most part unaware that slavery covered all of the original colonies and their
successor states and began to loosen its grip in the North only in the early
1800's, when personal liberty laws went into effect. New York City was a capital
of human bondage, with more slaves than any other city with the possible
exception of Charleston, S.C.

New England survives in the history books as the hotbed of abolitionism and the
home of the crusading anti-slavery novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe. But Ms.
Farmer-Paellmann has turned up documents revealing a different New England, one
in which corporate founders and respected businessmen trafficked in slaves, even
after aspects of the slave trade were made illegal.

One of the most serious offenders was the Rhode Island businessman John Brown,
who founded Providence Bank, an early predecessor of the modern FleetBoston
Financial Corporation. The Fleet corporate history portrays Brown as a
"respected merchant." But Ms. Farmer-Paellmann has unearthed records showing
that Brown owned ships that embarked on several slaving voyages and that he was
prosecuted in federal court for participating in the international slave trade
after it had become illegal under federal law. Records show that Providence Bank
lent substantial sums to Brown, and Ms. Farmer-Paellmann suspects that the bank
both financed and profited from the founder's illegal slave trading. For its
part, FleetBoston contends that incomplete records make a conclusion impossible.

The most disturbing document to emerge so far reveals that the Aetna Insurance
Company of Hartford actually insured slave owners against the loss of their
human chattel. That Aetna knew the horrors of slave life is evident in a rider
through which the company declined to pay the premium for slaves who were
lynched, worked to death or who committed suicide. Aetna says that incomplete
records forbid its knowing how many such policies were written. After the policy
came to light, the company apologized for having been involved in the slave
trade.

Ms. Farmer-Paellmann claims to have found similar documents concerning more than
a dozen corporations still doing business in this country and has promised to
file several lawsuits charging these companies with unjustly enriching
themselves at the expense of slaves. Whether or not the lawsuits succeed is
almost beside the point. This exercise will have done its job if it reveals to
the public the role of slavery in shaping American life. More than a few modern
fortunes rest on the suffering of human beings who once accounted for a large
portion of American wealth and lived in chains here for 250 years.

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: DEUT (JSE) (58%); DBK (FRA) (58%); DBK (BIT) (58%); DBETN (JSE) (58%);
DBA (ASX) (58%); DB (NYSE) (58%); SIN (SWX) (57%); SIE (LSE) (57%); SIE (FRA)
(57%); SIE (BIT) (57%); SI (NYSE) (57%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS523920 PORTFOLIO MANAGEMENT (58%); NAICS523110 INVESTMENT BANKING
& SECURITIES DEALING (58%); NAICS522110 COMMERCIAL BANKING (58%); SIC6282
INVESTMENT ADVICE (58%); SIC6211 SECURITY BROKERS, DEALERS, & FLOTATION
COMPANIES (58%); SIC6081 BRANCHES & AGENCIES OF FOREIGN BANKS (58%); NAICS335110
ELECTRIC LAMP BULB & PART MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS334513 INSTRUMENTS & RELATED
PRODUCTS MANUFACTURING FOR MEASURING, DISPLAYING & CONTROLLING INDUSTRIAL
PROCESS VARIABLES (57%); NAICS334413 SEMICONDUCTOR & RELATED DEVICE
MANUFACTURING (57%); NAICS334210 TELEPHONE APPARATUS MANUFACTURING (57%);

COUNTRY: GERMANY (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE (73%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%);

COMPANY: DEUTSCHE BANK AG (58%); SIEMENS AG (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES;   GERMANY (96%); UNITED STATES (94%); CENTRAL EUROPE
(73%);   NEW YORK, USA (79%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (73%);

SUBJECT: SLAVERY; BLACKS; LAW AND LEGISLATION; SUITS AND LITIGATION  LEGISLATION

 (90%); LITIGATION (90%); SLAVERY (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); LAWYERS (89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); HISTORY (78%); HOLOCAUST
(78%); APPROPRIATIONS (78%); GENOCIDE (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (75%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (74%); WORLD WAR II (72%); JEWS & JUDAISM (71%);
RELIGION (71%); LAW SCHOOLS (70%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (70%); INVESTIGATIONS

 (70%); ARCHIVE COLLECTIONS (69%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (64%);

PERSON: STAPLES, BRENT; FARMER-PAELLMANN, DEADRIA  JOHN CONYERS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: July 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1862 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 2, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Syria Is Sued by Family of Man Killed by '96 Bomb in Jerusalem

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 731 words


The family of an Israeli-American man killed in a 1996 terrorist attack in
Jerusalem filed suit in New York yesterday against Syria, contending that it
provided critical support to Hamas, the militant Palestinian group whose members
carried out the suicide bombing attack.

The suit seeks to hold the government of Syria, the Syrian Defense Ministry and
two Syrian officials legally responsible for the attack in which 24 people were
killed, including Ira Weinstein, a 53-year-old butcher who lived in Israel for
the last decade of his life, and whose family is bringing the suit.

The two Syrians are Mustafa Tlass, the defense minister, and Ghazi Kanaan, the
commander of Syrian forces in Lebanon.

In the suit, the Weinstein family says that Syria is liable for Mr. Weinstein's
death and the suffering that he and his family endured because Syria provided
Hamas terrorists with "material resources" and training to carry out the
bombing.

Other American victims of terrorist acts have won monetary damages against Iran
and Cuba, but have been unable to collect them because those nations' assets in
the United States have been frozen.

Although Syria has appeared on the State Department's list of state sponsors of
terrorism for decades, the State Department says it has not been directly
engaged in terrorism since 1986. Rather, it says, Syria gives indirect support,
by letting Hamas and other groups run bases and take refuge in Damascus or in
the Bekaa region in Lebanon, which is under Syrian control.

With that decision from the State Department, Syria is not subject to sanctions
as severe as those imposed on Iraq, Iran and other designated state terrorism
sponsors. And trade is permitted between the two countries. Therefore Syria has
assets in the United States that could be seized if a jury ruled against Syria,
the family's lawyers assert.

"We will prove that Syria has supported terrorist actions perpetrated by Hamas,"
said Nitsana Darshan-Leitner, an Israeli lawyer representing the plaintiffs,
Susan Weinstein, Ira's Weinstein's widow, and their children, Jennifer, 34,
Joseph, 31, and David, 17. "And we hope to dissuade Syria and others from
hosting and helping terrorist groups by showing them that the price paid for
doing so is far too high."

A spokesman for the Syrian Embassy in Damascus denied that Syria condones or
supports terrorism and deplored the killing of civilians throughout the world.
"We respect human rights and reject any allegation that we tolerate or sanction
terrorism anywhere," a diplomat said.

Lawyers for the Weinstein family are seeking $330 million and punitive damages
in compensation for the suffering the family endured when Mr. Weinstein was
mortally wounded on a bus that was blown up by a Hamas suicide bomber in
Jerusalem in February 1996.

"Ira Weinstein did not immediately die from the bombing," states the complaint,
provided to The New York Times by the family's lawyers.

With burns over much of his body, severe lung damage, shrapnel, kidney failure
and amputation of both legs, the complaint says, Mr. Weinstein suffered
"excruciating and conscious pain for seven weeks before dying." His daughter,
Jennifer, a nurse in the ward at the hospital where her father was treated,
"witnessed her father's injuries and agony for the entire seven-week period."

The complaint accuses Syria of providing substantial aid to Hamas at the time of
the bombing, including training, weapons and explosives storage, safe haven,
lodging, means of communication and equipment and financial services. The
lawyers said that Hamas's involvement in the suicide bombing was later confirmed
by Hassan Salamah, a Hamas member, in statements to an Israeli court that
convicted him of helping to plan the bombing.

Jeffrey A. Miller, co-administrator of the Weinstein estate and the family's New
York attorney in the lawsuit, said the family filed the suit in Nassau County
Supreme Court under a 1996 law that permits American victims of terrorism to sue
to recover monetary damages from states that sponsor terrorism or provide
"material support or resources" to terrorists.

He said the law does not require his plaintiffs to show that Syria carried out
or encouraged the specific bombing that killed Mr. Weinstein, but only that it
provided "material support" to the group whose members carried out the act.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SYRIA (99%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC
OF (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); LEBANON (92%); IRAQ (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

CITY: JERUSALEM, ISRAEL (94%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (92%);

COMPANY: HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST MOVEMENT)  HAMAS (94%);

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (ISLAMIC FUNDAMENTALIST MOVEMENT)  HAMAS (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ISRAEL; SYRIA; JERUSALEM; ;  SYRIA (99%); ISRAEL (95%); UNITED
STATES (94%); IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (92%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED
(92%); LEBANON (92%); IRAQ (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);   JERUSALEM, ISRAEL
(94%); DAMASCUS, SYRIA (92%);

SUBJECT: SUITS AND LITIGATION; BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; TERRORISM  TERRORISM (95%);

 BOMBINGS (91%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (91%); HAMAS (91%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES

 (90%); LITIGATION (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); SUITS & CLAIMS (90%);
DAMAGES (89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (87%); LAWYERS (78%);
PUNITIVE DAMAGES (78%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (78%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%); JURY
TRIALS (76%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (76%); VERDICTS (74%); RELIGION (74%);
EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (70%); FUNDAMENTALISM
(69%);

PERSON: MILLER, JUDITH; WEINSTEIN, IRA (D1996); TIASS, MUSTAFA (MIN); KANAAN,
GHAZI; WEINSTEIN FAMILY  TZIPORA LIVNI (91%);

LOAD-DATE: August 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 5, 2000, Saturday

CORRECTION:

An article on Wednesday about a suit against the Syrian government by the family
of an Israeli-American man killed in a 1996 terrorist attack in Jerusalem
misstated the position of Brig. Gen. Ghazi Kanaan, one of two Syrian defendants.
He is the chief of military intelligence, not commander of the Syrian forces in
Lebanon.


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1867 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 3, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Massacres in Kashmir May Be Effort to Sabotage Peace Initiative

BYLINE: By BARRY BEARAK

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 574 words

DATELINE: NEW DELHI, Aug. 2


In a killing rampage remarkable even for the bloodied mountains and forests of
Kashmir, at least 93 people were slain late Tuesday and early today in six
separate massacres.

Most of the dead were innocents: pilgrims on their way to pray at a holy site,
laborers working at a brick kiln, villagers awakened from their beds and lined
up for killing.

To many in India the cause of all this killing seemed straightforward enough: a
peace initiative last week by one militant group has been deemed a contemptible
betrayal by others, requiring sabotage.

"It is clear that after the Hizbul Mujahedeen called for a cease-fire and talks,
other militant groups have been instructed by Pakistan to step up their attacks
on innocent and unarmed people," India's prime minister, Atal Behari Vajpayee,
told Parliament. He added, "I will tell these terrorists that we will not bow
down to their threats."

But Pakistan, as well as several of the militant groups critical of the peace
initiative, denied any responsibility for the multiple attacks.

Indeed, Pakistan's Foreign Ministry issued a statement asserting that India's
own ruthless conniving might be to blame. "On previous occasions," the ministry
said, "terrorist acts aimed at civilians have been carried out by renegade
elements at the behest of the Indian security forces, to malign the Kashmiri
freedom struggle internationally."

Each of the two countries now occupies part of Kashmir, though India's share is
far larger and includes the valley that is the heart of Kashmiri culture.

Since 1989, Pakistan-backed militants have been rebelling against Indian rule.
An estimated 25,000 to 40,000 people have died in the fighting.

Last week, the Hizbul Mujahedeen -- one of the main insurgents -- declared a
unilateral cease-fire for three months, a surprise announcement that brought an
offer of talks from India and condemnation from other Islamic militants in the
fray.

The Kashmir dispute is a deep morass, and while little common ground would seem
to exist between the Hizbul and India, plans for discussions appeared to be
going forward, so violent efforts to derail the process could hardly be
unexpected.

Many in India have presumed that the Hizbul Mujahedeen would not have declared a
cease-fire without at least the tacit approval of Pakistan's military
government, which has been under pressure from the United States.

Inflamed oratory aside, the attacks raise questions about whether Pakistan
indeed favors the new dialogue and how much capacity it has to control the
militants.

The attacks were particularly jarring and heinous, and the victims were
overwhelmingly Hindu. In the worst incident, gunmen opened fire on pilgrims on
their way to a religious shrine at Pahalgam, 55 miles south of Srinagar. The
death toll in that one incident has risen to 33, according to hospital
officials.

In a small brickmaking community near the town of Anantnag, attackers forced
people from their homes, lined up the men and shot them. Eighteen died there.

Curfews have since been imposed in parts of the state. The authorities say they
fear a violent Hindu backlash against Muslims.

For their part, the Hizbul Mujahedeen were loath to suggest that any militant
groups had taken part in the massacres. Instead, the group's chief, Sayed
Salahuddin, demanded that India's leaders come to the table without any
preconditions and be ready to discuss Kashmiri secession.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: INDIA (96%); ASIA (96%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: KASHMIR (98%); JAMMU & KASHMIR, INDIA (94%);

CITY: NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%);

COMPANY: HIZBUL MUJAHEDEEN (INDIA)

ORGANIZATION: HIZBUL MUJAHEDEEN (INDIA)

GEOGRAPHIC: INDIA; KASHMIR AND JAMMU (INDIA); PAKISTAN;   INDIA (96%); ASIA
(96%); PAKISTAN (94%); UNITED STATES (79%);   KASHMIR (98%); JAMMU & KASHMIR,
INDIA (94%);   NEW DELHI, INDIA (79%);

SUBJECT: INDIA-INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS-PAKISTAN; TERRORISM  PEACE PROCESS (93%);

 TERRORISM (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); MOUNTAINS

 (89%); RELIGION (89%); RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (77%);
TERRORIST ATTACKS (77%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); REBELLIONS
& INSURGENCIES (75%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (74%); SHOOTINGS (73%);
HOSPITALS (71%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (71%); PRIME MINISTERS (68%); APPROVALS

 (66%); GUNSHOT WOUNDS (62%);   MILITARY RULE (74%);

PERSON: BEARAK, BARRY; VAJPAYEE, ATAL BEHARI (PRIME MIN)

LOAD-DATE: August 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1874 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                  August 7, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Karadzic Still Plays Hide-and-Seek With U.N. in Bosnia

BYLINE: By CARLOTTA GALL

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1416 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Aug. 6


The high, forested mountains of southeastern Bosnia are a place to hide, and,
according to current local lore, it is there, in the steep gorges or trails and
high passes into neighboring Montenegro, that Radovan Karadzic has been hiding.

Dr. Karadzic, the former leader of the Bosnian Serbs twice indicted by the war
crimes tribunal in The Hague on charges of genocide and crimes against humanity,
took refuge, according to news media reports in Bosnia last month, in the
village of Celebici, right on the border with his native Montenegro.

A onetime psychiatrist who led a campaign of extreme nationalism and instigated
a lethal war of ethnic cleansing, he has been closely guarded since the war
ended.

Even men who were once his close associates say they have not seen him for two
years. His influence over the Bosnian Serb republic, which he founded, is said
to be waning, as officials close to him have been moved out of office, left the
country or been arrested.

Yet Dr. Karadzic, widely regarded as the man most culpable for the 1992-95 war
in Bosnia, is still at large.

His unrepentant presence glowers over every issue in this ruined society: the
return of displaced people to their homes, the rule of law, cooperation of local
officials and politicians with the international administration, and the failure
or unwillingness of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Bosnia, known as
SFOR, to arrest him.

"To me he is the central one," said Thomas Miller, the American ambassador in
Bosnia, who insists that arresting Dr. Karadzic is still a priority. "For my
government, if I had one single wish, it would be to get Karadzic. He's a war
criminal, responsible for terrible things, but to his people he symbolizes
resistance. If he goes, it collapses that wall of resistance."

Yet Dr. Karadzic has eluded the special squads who have steadily picked up
lesser suspects -- almost one a month in the last 10 months -- and he has
continued to move around the region, if with great caution and even more warily
since NATO troops seized his close associate and partner in war, Momcilo
Krajisnik, in April.

It is five years since Dr. Karadzic was indicted, and local journalists and
officials fear that despite all foreign promises, he may get away for good,
sneaking into Montenegro and then Serbia, where many other war crimes suspects
have found refuge.

Georgios Vlachogiannis, the international governor of Foca, the Serbian
nationalist stronghold closest to Celebici, said he did not believe that Dr.
Karadzic was still in the area. "There are rumors that he is moving through the
Montenegrin border," he said. "Some think he is moving into Serbia."

In Pale, the ski resort town outside Sarajevo that Dr. Karadzic made his capital
and wartime headquarters, his daughter has reportedly been looking for a buyer
for her television and radio station, Astra. That could indicate that the family
is preparing to move to Serbia, one local journalist said. Dr. Karadzic's son, a
businessman reputed to have ties to the widespread smuggling networks developed
during the war, has lived in Belgrade for some years.

Dr. Karadzic's wife, Ljiljana Karadzic, still heads the Red Cross in the Bosnian
Serb republic and in July attended the celebrations in Pale marking the 10th
anniversary of the founding of her husband's Serbian Democratic Party.

She appears to live apart from her husband for security reasons but remains a
standard bearer and praised the achievements of his party.

Support for Dr. Karadzic in Pale remains outwardly strong. "Everyone still
supports him," said a 24-year-old who gave only his first name, Mladan. "I think
no one would betray him, despite the big reward. If he were arrested, blood
would be spilled and there would be attacks on SFOR."

But others doubt that there would be unrest, pointing to the muted reaction
after the arrest of Mr. Krajisnik. "People are only interested in jobs," said
Mayor Dragoljub Pipovic of Foca, a Serb.

The governor, Mr. Vlachogiannis, says the thugs who made Foca notorious -- 12
men from Foca alone have been indicted on war crimes charges -- have gone and
the atmosphere in the town has changed. "My feeling is that after Krajisnik's
arrest they left," he said. "They are probably living in Serbia."

Asked why NATO peacekeepers would not arrest indicted war crimes suspects before
they crossed the border, a spokesman for the force, Col. Tom Beginnes, said that
it was not the force's task to pursue suspects and that they could be arrested
only when encountered in the course of peacekeeping activities.

Dr. Karadzic's top general, Ratko Mladic, has been living in Belgrade since the
end of the Bosnian war and has been sighted there several times in recent
months.

Yet even Serbia may not provide a safe refuge for some men -- as Dragan Nikolic,
a Serb wanted by the tribunal for crimes alleged to have been committed in a
camp for Muslims near Vlasenica in 1992, found out. Mr. Nikolic, the first man
indicted by the war crimes tribunal, was abducted from his home in the town of
Smederevo in central Serbia in April, driven to the border with Bosnia in the
trunk of a car and handed over to American troops. His abduction is said to have
been organized by Serbian bounty hunters tempted by the cash reward, who have
since been arrested in Serbia.

The State Department has posted a $5 million reward for information leading to
the arrest of the three most notorious men indicted by the tribunal, Dr.
Karadzic, General Mladic and President Slobodan Milosevic of Yugoslavia, who was
charged for crimes committed by his troops in the Kosovo war last year.

If the reward has not brought any results so far, it has certainly raised the
stakes. Wolfgang Petritsch, who heads the international administration in
Bosnia, said the steady stream of arrests had increased the pressure. "The big
shots are still at large," he said, "but I can feel a heightened sense of
nervousness."

Dr. Karadzic has gone to extreme lengths to protect himself. He never shows his
face, but people know he is in Pale when they see members of his entourage
around, one journalist in the town said. That last happened two to three months
ago, the journalist added. Former associates say Dr. Karadzic went underground
two years ago after the murder of the young deputy police chief, Srdjan
Knezevic, in Pale in 1998.

Dr. Karadzic is widely believed to have been behind the killing, since the
influential deputy had defected to join Biljana Plavsic, then president of the
Bosnian Serb republic.

Ms. Plavsic, once an extreme nationalist, turned her back on Dr. Karadzic and
threw in her lot with the Western officials running Bosnia before losing the
presidency in late 1998. She reacted by withdrawing Dr. Karadzic's government
bodyguards, according to his former defense minister, Milan Ninkovic.

One of the few close associates of Dr. Karadzic still openly in circulation in
Bosnia, Mr. Ninkovic remains the most powerful politician in his hometown of
Doboj in the north of the country.

Yet the threat of a secret indictment clearly nagged at him. He complained that
peacekeepers' helicopters had started flying over his house on the outskirts of
Doboj.

"They often fly over the house and hover, and there is some indication that they
are photographing my house," he said. "I consider that there is no war crime in
my past and the only problem is that I am an obstacle to my political enemies."

He served as defense minister for the last year of the war in Bosnia, and so was
in office during the worst massacre of the war, at Srebrenica. He insists that
he had little authority and that Dr. Karadzic and General Mladic frequently
bypassed him when they issued orders to the army.

He blamed General Mladic, with whom he had frequent disagreements, for
Srebrenica. He was careful in his comments about Dr. Karadzic, saying the only
order he had seen was for the army to surround Srebrenica, not seize it.

Mr. Ninkovic, like Mrs. Karadzic, defends the actions of the Bosnian Serb
leadership during the war. An interview with him runs like a speech in his
defense, and one that takes little account of the recent arrests and indictments
of some of the most notorious Bosnian Croat war crimes suspects.

"My only mistake was that I wanted to defend my own people," Mr. Ninkovic said,
accusing the Muslim side of war crimes too. "Who killed the 30,000 Serb war
dead?" he asked. "Yet it is only Serbs who go to The Hague."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (96%); MONTENEGRO
(95%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (91%);

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS
(93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION; UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS

 (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (59%); NORTH
ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA; SERBIA; MONTENEGRO; ;  BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (99%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (96%); MONTENEGRO (95%); SERBIA (94%); NETHERLANDS (91%);   SARAJEVO,
BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (90%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE  INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%);

 WAR CRIMES (90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARRESTS (89%);
MOUNTAINS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%); GENOCIDE (77%); CIVIL
WAR (77%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS
(77%); DISPLACED PERSONS (77%); JOURNALISM (76%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS
(76%); SKIING (73%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (72%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (65%);
ARMED FORCES (50%);   RULE OF LAW (70%);

PERSON: GALL, CARLOTTA; KARADZIC, RADOVAN; KRAJISNIK, MOMCILO  DAVID DAVIS
(56%);

LOAD-DATE: August 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: August 9, 2000, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the former leader of the
Bosnian Serbs, Radovan Karadzic, who is a fugitive from arrest for war crimes,
misidentified the organization that controls the peacekeeping force that is
seeking him in Bosnia. It is NATO, not the United Nations.



GRAPHIC: Photos: Radovan Karadzic, the former Bosnian Serb leader indicted by
the war crimes tribunal in The Hague, is still at large. Washington offers
rewards for information leading to the capture of him and two others. (Reuters)

Map of Yugoslavia shows the location of Celebici: Radovan Karadzic was said to
be hiding in Celebici last month.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1887 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 12, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Seeking Out a Just Way To Make Amends for Slavery;
The Idea of Reparations for Blacks Is Gaining in Urgency, But a Knot of
Questions Remain, Like: Which Blacks?

BYLINE: By DIANE CARDWELL

SECTION: Section B; Page 7; Column 1; Arts & Ideas/Cultural Desk

LENGTH: 1494 words


In recent years the issue of reparations has exploded among nations wrestling
with the past. Scholars are beginning to see the German payout of $60 billion to
Jewish victims of the Holocaust, the United States decision to pay reparations
to Japanese-Americans who were interned during World War II and even Japan's
awkward efforts to settle with Korean "comfort women" as bedrocks of a new
political landscape.

Elazar Barkan, the chairman of the cultural studies department at Claremont
Graduate University in California, contends that since the end of the cold war,
the West in particular has entered a neo-Enlightenment period of political
morality in which restitution increasingly plays a leading role. Political
language has shifted, he writes in "The Guilt of Nations"(W.W. Norton), from
machtpolitik, the politics of power, to a shared belief among nations in the
rights of individuals and groups.

Consent and cooperation have become the buzzwords of global relations, Mr.
Barkan says, and agreement is now being achieved through negotiation rather than
force. "Certainly the eagerness of leaders -- Clinton, Blair, Chirac, the pope
-- to atone has been mocked," he said during a telephone interview. "But there
is a growing sense that you have to do the right thing."

In this new era, Mr. Barkan and others argue, the issue of American reparations
for slavery -- straitjacketed for decades in a kind of intellectual Bedlam -- is
beginning to look sane. "For so long it was just ludicrous for black folk to
even bring up the notion that they might be entitled to some just compensation,"
said Michael Eric Dyson, the Ida B. Wells Barnett professor of religious studies
at De Paul University in Chicago. "It was simply crazy." But after so many
successful reparations campaigns, including those for economic and cultural
restitution to various American Indian tribes, the African-American case has
gained momentum.

Every year since 1989, Representative John Conyers Jr., Democrat of Michigan,
has sponsored a bill to establish a commission to study reparations for slavery.
It remains stuck in committee, but away from Capitol Hill other developments are
having a significant impact on the national debate.

Black intellectuals like Randall Robinson, the president of TransAfrica, a
lobbying group, and the author of "The Debt: What America Owes to Blacks," and
the Harvard University professors Charles T. Ogletree and Henry Louis Gates Jr.
have publicly supported reparations. Individual cities and towns are confronting
their racist pasts: some, like Chicago, Detroit, Cleveland and Dallas, support
Federal hearings on reparations while others, like Tulsa, Okla., Rosewood, Fla.,
and Elaine, Ark., are either considering or are paying monetary damages for past
atrocities. As Mr. Dyson explains, "African-Americans themselves are beginning
to be politicized around this debate."

Mr. Barkan writes that slavery remains "the most glaring example of an
unaddressed historical injustice in the United States." He adds that this
"stands in direct contrast with the public culture that embraces the concept of
attempting to redress its imperfect past."

But opponents of reparations commonly argue that other examples of past
imperfection are redressable in ways that slavery is not. In the case of the
Japanese-Americans, the victims themselves were compensated for quantifiable,
provable suffering at the hands of an identifiable perpetrator, the United
States Government. With the descendants of slaves, this argument goes, the
situation is entirely different.

It is, first of all, said to be impossible to determine the actual present-day
effect of slavery -- to trace the impact of slavery on, for example, today's
overwhelming incarceration rate among black males, or to calculate all those
generations of lost or artificially depressed wages. Not to mention the quagmire
of determining who should be compensated. All blacks? Only those who demonstrate
direct linkage to a slave? Should those of mixed race be included? Or what about
Oprah?

Supporters of reparations find this line of argument irrelevant. "The way I look
at historical crimes or historical injustices is do the victims still suffer,
whether it is the victim or the victim's descendants," Mr. Barkan says. "Another
issue that's been raised is, 'Why should I pay for it, I didn't do it?' It is a
foolish argument. No one is responsible personally for any wrongdoing. But just
to stop the action doesn't mean to have paid for the past. The perpetrator is
very clear. It's the identity of the U.S. The U.S. as an entity is responsible."

Scott L. Malcomson, the author of the forthcoming "One Drop of Blood: The
American Misadventure of Race" (Farrar, Straus & Giroux) points out that whites
have been distancing themselves from moral culpability for slavery since as far
back as the Revolutionary period. Thomas Jefferson, for instance, argued that it
was the British who were to blame. Even so, many abolitionists at the time
supported their own form of reparations: the establishment of a colony in Africa
for freed slaves.

Although Mr. Barkan writes in "The Guilt of Nations" that national identity is a
result of history, "for better and for worse," and therefore we "should pay our
historical debts," Wendy Kaminer, a fellow at the Radcliffe Public Policy
Center, recently argued the opposite point. Writing in American Prospect
magazine, she said that the campaign for reparations "reflects some of the
premises of the aristocracy it attacks." She continued: "It allows the past to
define our entitlements in the present; it relies on a belief in the justice of
inheritance. . . . If equality is a birthright, you don't have to purchase it
with the sufferings of your ancestors, any more than you should be able to
purchase privileges with your ancestors' achievements."

Indeed, just how the past should be used is at the crux of the debate. Ian
Buruma, who has written extensively about the legacies of World War II, contends
that the quest for reparations tends to mire the petitioners in the very
victimization for which they seek payment, as well as encouraging a never-ending
flood of restitution-seekers. "If every group that feels a historical wrong
wants compensation, how far back do you go?" he asked in an interview. "It
becomes problematic."

As ethnic groups in the United States and elsewhere have assimilated, Mr. Buruma
went on, they have tended to replace their cultural identities with the residue
of past discrimination. This leads, in his view, to resentment, which undermines
the possibility of mutual understanding between groups.

"Instead of identifying as an American entitled to freedoms and rights and all
men created equal," he said of African-Americans seeking reparations, "you are
born into an aggrieved group deserving compensation. Then that's your whole
identity and you can never get out of it."

For some, the argument against reparations is simply that any kind of
compensation would be wholly inappropriate and inadequate recompense, not just
for slavery but also for the entire array of racial injustices that trailed in
slavery's wake. As the sociologist Glenn C. Loury wrote recently in The New York
Times: "Who can say what the out-of-wedlock birth rate for blacks would be,
absent chattel slavery? How does one calculate the cost of inner-city ghettos,
of poor education, of the stigma of perceived racial inferiority? The severity
of slavery's 'injury' is far more profound than any cash transfer will be able
to reverse."

But for proponents, the word reparations can cover a host of interventions, from
cash payments -- the current equivalent of, say, 40 acres and a mule -- to a
direct, official apology from the President. Some argue that affirmative action
policies already in place should be considered sufficient, though Mr. Barkan
responds that affirmative action aims at fixing present injustices rather than
compensating for past ones.

Mr. Robinson and Mr. Ogletree, among others, have suggested that reparations be
used to finance social and economic development programs for the benefit of all
black Americans. In another development, a lawyer named Deadria Farmer-Paellmann
is compiling evidence for lawsuits against a dozen companies that she says
demonstrably benefited from the slave trade. Among them are Providence Bank, a
precursor of the FleetBoston Financial Corporation, and the Aetna Insurance
Company of Hartford.

Ultimately, though, many proponents of reparations see the issue as a moral one
that cannot be dismissed because the practicalities seem byzantine at the
moment. "I think it's part of the social contract of justice in America," Mr.
Dyson said, "that if black people have done what they've done and have been
treated the way they've been treated, then they deserve what they deserve. And
we can argue about what that dessert should look like, but it ain't come yet."


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC2731 BOOK PUBLISHERS  (56%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (98%); JAPAN (92%);

STATE: OKLAHOMA, USA (93%); IDAHO, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); WEST USA
(79%); OHIO, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: TULSA, OK, USA (93%); DETROIT, MI, USA (79%); CLEVELAND, OH, USA (79%);

COMPANY: HARVARD UNIVERSITY PRESS (51%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (98%); JAPAN (92%);   OKLAHOMA, USA (93%); IDAHO, USA
(79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); WEST USA (79%); OHIO, USA (79%); VIRGINIA, USA
(79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);   TULSA, OK, USA (93%); DETROIT, MI, USA (79%);
CLEVELAND, OH, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: SLAVERY; BLACKS  WORLD WAR II (90%); HOLOCAUST (90%); JEWS & JUDAISM
(89%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (88%); ETHNIC & CULTURAL
STUDIES (78%); HUMANITIES & SOCIAL SCIENCE (78%); ASIAN AMERICANS (77%); DAMAGES

 (77%); COLD WAR (77%); RELIGION (77%); POLITICAL DEBATES (76%); INTERVIEWS
(76%); POLITICS (76%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (75%); US DEMOCRATIC
PARTY (72%); LOBBYING (72%); RELIGIOUS EDUCATION (72%); NATIVE AMERICANS (72%);
WRITERS (69%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (76%);

PERSON: CARDWELL, DIANE  JOHN CONYERS (56%);

LOAD-DATE: August 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: RIOT'S AFTERMATH, 1921 -- A state commission has recommended
that Oklahoma pay reparations to blacks for a massacre in Tulsa in which some
300 were killed and a black neighborhood was burned. After the violence blacks
were led to detention. (Tulsa Historical Society, via Associated Press);
INTERNMENT CAMPS, 1943 -- The United States has paid reparations for interning
nearly 120,000 Japanese-Americans on the West Coast in often remote camps after
the attack on Pearl Harbor. Above, the Minidoka camp in Hunt, Idaho. (Wing Luke
Asian Museum, via Associated Press)(pg. B7); An engraving shows a shipload of
African slaves arriving at Jamestown, Va., in 1619. (Harper's Magazine, January
1901)(pg. B9)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1895 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 August 18, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

WORLD BRIEFING

BYLINE: Compiled by Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words



MIDDLE EAST

AFGHANISTAN: TALIBAN BACKTRACK ON BAKERIES -- One day after the ruling Taliban
shut down bakeries that employ widows and feed the poor, they reversed
themselves and said that all 25 could reopen and the 360 women return to work.
The Taliban, who rule roughly 90 percent of Afghanistan, espouse a harsh brand
of Islamic law and have imposed strict controls on women since capturing the
capital, Kabul, in 1996.  (AP)


IRAQ: READY FOR BUSINESS -- Baghdad's Saddam International Airport officially
reopened, 10 years after it was closed because of sanctions imposed on Iraq
following its 1990 invasion of Kuwait. But the only traffic the airport will
have for the foreseeable future is likely to be limited to the arrival of
private flights from abroad, which are not specifically banned by the embargo.

(Agence France-Presse)

EUROPE

LATVIA: DOWNTOWN BLASTS -- Two bombs exploded in a shopping center in downtown
Riga, wounding 21 people, the police said. No one claimed responsibility, but
Riga has had scores of bombings since Latvia regained independence in 1991, and
the police have attributed most to gang activity.  (AP)

BRITAIN: ROYAL PASSAGE -- Prince William, second in line to the British throne
after his father, Prince Charles, has passed his final-year exams and will be
attending St. Andrews, Scotland's oldest university. He plans to begin a
four-year degree course in art history next year, after a year off. He is
currently in Belize taking part in exercises with the Welsh Guards.  (AP)

THE AMERICAS

COLOMBIA: POLICEMEN SLAIN -- The bodies of three policemen who had been taken
prisoner by rebels 18 months ago were found with their throats slit after a
clash between the army and rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia.
They were among more than 350 security force members the guerrilla group has
captured over the last two years to try to pressure the government to release
some 450 jailed rebels.  (Reuters)

MEXICO: BORDER CZAR -- President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada said that after he
takes office in December, he will appoint a "czar" to help resolve border issues
that have long strained relations between the United States and Mexico. A chief
duty, he said, would be to promote greater cooperation between local governments
on both sides of the border.  Ginger Thompson (NYT)

CANADA: BOLSTERING THE RIGHT -- The new right-wing party, the Canadian Alliance,
won another defection from its shrinking rival, the Progressive Conservative
Party, as Brian Pallister, a former Manitoba cabinet minister, left the ranks of
the old party, known as the Tories. Mr. Pallister, a former national Tory
leadership candidate, said he would run for Parliament from Manitoba in
elections expected next spring.

James Brooke (NYT)

ASIA

JAPAN: WOMEN AT THE WHEEL -- Two women have became the first female drivers of
the super-fast Shinkansen "bullet" trains. A spokesman for the JR West rail
system said Rumi Yamashita, 27, and Miyuki Fukuzawa, 29, benefited from a 1997
revision of Japan's equal opportunity law, which banned sexual discrimination in
recruiting, appointing and promoting workers.  (Agence France-Presse)

JAPAN: SUICIDE RISE -- The number of suicides hit a record 33,048 in the year
ending in March, with the nation's prolonged economic slump taking its toll, the
police said. Health problems accounted for half of all suicide cases while
economic hardship was blamed for another fifth, an 11.5 percent jump from the
previous year's survey. Ninety-two percent of the economy-related suicides
involved men, as companies abandon their tradition of employment for life.
(Agence France-Presse)

INDIA: GANDHI TOUR -- The Congress Party president, Sonia Gandhi, the
Italian-born inheritor of the Nehru-Gandhi dynasty, left, will make her first
trip abroad as leader of the opposition for a conference of presiding officers
of parliaments in New York that begins on Aug. 31. The delegation will also
include the Bharatiya Janata Party's Pramod Mahajan, the Samajwadi Party's
Mulayam Singh Yadav and the Nationalist Congress Party chief, Sharad Pawar.

Celia Dugger (NYT)

INDIA: ANTI-CHRISTIAN SUSPECT -- Police in the southern state of Karnataka said
they had arrested a junior air force officer, Syed Hasan Ur Zama, as a suspect
in the bombings of Christian churches this summer. They said Mr. Zama, a member
of a Muslim organization called Deendar Anjuman, admitted passing information
about the location of railway bridges and defense posts to Pakistan. Most
attacks on Christians have been blamed on Hindu groups.  Celia Dugger (NYT)

HONG KONG: HAVEN FOR ACTIVIST -- Hong Kong granted the right of permanent
residence to one of Beijing's most vocal critics, Frank Lu Siqing, who runs the
Information Center for Human Rights and Democracy. Mr. Lu entered Hong Kong
illegally in 1993 and started the center, which disseminates news about Chinese
dissidents, in 1996. Hong Kong residents normally can receive permanent "right
of abode" after seven years, but his illegal entry and the hostility of China,
which regained control over Hong Kong in 1997, had raised doubts about his
chances.  (AP)

AFRICA

IVORY COAST: ANTI-JUNTA PROTESTS -- Thousands of youths chanting anti-government
slogans marched through Abidjan, the commercial capital, in the first major
public protest since the military coup in December. They demanded that the junta
leader, Gen. Robert Guei, step down rather than run for president in Sept. 17
elections to restore civilian rule.

(Agence France-Presse)


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: ALMUDON (KUW) (57%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS531110 LESSORS OF RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS & DWELLINGS (57%);
SIC6513 OPERATORS OF APARTMENT BUILDINGS (57%); SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
SERVICES (56%);

COUNTRY: AFGHANISTAN (95%); CANADA (92%); COLOMBIA (92%); MEXICO (92%); IRAQ
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (91%); LATVIA (91%); SCOTLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); ASIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); KUWAIT (79%); BELIZE (79%);

STATE: MANITOBA, CANADA (90%);

CITY: KABUL, AFGHANISTAN (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%);   RIGA, LATVIA (91%);

COMPANY: AL MUDON INTERNATIONAL REAL ESTATE CO KSCC (57%); AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE
(56%);   CONSERVATIVE PARTY (65%);

ORGANIZATION: CONSERVATIVE PARTY (65%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN (95%); CANADA (92%); COLOMBIA (92%); MEXICO (92%); IRAQ
(92%); MIDDLE EAST (91%); LATVIA (91%); SCOTLAND (79%); EUROPE (79%); UNITED
STATES (79%); NORTH AMERICA (79%); ASIA (79%); JAPAN (79%); UNITED KINGDOM
(79%); KUWAIT (79%); BELIZE (79%);   MANITOBA, CANADA (90%);   KABUL,
AFGHANISTAN (92%); BAGHDAD, IRAQ (79%);   RIGA, LATVIA (91%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TALIBAN (92%); BOMBINGS (90%); BRITISH
ROYALTY (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS
(89%); POLITICAL PARTIES (85%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (78%);
AIRPORTS (75%); EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (75%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (74%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (73%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (73%); BRITISH MONARCHS (71%);
APPOINTMENTS (69%); ELECTIONS (66%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (66%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (66%); RELIGION (56%); GANGS (52%); HISTORY (50%);

PERSON: PRINCE CHARLES (50%); PRINCE WILLIAM (50%); VICENTE FOX QUESADA (50%);

LOAD-DATE: August 18, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1896 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Jeanne Moore

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 965 words



ASIA

INDONESIA: BOOST FOR MILITARY
The country's top legislative body passed a decree allowing the military to keep
its seats in the legislature until 2009, and banned retroactive prosecution of
rights cases. The new laws contradict President Abdurrahman Wahid's campaign to
remove the once-all-powerful military from politics and bring to justice members
of the security forces accused of committing abuses in strife-torn regions like
Aceh and East Timor.  (AP)


SRI LANKA: ELECTION CALLED
President Chandrika Kumaratunga dissolved Parliament six days before the end of
its six-year term and called national elections for Oct. 10. Her constitutional
plan for a quasi-federal system that would give greater autonomy to minority
Tamils is dead for now, but she has said she will revive the proposal -- an
effort to bring peace to a nation embroiled in a civil war with separatist Tamil
militants -- after the elections.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

PHILIPPINES: HOSTAGE RELEASE EXPECTED
Muslim separatist rebels were expected to free the rest of their hostages today
after releasing three Malaysians yesterday, said the chief government
negotiator, Roberto Aventajado. The 25 remaining captives include nine
Westerners abducted at a diving resort in Malaysia in April.  (AP)

PHILIPPINES: ENVIRONMENTAL SUIT
More than 100 people filed suit against the United States and the Philippines,
seeking $103 billion for deaths and illnesses they say were caused by hazardous
waste at former American military bases. American officials have offered to help
solve the Philippines' environmental problems, but insisted Washington has no
legal obligation to clean up toxic wastes at the former bases.  (AP)

INDIA: BARGAINING OVER ACTOR
Veerappan, the South Indian outlaw who kidnapped a movie star, had demanded that
five Tamil militants be released from jail, and the state of Tamil Nadu had
agreed. But four of the militants refused to be released on bail, insisting that
all charges against them be dropped before they are freed. Their refusal may
further delay the release of the actor, Rajkumar.  Celia W. Dugger (NYT)

AFGHANISTAN: CALL FOR RECOGNITION
The Taliban government called for international recognition as it celebrated the
country's 81st independence anniversary with a military parade featuring
thousands of soldiers. Now, only Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab
Emirates have diplomatic ties with the Islamic militia that has controlled most
of the country since 1996.  (Agence France-Presse)

EUROPE

KOSOVO: TWO EXPLOSIONS
A grenade attack slightly wounded nine Serbian children in a Kosovo village,
hours after an explosion in the province's capital, Pristina, wounded one woman
and damaged several political offices, NATO said. The children were wounded when
unidentified assailants threw two hand grenades onto a basketball court in
Crkven Vodica. The explosion in Pristina was apparently caused by a bomb.  (AP)

SWITZERLAND: VOTE ON FOREIGNERS CRITICIZED
The Swiss government spoke out against a proposal to limit the country's foreign
population, saying such a measure would damage Switzerland's economy and
credibility. Swiss citizens will vote on Sept. 24 on the proposal to cap the
proportion of foreigners at 18 percent of the population. As of last year,
foreigners made up 19.2 percent of the country's residents.  (AP)

THE AMERICAS

NICARAGUA: TAIWAN LEADER CULTIVATES TIES
The new president of Taiwan, Chen Shui-bian, concluded a visit to Nicaragua, one
of the Latin American nations that has diplomatic relations with Taiwan, with a
promise to promote investment in the Central American nation. He then flew to
Costa Rica.  (Agence France-Presse)

COLOMBIA: DRUG SUSPECT EXTRADITED
Alberto Orlandez Gamboa, accused of leading one of Colombia's most powerful drug
cartels, was sent to the United States to stand trial, days after drug dealers
threatened violence if authorities carried out the extradition. He will face
charges in United States District Court in Manhattan that he conspired to import
and distribute thousands of pounds of cocaine from Colombia to New York and
other American destinations. After a 10-year moratorium on extraditions, Mr.
Gamboa is the third Colombian sent to the United States to face drug charges in
the past nine months.  (AP)

AFRICA

ZIMBABWE: MORE FARM TAKEOVERS
The government said it would seize 229 more farms to resettle blacks, bringing
to 3,270 the number of white-owned farms involved in its controversial land
reform program. Last week the government began settling black families on 200
farms. The government plans to relocate peasants on about 100 farms in each of
Zimbabwe's eight provinces before the onset of the rainy season in about two
months' time.  (Reuters)

IVORY COAST: JUNTA LEADER TO RUN
The country's military ruler, Gen. Robert Guei, formally registered to contest a
Sept. 17 presidential election he called to return Ivory Coast to civilian rule.
General Guei came to power last December in Ivory Coast's first military coup,
and expectations of a Guei candidacy have already prompted street protests.
(Reuters)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: U.N. BODY URGES END TO SANCTIONS
The United Nations Subcommission on the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights
called for the lifting of 10-year-old sanctions on Iraq, saying they had
"condemned an innocent people to hunger, disease, ignorance and even death." It
said the United Nations' oil-for-food program, which since 1996 has allowed Iraq
to sell oil to buy food and other essentials, was not meeting people's needs.
Washington opposes easing sanctions, insisting that President Saddam Hussein is
responsible for his people's suffering.  (Reuters)


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: SIC7375 INFORMATION RETRIEVAL SERVICES (51%);

COUNTRY: KOSOVO (94%); INDIA (94%); PHILIPPINES (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);
SERBIA (93%); ASIA (92%); MALAYSIA (92%); INDONESIA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SRI LANKA
(79%);

STATE: TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%); SOUTH INDIA (79%);

CITY: PRISTINA, KOSOVO (92%);

COMPANY: AGENCE FRANCE-PRESSE (51%);

GEOGRAPHIC: KOSOVO (94%); INDIA (94%); PHILIPPINES (94%); UNITED STATES (94%);
SERBIA (93%); ASIA (92%); MALAYSIA (92%); INDONESIA (92%); SWITZERLAND (92%);
SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); AFGHANISTAN (79%); TIMOR-LESTE (79%); UNITED ARAB
EMIRATES (79%); EUROPE (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SRI LANKA
(79%);   TAMIL NADU, INDIA (94%); SOUTH INDIA (79%);   PRISTINA, KOSOVO (92%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  LEGISLATIVE BODIES (91%); ELECTIONS (90%);

 HOSTAGE TAKING (90%); SEPARATISM & SECESSION (90%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES
(89%); MILITARY WEAPONS (89%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (89%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION
(87%); ARMED FORCES (78%); TALIBAN (78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); DELAYS &
POSTPONEMENTS (78%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (78%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(78%); POLITICS (78%); MILITARY BASES (78%); CELEBRITIES (77%); LITIGATION
(77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT

 (76%); LEGISLATION (73%); ANNIVERSARIES (73%); BAIL (72%); SUITS & CLAIMS
(71%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (71%); ENVIRONMENT & NATURAL RESOURCES (70%); WOUNDS
& INJURIES (69%); ACTORS & ACTRESSES (68%); TOXIC & HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES (67%);
RELIGION (67%); ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP (65%); PARADES & MARCHES (60%); BASKETBALL

 (60%);

PERSON: ALBERTO ORLANDEZ GAMBOA (55%); CELIA W DUGGER (55%);

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

Map of Ivory Coast.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1905 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 23, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Effort to Recruit Minorities Falls Short in Trooper Class

BYLINE: By DAVID KOCIENIEWSKI

SECTION: Section B; Page 5; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 689 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Aug. 22


Despite a well-advertised effort to bring more blacks, women and Latinos into
the New Jersey State Police, only 15 of the 105 cadets scheduled to enter the
academy next month are black or Latino, and just one is a woman, according to
statistics released by the agency today.

Early this year, the agency settled a discrimination suit filed by the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People by agreeing to scrap several
requirements that many black applicants considered discriminatory. The state
also pledged to make aggressive attempts to advertise and recruit in black and
Latino neighborhoods.

But in releasing the recruitment numbers today, the state police superintendent,
Carson J. Dunbar Jr., said he was disappointed that the agency's attempt to
diversify its ranks would leave the percentage of minority troopers virtually
unchanged, at 14 percent. About 3 percent of the 2,800 current troopers are
women, Mr. Dunbar said, so the new class actually represents a decrease in the
percentage of women.

Mr. Dunbar said the strong economy was partly to blame for the lackluster
results, because many female and minority applicants had found better-paying
jobs and decided not to finish the screening process.

He also acknowledged that the agency's reputation remained tarnished in many
black and Latino neighborhoods because of the Justice Department's highly
publicized investigation into discrimination by troopers and the state's
admission that some officers had engaged in racial profiling for years --
problems that preceded his appointment last year.

"I wish I could tell you there's a quick fix for this problem," said Mr. Dunbar,
who became a New Jersey trooper himself in 1973 and was the only minority
officer in his class. "The real answer is, it's going to be a long process."

He refused to specify what racial breakdown the force ultimately hopes to reach,
saying that he did not want to give the mistaken impression that the state
police were adopting a quota system. New Jersey's population is about one-third
minority, however, and in the settlement with the N.A.A.C.P. the state agreed to
try to broaden the demographics of the force.

Some elected officials said they were dismayed that the state had failed to
deliver on its promise to increase minority representation on the force.

"The state police have missed a golden opportunity to change its institutional
image," said Leroy J. Jones Jr., a Democratic assemblyman from Essex County.
"Clearly, they need to reassess their approach and re-examine who they are using
as consultants in recruiting more minorities into the ranks."

Some current troopers have also complained that the state lowered its physical
fitness requirements for new recruits, in an attempt to help female applicants.
During the last two years, the state eliminated its pull-up, broad jump and
vertical jump requirements, and applicants who fail the physical test may now
take it repeatedly until they pass.

Mr. Dunbar defended the less stringent requirements, saying they still allow the
state police to winnow out those applicants who are physically unsuited to
perform the job. The state police also worked with several consulting firms to
revise the application process and add screening that tests candidates'
temperament and decision-making abilities.

"It's not just about strength, it's about what kind of person you are," Mr.
Dunbar said.

The state police are scheduled to begin a new recruiting drive next year and
will work with the National Organization of Black Law Enforcement Executives and
the National Association of Women in Policing to try and expand the pool of
female and minority candidates. The state police may place more emphasis on
reaching out to women's sports teams, Mr. Dunbar said, and will continue to
recruit at schools and community events in minority neighborhoods.

But he said that his own experience in law enforcement recruiting, for both the
State Police and the F.B.I., had taught him not to expect quick results.

"It doesn't happen that rapidly," he said. "What I would like to see is steady
increases."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TRENTON, NJ, USA (73%);

COMPANY: JUSTICE DEPARTMENT  ACP (BELGIUM) (52%);

ORGANIZATION: JUSTICE DEPARTMENT

GEOGRAPHIC: NEW YORK CITY;   UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (94%); NEW
YORK, USA (79%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (79%); TRENTON, NJ, USA (73%);

SUBJECT: POLICE; HIRING AND PROMOTION; POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT;
HISPANIC-AMERICANS; BLACKS; WOMEN; AFFIRMATIVE ACTION; ECONOMIC CONDITIONS AND
TRENDS; DISCRIMINATION  POLICE FORCES (91%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (90%); POLICE
MISCONDUCT (90%); HISPANIC AMERICANS (90%); RACE & RACISM (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT

 (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (90%); AFFIRMATIVE ACTION (89%);

 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN EDUCATION (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); RACIAL
PROFILING (78%); DEMOGRAPHIC GROUPS (78%); WOMEN (78%); TRENDS (77%); POPULATION
& DEMOGRAPHICS (77%); POPULATION SIZE (77%); LITIGATION (76%); CIVIL RIGHTS
(76%); MISCONDUCT (72%); STATISTICS (72%); INVESTIGATIONS (72%); ECONOMIC NEWS
(67%);   PHYSICAL FITNESS (50%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (56%);

PERSON: KOCIENIEWSKI, DAVID; DUNBAR, CARSON J JR (SUPT)  CARSON J DUNBAR JR
(94%);

LOAD-DATE: August 23, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1908 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 24, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 10; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1124 words



MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: SHAS CHIEF'S SENTENCE UPHELD -- The Supreme Court denied a request for a
new hearing on a three-year jail term for fraud, bribery and breach of trust
imposed on Aryeh Deri, former leader of the ultra-Orthodox Shas Party. It
ordered Mr. Deri to begin his sentence on Sept. 3. Mr. Deri, a charismatic
former interior minister of Moroccan descent who built Shas into a powerful
legislative bloc, was convicted of taking bribes at the Interior Ministry.
John F. Burns (NYT)


WEST BANK: BIN LADEN LINK DENIED -- The leader of the militant Islamic group
Hamas denied an assertion by Israel that a Hamas member who was among 23 Arabs
arrested on terrorism charges had been sent to Pakistan for terrorist training
with the group headed by Osama bin Laden, the Saudi-born Islamic militant.
"Hamas and I have no connection with bin Laden," Sheik Ahmed Yassin told The
Associated Press.   John F. Burns (NYT)

IRAN: DISSIDENT FREED -- A leading Iranian dissident jailed in June by the
hard-line judiciary for attending a conference in Germany about Iran has been
freed, a close associate said. Ezatollah Sahabi, a member of the Freedom
Movement, which opposes clerical rule, was released after paying $62,500 bail,
said Reza Alijani, an editor of the banned Iran-e-Farda magazine. Mr. Sahabi was
director of the magazine, one of 25 publications banned since April.   (AP)

EUROPE

GERMANY: 3 DENY INTENT TO KILL -- Three rightist youths said they did not intend
to kill Alberto Adriano, an African, when they assaulted him in June. Speaking
in court, where they have been charged with murder, they admitted attacking Mr.
Adriano and said they were drunk at the time. A murder conviction requires proof
of an intention to kill. The case has become the focus of intense interest as
Germany combats a wave of anti-immigrant violence.   Roger Cohen (NYT)

AUSTRIA: HAIDER HITS OUT -- Jorg Haider, the driving force behind Austria's
extreme right Freedom Party, said the Czech Republic and Slovenia should not be
allowed to join the European Union until they disavow decrees that led to the
expulsion of ethnic Germans after World War II. Mr. Haider, whose father was a
committed Nazi, has often said that German suffering in the war must also be
recognized.   Roger Cohen (NYT)

NORTHERN IRELAND: PROTESTANT FEUD CONTINUES -- A Protestant man was shot to
death at his home in north Belfast in what appeared to be another strike in a
feud between loyalist paramilitary groups. No group claimed immediate
responsibility. The shooting happened near where two Protestant militants were
shot dead on Monday.   (AP)

NETHERLANDS: LOCKERBIE CASE DELAYED -- The testimony of a key witness in the
Lockerbie bombing trial was delayed until Monday so the defense can ask the
Central Intelligence Agency for unedited versions of interviews with him. The
man, identified as a former Libyan spy named Abdul Majid Giaka who lives in the
United States under the witness protection program, is said to be the only
witness who can say that one of two defendants checked a bomb-laden suitcase
onto a plane in Malta in 1998.   Donald G. McNeil Jr. (NYT)

LATVIA: LANGUAGE LAW EASED -- Bowing to critics, Latvia issued slightly more
flexible rules for a law requiring use of the Latvian language in most
activities. The new rules no longer require lawyers and doctors to speak fluent
Latvian, and allow other languages to be spoken at international events.
Russian-speaking Latvians, more than a quarter of the population, largely oppose
the rules; some Europeans say the law does not meet anti-discrimination
standards for joining the European Union.   Michael Wines (NYT)

SLOVAKIA: GYPSY MOTHER SLAIN -- Just three weeks after a United Nations report
highlighted racism against Gypsies in Central and Eastern Europe, a Gypsy mother
of eight was bludgeoned to death by three men in the town of Zilina. Four
daughters of the woman, Anastazia Balazova, 49, were injured. Racial hatred and
extreme-right groups have been growing in Slovakia, and a similar situation
exists in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Romania and the Balkans.   Ladka Bauerova
(NYT)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: CHURCH CHECKUP -- The United Church of Canada, which is being sued by
hundreds of former students of its Indian boarding schools, has decided to
submit all its ministers to mandatory police and sexual abuse registry checks
every three years. An attempt to lower the church's liability insurance rates,
the policy was adopted after lawsuits charged that sexual and physical abuse
took place at the church's schools in the 1950's and 60's.   James Brooke (NYT)

ARGENTINA: I.B.M. WARRANTS WITHDRAWN -- A judge has annulled international
arrest warrants issued in 1998 for two American executives with I.B.M. wanted
for questioning in a 1994 corruption case, court officials said. The officials
said the decision was intended to make it easier to interrogate the two, Steve
Lew and Peter Rowley, and to gather evidence for an investigation in which
investigators say some $30 million in bribes were paid in connection with a
government contract.   (Agence France-Presse)

AFRICA

CONGO: PEACE PACT SUSPENDED -- The government said it was suspending the
carrying out of a 1999 accord aimed at ending the conflict in Congo. Human
Rights Minister Leonard She Okitundu cited a substantial change in circumstances
since the signing of the pact by warring parties in 1999 in Zambia. He said
Congo wanted to hold direct talks with Rwanda, Uganda and Burundi, which all
back rebel groups that took up arms against President Laurent Kabila in August
1998.   (Reuters)

BURUNDI: BLAST KILLS 8 -- A grenade exploded in a market in central Bujumbura,
the capital, killing at least 4 people and injuring 50 others as tensions rose
ahead of a deadline for an accord to end a civil war between Hutu and minority
Tutsi that began in 1993. Tutsi militiamen are suspected of making the attack.
Neither side says it is ready to sign a pact mediated by Nelson Mandela, and
President Pierre Buyoya has asked him to postpone an Aug. 28 signing ceremony.
   (AP)

ASIA

INDIA: GANDHI TO SKIP NEW YORK -- The Congress Party president, Sonia Gandhi,
leader of the opposition in Parliament, has decided not to attend a meeting of
legislators in New York this month. Party officials say she has pressing party
business and also wants to be home when her daughter, Priyanka Vadra, gives
birth. Mrs. Vadra, who dazzled audiences when she campaigned for her mother last
year, is carrying a child that family loyalists hope will one day inherit the
Nehru-Gandhi dynasty.   Celia W. Dugger (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); ISRAEL (93%); GERMANY (93%); SCOTLAND
(92%); EUROPE (92%); MIDDLE EAST (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (79%);
NETHERLANDS (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); BURUNDI (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);
CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SLOVENIA (79%); AUSTRIA (72%); CENTRAL
EUROPE (55%);

CITY: BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);

COMPANY: ASSOCIATED PRESS (64%);   HAMAS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: HAMAS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (93%); ISRAEL (93%); GERMANY (93%);
SCOTLAND (92%); EUROPE (92%); MIDDLE EAST (90%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES
(79%); NETHERLANDS (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); BURUNDI (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND
(79%); CZECH REPUBLIC (79%); PAKISTAN (79%); SLOVENIA (79%); AUSTRIA (72%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (55%);   BELFAST, NORTHERN IRELAND (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  SENTENCING (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%);
TERRORISM (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); FRAUD & FINANCIAL CRIME (90%);
HAMAS (90%); PROTESTANTS & PROTESTANTISM (89%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%);
CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (89%); SHOOTINGS (86%); WAR & CONFLICT (85%); SUPREME
COURTS (78%); WITNESSES (78%); ASSAULT & BATTERY (78%); TESTIMONY (78%); BRIBERY

 (77%); EUROPEAN UNION (76%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (75%); AL-QAEDA (75%);
ARRESTS (74%); RELIGION (74%); BAIL (73%); BOMBINGS (70%); WORLD WAR II (64%);
MURDER (58%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (86%);

LOAD-DATE: August 24, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo

Map of Africa shows the location of Bujumbura.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1914 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 26, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 951 words



EUROPE

RUSSIA: TRANQUILIZER REPORTS DENIED
The mother of a sailor who died on the submarine Kursk angrily denied that
officials had tranquilized her to halt her denunciation of a Kremlin official at
a stormy meeting on the disaster. Videotape showed that Nadya Tylik collapsed in
mid-tirade after being injected during a confrontation with Deputy Prime
Minister Ilya Klebanov. But Ms. Tylik said her husband had asked a doctor for
the injection because he feared the confrontation would worsen a heart ailment.
Contrary suggestions in the Western press, she said, were "lots of lies."
Michael Wines (NYT)


TURKEY: 7 ACCUSED IN BOMBING PLAN
Seven people suspected of belonging to a guerrilla group were arrested and
accused of planning a bomb attack on the Incirlik air base in Turkey, from which
American and British planes carry out patrols over the no-flight zones in Iraq.
No details of the plot or the arrests were announced. The police also said a
member of the group, the Revolutionary Peoples' Liberation Army-Front, was
arrested in Istanbul in possession of explosives, hand grenades and a gun.
Douglas Frantz (NYT)

BRITAIN: JOINING INTERNATIONAL COURT
The government said it would publish legislation enabling Britain to join an
international criminal court that would try suspects on charges of war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity. So far 15 countries have passed such laws;
60 must do so before the court can come into existence. The United States
opposes the court, saying it would make American soldiers vulnerable to
politically motivated prosecutions abroad.  Sarah Lyall (NYT)

YUGOSLAVIA: MILOSEVIC WIFE IS CANDIDATE
Mirjana Markovic, the influential wife of President Slobodan Milosevic, will run
for election in the Sept. 24 voting for the federal Parliament. Ms. Markovic,
leader of the neo-Communist Yugoslav Left Party, heads a list of candidates from
Pozarevac, the couple's hometown in central Serbia. The English-language
newsletter VIP said it was the first time Ms. Markovic had run for Parliament
since her husband rose to power in the late 1980's.(Reuters)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: PREMIER DERIDES POLLS
Prime Minister Jean Chretien, in power since 1993, has dismissed polling trends
that show his Liberal Party slumping and the opposition Canadian Alliance
rising. "We will win the next election because we have a huge majority over
everybody else," he said. Mr. Chretien, who has vowed to seek a third term in
elections that are to be held by next June, told reporters he was not bothered
by an Angus Reid poll that showed Liberal support falling to 43 percent of
respondents and Alliance support rising to 25 percent.  James Brooke (NYT)

PERU, JORDAN: ARMS RUNNING DENIED
Jordan angrily denied accusations by President Alberto K. Fujimori of Peru that
top Jordanian commanders were involved in the trafficking of thousands of
Russian assault rifles through Peru to Colombian guerrillas. Foreign Minister
Abdelelah al-Jatib said Jordan and Peru were involved in legal arms sales, and
that corrupt Peruvian officials "are not capable of controlling the activities
of traffickers in their own country." Clifford Krauss (NYT)

ASIA

PAKISTAN: DEMOCRACY PLEA
Commonwealth Secretary General Don McKinnon arrived in Islamabad to urge the
military rulers to make an "early return" to democracy. "This is the beginning
of a series of high-level discussions which hopefully will result in democratic
elections as soon as possible," he said. The Supreme Court validated last year's
military takeover and gave Gen. Pervez Musharraf until Oct. 12, 2002, to hold a
general election.

(Agence France-Presse)

MIDDLE EAST

IRAQ: REPORT OF MISSILE FACTORY
Germany's intelligence agency says it has detected a factory 25 miles southwest
of Baghdad where Iraq is making missiles able to carry conventional, chemical or
biological weapons. "There is a real danger that sooner or later Germany will be
within the range of these weapons," the agency was quoted as saying in the daily
Bild.  Victor Homola (NYT)

AFRICA

LIBERIA: TV CREW FREED
Under growing international pressure, the Liberian government dropped all
charges against a detained British television crew accused of spying. Justice
Minister Eddington Varmah said the government had agreed to release the two
Britons, a South African and a Sierra Leonean in exchange for an apology.  (AP)

SOMALIA: PRESIDENT CHOSEN
The fledgling Parliament, meeting in Arta, Djibouti, elected Abdiqassim Salad
Hassan as president, Somalia's first since it collapsed into anarchy nine years
ago. Mr. Abdiqassim Salad, 58, was deputy prime minister in the government of
Muhammad Siad Barre, who was ousted in 1991. He will pick a cabinet and return
to Somalia, where warlords have warned they will not allow the government.
(Reuters)

UNITED NATIONS

LETTER TO QADDAFI RELEASED
Secretary General Kofi Annan, intending to squash reports that there had been a
secret deal with Libya to limit the scope of the trial of two Libyans accused in
the Lockerbie airliner bombing, released a letter he wrote to Muammar el-Qaddafi
of Libya last year. The letter and an annex assured Colonel Qaddafi that the
trial would not be used to undermine his regime, but made clear that normal
prosecutorial procedures would be followed.

Barbara Crossette (NYT)

FINN RULES HIMSELF OUT
Finland's ex-president, Maarti Ahtisaari, said he was definitely ruling himself
out as a candidate for United Nations high commissioner for refugees. A
successor to Sadako Ogata of Japan is expected to be named by early October.

Barbara Crossette (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); TURKEY (92%); EUROPE
(92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%); IRAQ (79%); NORTH & SOUTH
AMERICAS (50%);

CITY: ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (55%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(55%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (55%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); UNITED STATES (93%); TURKEY (92%); EUROPE
(92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%); SERBIA (79%); IRAQ (79%); NORTH & SOUTH
AMERICAS (50%);   ISTANBUL, TURKEY (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); ARRESTS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY &
VETERANS LAW (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (89%);
HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%); PRIME MINISTERS
(89%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (87%); POLLS & SURVEYS (77%); ELECTIONS (76%);
DISEASES & DISORDERS (76%); POLITICS (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (74%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); ARMED
FORCES (72%); LEGISLATION (71%); LIBERALISM (71%); POLITICAL PARTIES (71%); WAR
CRIMES (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (70%); VOTERS & VOTING (68%); FIREARMS
(66%); GENOCIDE (66%); TRENDS (65%);

PERSON: JEAN CHRETIEN (56%);

LOAD-DATE: August 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1929 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 3, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Discrimination by the Scouts

SECTION: Section 4; Page 10; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 405 words


The Boy Scouts of America turned to the United States Supreme Court earlier this
year to protect its constitutional right, under the freedom of association, to
exclude gays from its membership. The Boy Scouts asserted that barring gays was
fundamental to its mission. But now, as local governments, corporations and
individuals across the country withdraw their support from the Boy Scouts in
response to this exclusionary policy, it is obviously time for the organization
to reconsider its stance.  The Girl Scouts of the U.S.A., it is worth noting,
does not discriminate against gays.

The swift reaction of public authorities to the Scouts' defense of its right to
discriminate has been heartening. Prodded by local anti-discrimination laws,
Chicago, San Francisco and many smaller communities have revoked the Boy Scouts'
access to public facilities such as schools and campgrounds. This is especially
appropriate where such access was granted on preferential terms. In San Diego,
for instance, the American Civil Liberties Union is right to challenge the city
for leasing 18 acres of parkland to the Scouts for one dollar a year.  Despite
the Boy Scouts' laudable role in the lives of millions of boys for almost a
century, taxpayers cannot be in a position of bankrolling its activities so long
as gays are excluded.

The negative responses to the Boy Scouts' position are not yet a widespread,
grass-roots movement, as evidenced by the Scouts' growing membership. But the
organization is losing some significant and high-profile financial backing.
Donors as varied as Chase Manhattan Bank and some United Way chapters have
exercised their own freedom of association by ceasing to support the Scouts.

Withholding support cannot be an easy decision. But the organization needs to
realize that a growing number of donors will question its claim to belong on the
center stage of American life if it continues asserting a discriminatory
philosophy. In today's world, children cannot learn about honor from an
organization that views homosexuality as a moral defect.

In some areas, parents and local council leaders are mobilizing to change the
national leadership's policy banning homosexuals. There is much to be admired
about the Boy Scouts tradition and much that is worth preserving. But the
extended Boy Scout family needs to save the organization from its present
self-destructive and discriminatory course.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (58%); SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (58%); NEW YORK, NY, USA
(50%);

COMPANY: GIRL SCOUTS OF THE USA (71%);   BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA  (95%); SCOUT
ASSOCIATION  (95%); BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA (95%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION (94%);
SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES  (84%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
(84%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  (56%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION
(56%);

ORGANIZATION: BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA  (95%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION  (95%); BOY SCOUTS
OF AMERICA (95%); SCOUT ASSOCIATION (94%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES
(84%); SUPREME COURT OF THE UNITED STATES (84%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION

 (56%); AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   CALIFORNIA, USA (79%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA,
USA (58%); SAN DIEGO, CA, USA (58%); NEW YORK, NY, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   GAYS & LESBIANS (91%); YOUTH CLUBS
& ACTIVITIES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); SUPREME
COURTS (89%); FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY & ASSOCIATION (89%); CONSTITUTIONAL LAW (78%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (78%); CHILDREN (78%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS
(78%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (73%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (91%);

LOAD-DATE: September 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1936 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 6, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

Guerrilla Attacks Raise Worries in Central Asia

BYLINE: By DOUGLAS FRANTZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1021 words

DATELINE: ALMATY, Kazakhstan, Sept. 2


Deadly clashes between guerrillas and the armies of two former Soviet republics
in Central Asia last month are deepening concerns that an effort is under way to
destabilize the region.

Guerrillas operating from bases in Tajikistan staged several incursions into a
remote mountainous region bordering Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. Unconfirmed
government reports said dozens of rebels and at least 30 soldiers from the two
countries had been killed in the battles.

The Uzbek government says the attacks are organized by the Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan, which it says infiltrated the Fergana Valley from Tajikistan and
Afghanistan.

The death toll remains low, and fighting has been sporadic. But the attacks have
been more frequent than in the past, and government officials and Western
diplomats said the rebels were better trained and equipped, with antiaircraft
weapons, night-vision equipment and sniper rifles.

The presidents of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Uzbekistan met on Aug.
20 and issued a statement vowing that "terrorist actions will be crushed using
the most decisive measures." President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev of Kazakhstan has
asked for broad new powers to curb religious extremists.

The Uzbek government said that the guerrillas included fighters from other
countries in addition to Tajikistan and Afghanistan and that they had modern
arms and communication equipment as well as good financing.

The evidence is strong that the insurgents are Islamic militants trained and
armed in Afghanistan, say Kazakh officials and Western diplomats. Some officials
said the rebels wanted to create havoc to keep borders open for the heroin flow,
which the authorities said was increasing sharply. Other officials speculated
that the intent was to spread Islamic fundamentalism.

Whatever the goals, the violence has clearly reached a new stage. Fighting this
summer rose significantly beyond the bombings in the Uzbek capital, Tashkent, in
February 1999 and the single incident last summer in which Islamic rebels held
several hostages in Kyrgyzstan.

Military officials in Kyrgyzstan said on Sept. 5 that the armed forces had
bombed suspected rebel hideouts after hundreds of insurgents had crossed into
that country from Tajikistan, according to news agencies. Officials said more
than 7,000 government troops had been mobilized to counter a force of about 700
rebels in the mountainous region.

Jerzy Wieclaw, head of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe's
office in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan, said rebels had used antiaircraft guns and
possibly helicopters. He also said they were demonstrating new strength to an
impoverished population potentially ripe for change.

"These countries can cope with the threat now, but it seems to be a long-term
strategy to find military and political weak points," Mr. Wieclaw said.

Uncertainties remain about whether the fighting last month was the extent of the
rebels' abilities or a precursor to attacks intended to plunge the region into
greater instability.

"The question is whether this is what everybody has been fearing," Martha Brill
Olcott, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in
Washington, said in a telephone interview.

For years the leaders of many of the former Soviet republics have justified
harsh steps against political opponents by arguing that they are necessary to
keep terrorism at bay. The presidents are certain to emphasize the security
threat during previously scheduled meetings at the United Nations during the
gathering of worlld leaders there.

The first substantial battle was reported in early August. Government officials
in Uzbekistan said guerrillas from Tajikistan had clashed with troops, leaving
20 rebels and 12 soldiers dead. On Aug. 11 officials in Kyrgyzstan said 100
militants had entered the country and engaged in a pitched battle with
government troops. Unconfirmed reports said 20 soldiers and 50 rebels had been
killed.

Since then there have been sporadic clashes, including intelligence reports that
rebel snipers have used advanced rifles and night-vision equipment for attacks.

Kazakhstan joined its neighbors in sending military reinforcements to the
borders in the region, and Uzbekistan threatened to chase the rebels wherever
they went, an action that could create a new set of tensions if Uzbek troops
cross into Tajikistan.

Some diplomats worry that the threat will be used by the governments as a cover
for getting tougher on internal dissent in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and
Uzbekistan, where human rights groups already complain that political freedom is
suppressed.

Benita Ferrero-Waldner, chairwoman of the European security organization,
praised the cooperation among the Central Asian nations against terrorism but
cautioned them to avoid civilian casualties and repression. Democratic and
economic reforms, she said in a statement issued in Vienna, are the best means
of ensuring that terrorists do not find the support needed to expand the
fighting.

Even before the latest attacks, the presidents of all three countries
centralized authority and limited political expression in the name of fighting
terrorism and drug trafficking, though the degrees vary from country to country.

The attacks have caused geopolitical complications outside the region. The head
of Russia's security council attended the meeting of the region's presidents in
August and offered Russian troops, who are already battling rebels in Chechnya,
as reinforcements. The Chinese, concerned about separatists in Muslim-inhabited
areas of western China, have also pledged cooperation.

But the Central Asian leaders, struggling to establish independent identities
after decades of Soviet domination, seemed in no hurry to duck under a Russian
military umbrella or embrace Chinese security assistance.

In the long run, Mr. Wieclaw and other diplomats predicted, the outcome of the
war may be decided not by military power, but by how much backing the insurgents
find in the countryside, where unemployment and disenchantment with government
are running high.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UZBEKISTAN (94%); KYRGYZSTAN (94%); TAJIKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN
(94%); CENTRAL ASIA (94%); ASIA (94%); KAZAKHSTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION
(79%); EUROPE (79%);

CITY: TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (58%);   BISHKEK, KYRGYZSTAN (79%);

COMPANY: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  (83%);
ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (83%);

ORGANIZATION: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN
(83%); ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UZBEKISTAN; AFGHANISTAN; KAZAKHSTAN; RUSSIA; TAJIKISTAN;
UZBEKISTAN (94%); KYRGYZSTAN (94%); TAJIKISTAN (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CENTRAL
ASIA (94%); ASIA (94%); KAZAKHSTAN (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (79%); EUROPE
(79%);   TASHKENT, UZBEKISTAN (58%);   BISHKEK, KYRGYZSTAN (79%);

SUBJECT: ISLAM; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE
RELIGION (93%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (91%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (90%); ARMIES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); ARMED FORCES
(89%); SHOOTINGS (79%); CIVIL WAR (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%);
TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); MOUNTAINS (77%); TERRORISM (76%); BOMBINGS

 (76%); FUNDAMENTALISM (75%); ANTIAIRCRAFT WEAPONS (74%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES
(74%); HOSTAGE TAKING (73%); POLITICS (72%); NIGHT VISION DEVICES (68%);
HELICOPTERS (50%); POOR POPULATION (50%); HEROIN (50%);

PERSON: FRANTZ, DOUGLAS

LOAD-DATE: September 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Asia highlighting Kazakhstan: In Almaty, the Kazakh president
has asked for broad new powers.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1945 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 9, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Modern-Day Slavery

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 607 words


By a conservative estimate, there are 27 million people working under various
forms of slavery in the world today, and the number is growing. In contrast to
the slavery America knew, today's slaveholders mainly exploit people of their
own race. But as in the American past, they use violence and threats to force
people to labor for no pay. Slavery is illegal everywhere, but it thrives
because of the corruption of police and government authorities. Many people are
unaware that modern slavery exists.

People held in some form of bondage pick sugar cane in the Dominican Republic,
make the charcoal used in Brazil's steel industry and work as prostitutes in
Thailand. In Mauritania and Sudan blacks are forced into domestic and
agricultural slavery in Muslim households. Similar forms of oppression are not
unknown in developed nations. The Central Intelligence Agency estimates that
45,000 women and children are smuggled into the United States each year with
false promises of decent jobs. Instead, most find that their passports are
stolen and they are forced to work as prostitutes or maids, on farms or in
sweatshops.

But the majority of people who are treated like slaves, perhaps 20 million,
according to the United Nations, are South Asians in debt bondage. The system is
chillingly described in "Disposable People," a survey of contemporary forms of
slavery by Kevin Bales, who teaches at the University of Surrey in England.
Whole families, including children, are trapped into peonage to pay debts
incurred by medical expenses, a funeral or crop failure. Their debts are
inflated by outrageous prices for food and usurious interest rates. Families can
essentially be enslaved for generations.

Slavery and related kinds of servitude are a growing business because the number
of desperately poor people is increasing and globalization has disrupted rural
communities. In many nations, children, mainly girls, must drop out of school to
work. A girl in a northern Thai village can be sold into prostitution for $2,000
-- a huge sum there. A Thai survey found that many families knowingly sold
daughters into prostitution because they felt pressure to buy consumer goods
such as televisions. Girls stay until they contract AIDS, and are then sent back
to their villages to die in disgrace.

While slavery is illegal, it is hard to eradicate.  Even the United States lacks
adequate criminal penalties for those who traffic in human beings.  Moreover,
the victims -- the potential witnesses -- are usually deported. This may change,
however, as both houses of Congress recently passed a bill that would
criminalize trafficking, end the rapid deportation of victims and provide help
for them here and modest programs to prevent slavery abroad.

Slavery and forced labor are even more difficult to fight in nations where they
draw support from traditional structures of power and corruption, the
devaluation of women and, in India, the caste system. Educating the poor about
how to avoid falling victim helps, as do small loans and skill training. India
has an excellent program to pay off laborers' debts and give them training and
land.  But Dr. Bales argues that local officials and judges often sabotage it.

The first step in combating modern variations of slavery, however, is education.
The developed world needs to realize that slavery exists, and that its victims
may have helped produce the clothes, rugs and other goods we buy. It is
especially important for people in nations where it is widespread not to accept
it as a traditional practice but to see it as one of the most serious abuses of
human rights.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); ENGLAND (79%); SOUTHERN
ASIA (79%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%); THAILAND (79%); MAURITANIA (79%);

COMPANY: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (56%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY (56%);
UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY  (56%); CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY
(56%); UNITED NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (95%); INDIA (79%); BRAZIL (79%); ENGLAND (79%);
SOUTHERN ASIA (79%); DOMINICAN REPUBLIC (79%); THAILAND (79%); MAURITANIA (79%);



SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   SLAVERY (92%); EDITORIALS &
OPINIONS (90%); PROSTITUTION (89%); CHILDREN (88%); FAMILY (88%); SWEATSHOPS
(78%); HUMAN TRAFFICKING (78%); CORRUPTION (76%); SMUGGLING (76%); LABOR
TRAFFICKING (76%); GARMENT WORKERS (76%); WOMEN (76%); EMERGING MARKETS (75%);
FOOD PRICES (75%); RURAL COMMUNITIES (74%); ALIEN SMUGGLING (73%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (72%); WITNESSES (71%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (67%);
DEPORTATION (64%); GLOBALIZATION (63%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (53%); INTEREST
RATES (50%); ECONOMIC NEWS (50%); AIDS & HIV (50%);   FORCED LABOR (78%);

PERSON: KEVIN BALES (60%);

LOAD-DATE: September 9, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1953 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 10, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Judicial Caprice in China: 4 Families Share Stories

BYLINE: By ERIK ECKHOLM

SECTION: Section 1; Page 12; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1510 words

DATELINE: CHENGDE, China


Their voices cracking with outrage and disbelief, the parents gathered in a
village farmhouse, chronicling four years of fear and frustration as they battle
to keep their four sons from being executed for the killing of two taxi drivers
six years ago.

It is a tale that illustrates the pitfalls of China's criminal justice system
and highlights the sometimes capricious imposition of the death sentence in a
country that executes more prisoners each year than the rest of the world
combined.

Three times since 1996, the same local court has convicted a son from each of
these four farming families of murder, and sentenced all of them to death. And
three times, those convictions by the same three-judge panel were overturned on
appeal. Effectively declaring the case to be hollow, the Hebei provincial high
court cited credible evidence that the confessions were extracted by torture,
potential witnesses were threatened by the police, exonerating records were
suppressed and key forensic tests were crudely doctored.

Yet the defendants -- two farmers, a truck driver and a factory welder whose
ages range from 28 to 35 -- remain imprisoned in Chengde, a onetime imperial
playground that is today a major tourist center. Sometime this fall, in an
endless prosecution that shows both that the country is no longer a Communist
monolith and that local authorities retain immense power, they are to be tried
once more on the same charges, by the same local court, possibly to face another
death sentence.

The defendants have so far escaped execution only because their families -- all
farmers and workers -- were willing to bear official persecution and severe
financial strains to mount repeated legal appeals.

Although three have been jailed for months at a time for, they were told,
"protecting criminals," several relatives of the defendants agreed to an
interview. In a family home in the village of Zhuangtouying in a hillside tangle
of vegetable gardens, chicken coops and simple brick houses, the parents could
scarcely contain their rage and tears. "We four families have protested and
protested, but all we've ever met with from officials is curses and
humiliation," said Yang Shuxia, the mother of a 28-year-old defendant, Zhu
Yanqiang. "Year after year, every month, every week, every moment, this has hung
over us."

Wang Xioqin, the mother of Chen Guoqing, 30, another defendant, said: "These
boys aren't the culprits. The authorities just picked on them because they think
the common people won't fight back."

"In Chengde, the law enforcement officials just toy with common people's lives,"
added Ms. Wang, 52, her worn farmers' clothing smudged with mud.

Violent or grossly unfair practices by the police, prosecutors and local courts
are common in China, especially outside major cities. Cases of torture and
wrongful imprisonment are increasingly reported in the controlled Chinese press,
a sign that the central leadership feels it must acknowledge and attack a
problem that for most Chinese is a more immediate human rights concern than any
grand issue of democracy.

The continued prosecution in Chengde is "out of step with the demands of a
society under the rule of law," a prominent Beijing attorney, Jiang Xiaoming,
wrote in a Beijing newspaper in August.

"Although the case in Chengde appears to be extreme, similar ones are quite
common in China, and I don't mean just a handful of them," said Hu Yunteng, an
authority on criminal procedure and the death penalty with the Chinese Academy
of Social Sciences in Beijing as well as a practicing defense attorney.

The number of executions in China is treated as a state secret, but according to
incomplete numbers gleaned by Amnesty International from news accounts, close to
2,000 people have been put to death annually in recent years.

Mr. Hu said that despite major improvements in the criminal procedure code that
took effect in 1997, important shortcomings remain, such as a lack of protection
from double jeopardy. More common threats to fairness include a traditional,
widely shared assumption in China that "if evidence points toward an individual,
he must be guilty," Mr. Hu said. And in many localities, legal experts say,
Communist Party officials, the police and prosecutors hold sway over the courts.

"The public security organs can be very powerful," Mr. Hu said, "and to their
way of thinking, once they've expended so much time and energy on a case, if a
verdict of innocence comes in, they find this very hard to accept."

The torture of defendants is not rare, many lawyers say, and is often overlooked
by judges. In the Chengde case, interrogators applied an electric prod to one
man's genitals, inserted an electrified wire into the anus of another and beat
one of the men with an iron rod, according to relatives and defense attorneys
and the testimony of cellmates. Reached by telephone, two different Chengde
police officials refused to comment on the torture charges.

An unusual aspect of this case is the critical scrutiny it has received in
newspapers outside of Hebei Province. The Aug. 10 issue of Southern Weekend, a
nationally circulated newspaper published in Guangzhou, printed a detailed
expose, including excerpts from the appeals court's description of glaring
inconsistencies in the forensic evidence and of the alleged torture. Key tests
of blood samples used to tie defendants to the killing, for example, were dated
days before the men had even been detained, according to the court record.

But few residents of Chengde have heard any of this: local media have not
reported on the legal reversals and charges of official misconduct.

Defending the prosecutions, an administrator of the Chengde intermediate court,
where the convictions occurred, told Southern Weekend, "This case can't be
wrong."

Investigators had sometimes been careless with evidence, admitted the official,
Miao Hongqing, but all the defendants had confessed, and the circumstantial
evidence and blood tests all matched up. He accused the families of colluding to
make up alibis.

The four men only became suspects some three months after the killings of the
taxi drivers, which to the embarrassment of the police had gone unsolved.
According to the families, the police first picked up Mr. Chen on an unrelated
matter.

"It all started when the police accused Chen Guoqing of raping a girl from a
street stall," said his mother, Ms. Wang. "They fined him the equivalent of $36
but he refused to pay, saying he was innocent. A few days later, he was taken
away and tortured."

In police hands, Mr. Chen not only confessed to a role in the killings but
implicated more than a dozen of his fellow villagers. Some have fled the area,
and others were not prosecuted for unknown reasons.

The relatives insist that the men have strong alibis.

His family swears that Chen Guo qing, for example, was on duty at a local boiler
plant during one of the killings. A defense attorney said that factory records
proving Mr. Chen's claim had been introduced at trial, but ignored by the
judges.

On one of the nights he is accused of committing murder, Zhu Yangqiang was at
home in bed with an intravenous drip, on his second day of recovery from a
street fight, according to his mother and neighbors. Ms. Wang said that clinic
records of his medical treatment were seized by investigators, mentioned in the
first trial to no effect and have not been produced since.

Yang Wanying said his son, the defendant Yang Shiliang, 35, who is married with
an 11-year-old boy, had high earnings driving a five-ton truck that the family
had bought with pooled resources. His wife, father and father-in-law all had
steady jobs with decent salaries.

"With five breadwinners in the family we were earning a good living, so why
should he ever murder anyone for money?" Mr. Wang asked.

Mr. Wang, who is 64, said he has been totally disillusioned by the conduct of
the authorities. "I'm quite old, and I've never heard of any rule of the
Communist Party that allows for this sort of thing to happen," he said.

Fu Yiru, the mother of the fourth defendant, He Guoqiang, 28,said that once they
heard their son was a suspect they urged him to turn himself in to clear his
name, and he agreed. "How we regret it now," she said.

As it repeatedly overturned the convictions, the Hebei provincial high court
declared, "The facts are unclear and the evidence is insufficient."

In principle, this should lead to a presumption of innocence and the appeals
court could have ordered the men released rather than giving local officials the
option of a retrial.

But, because of ingrained assumptions about guilt, personal and political ties
between the courts and even concern about the lower court's possible financial
liability for wrongful imprisonment, flawed cases are often sent back in this
manner to the original venue, said Mr. Hu, the legal authority.

"We have a lot of criminal cases like this one, going back and forth like a
Ping-Pong match," he said.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CHINA (97%);

STATE: HEBEI, CHINA (91%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (78%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA (97%);   HEBEI, CHINA (91%); NORTH CENTRAL CHINA (78%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   EVIDENCE (90%); SENTENCING (90%);
APPEALS (90%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (90%); CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); FAMILY
(89%); TORTURE (89%); JAIL SENTENCING (89%); MURDER (77%); LAW COURTS &
TRIBUNALS (76%); CRIMINAL LAW (76%); LITIGATION (76%); TALKS & MEETINGS (76%);
FARMERS & RANCHERS (76%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (76%); WITNESSES (75%); INTERVIEWS
(75%); FORENSICS (72%); ADMISSIONS & CONFESSIONS (71%); JUDGES (71%); FRUITS &
VEGETABLES (70%);   CORRECTIONS (76%); MANUFACTURING FACILITIES (72%);

PERSON: HU YUNTENG (70%);

LOAD-DATE: September 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of China shows the location of Chengde: The cases of four men in
Chengde have drawn national attention.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1961 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 14, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 940 words



EUROPE

RUSSIA: KURSK WILL BE RAISED -- Russia is not reconsidering its decision to
raise the submarine Kursk from the Barents Sea, Deputy Prime Minister Ilya
Klebanov said. He added that he was surprised by remarks by the minister for
atomic energy, Yevgeny Adamov, who suggested that it might be safer to leave the
Kursk and its twin-reactor power plant on the seabed indefinitely. Mr. Klebanov,
who heads the commission looking into the disaster, said the sub would be raised
after the dead are recovered this fall.   Patrick E. Tyler (NYT)


RUSSIA: TREATY SIGNED -- Russia became the 112th country to sign the treaty
setting up an international criminal court to try those accused of war crimes,
genocide and crimes against humanity. Nineteen countries have also ratified the
treaty, of the 60 ratifications needed for the court to begin functioning. The
United States has not signed, and is demanding an exemption for American
soldiers and officials.   Barbara Crossette (NYT)

TURKEY: EX-PREMIER'S JAILING DELAYED -- Prosecutors agreed to a four-month delay
in jailing former Prime Minister Necmettin Erbakan for remarks he made in 1994.
A warrant was issued for Mr. Erbakan, 73, after he failed to show up to start
serving a one-year sentence for telling a political rally Turkey had abandoned
its Islamic roots and politicians had divided Kurds from other Turks. Mr.
Erbakan's lawyers said his jailing would prevent him from defending two other
cases.   Douglas Frantz (NYT)

NORTHERN IRELAND: REBEL ACTION -- A mortar fired from a van on a hotel building
site damaged a Royal Ulster Constabulary station in Armagh, and two bombs were
deactivated before they could go off at a British Army training center near
Londonderry. No one was hurt in the incidents, which were attributed to the
dissident group the Real I.R.A.   Warren Hoge (NYT)

BELGIUM: UNION SLAYINGS -- At least 140 union activists were killed last year,
mostly in Latin America and Asia, and organizing efforts were not adequately
protected in industrialized economies, the International Confederation of Free
Trade Unions said in its annual survey. Rights of union organizers were violated
around the world, the Brussels-based group said, ranging from union busting to
"ruthless repression."   Elizabeth Olson (NYT)

BOSNIA: CROAT SURRENDERS -- A Bosnian Croat charged with war crimes against
Muslims in Mostar in 1993 turned himself in to a regional court, officials said.
The United Nations mission in Bosnia welcomed the surrender of Zoran Soldo, the
second member a five-man gang that terrorized Mostar to give himself up. It also
called on the police to arrest the three others.   (Reuters)

THE AMERICAS

CANADA: JOURNALIST SHOT -- A columnist for Quebec's largest selling paper,
Journal de Montreal, was shot in what a police spokesman called an assassination
attempt. Michel Auger, 56, an expert on organized crime, was in stable
condition. Paule Beaugrand-Champagne, the newspaper's editor in chief, noted
that the attack came a day after a column by Mr. Auger detailed a drug turf war
between Quebec's biker gangs and Mafia groups.   James Brooke (NYT)

AFRICA

SOUTH AFRICA: WAR ON VIGILANTES -- Law enforcement officials said South Africa
is at war with the vigilante group suspected of orchestrating a string of
bombings in and around Cape Town for two years. The statement came hours after a
bomb exploded near a community center where the provincial premier was about to
speak. Several people were hurt.   Henri E. Cauvin (NYT)

BURUNDI: TUTSI TO SIGN PACT -- The last three holdout Tutsi parties have agreed
to sign an accord aimed at ending the country's civil war, Nelson Mandela, the
mediator in the civil war, said after meeting with the leaders of the three
groups at his home in Johannesburg. All 19 parties to the accord have now signed
it, but two Hutu rebel groups continue to oppose the agreement.   Henri E.
Cauvin (NYT)

ASIA

JAPAN: CLINTON ORDERS SANCTIONS -- President Clinton ordered the first sanctions
against Japan for expanding its hunting of whales, ordering that Japanese
fishermen will be prohibited from fishing in United States waters if they are
opened to foreign fleets this year. He acted after the Commerce Department ruled
that Japan is undermining efforts to protect whales, saying he would consider
more sanctions in the next 60 days.   David E. Sanger (NYT)

INDIA: SURGERY FOR PRIME MINISTER -- Prime Minister Atal Behari Vajpayee will
have surgery on his left knee after he returns from his two-week visit to the
United States, a government spokesman said. Mr. Vajpayee's health has been the
cause of great speculation recently but the prime minister, who is 73, has
insisted that his ailments begin and end with a bad knee.   Barry Bearak (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

ISRAEL: CHANGING DESIRES -- Under the headline "The Jewish Mother No Longer
Wants Her Son to Be a Doctor," the Yediot Ahronot published results of a poll of
Israeli mothers. It showed that 40 percent want their children to go into the
high-tech industry, 15 percent want them to become doctors, and only 2 percent
want them to be rabbis.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)

ISRAEL: SLOW JUSTICE -- The Israeli-Arab family that won a landmark Supreme
Court case this year, earning the right to settle in the Jewish community of
Katzir, has still not been able to move into the town. The Association for Civil
Rights in Israel petitioned the state attorney to comply with the court's
decision and allocate land to the family.   Deborah Sontag (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); EUROPE (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); CROATIA (92%); TURKEY (92%); BELGIUM (90%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%); CANADA (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (53%);

STATE: ARCTIC OCEAN (73%); QUEBEC, CANADA (70%);

CITY: BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (74%); MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (65%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(56%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (94%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); EUROPE (92%);
UNITED STATES (92%); CROATIA (92%); TURKEY (92%); BELGIUM (90%); LATIN AMERICA
(79%); CANADA (79%); NORTHERN IRELAND (79%); ASIA (79%); UNITED KINGDOM (79%);
NORTH & SOUTH AMERICAS (53%);   ARCTIC OCEAN (73%); QUEBEC, CANADA (70%);
BRUSSELS, BELGIUM (74%); MONTREAL, QC, CANADA (65%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (90%); HEADS OF
STATE & GOVERNMENT (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (89%); POLICE FORCES (88%); WAR CRIMES (88%); ENERGY
DEPARTMENTS (78%); POLITICS (78%); NUCLEAR POWER PLANTS (77%); ARMIES (76%);
SHOOTINGS (75%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (75%); INTERNATIONAL LAW
(75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); SENTENCING (74%); GENOCIDE (74%); ARREST WARRANTS
(74%); ARRESTS (74%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (74%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (74%); ELECTRIC
POWER PLANTS (72%); NUCLEAR ENERGY (72%); POWER PLANTS (72%); LAWYERS (71%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (71%); POLLS & SURVEYS (69%); CRIMES AGAINST
HUMANITY (69%); ARMED FORCES (67%); MILITARY TRAINING (67%); RELIGION (65%);
LABOR UNIONS (64%); JOURNALISM (61%);

PERSON: NECMETTIN ERBAKAN (55%);

LOAD-DATE: September 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1962 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                September 15, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Puts Uzbek Group on Its Terror List

BYLINE: By JUDITH MILLER

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 844 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Sept. 14


The Clinton administration has added the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan to its
list of foreign terrorist organizations, saying the group has ties to the Saudi
financier Osama bin Laden, administration officials said today.

The decision reflects the administration's determination to isolate groups that
it believes sponsor or abet international terrorism, especially those that
American officials identify as part of a global network sponsored by Mr. bin
Laden. Last year the United States placed Mr. bin Laden's group, al Qaeda, on
the list, accusing him and his organization of blowing up two American Embassies
in Africa in August 1998.

Addition of the Islamic Movement to the list of 28 foreign groups that
Washington now accuses of sponsoring terrorism means that American citizens and
residents are legally barred from contributing money or "material support" to
the group. It also means that Islamic Movement members can be denied visas to,
or deported from, the United States. And it enables the Treasury Department to
seize assets held by the group or its members in American banks and financial
institutions.

Administration officials said the department had already asked the nation's
financial institutions to identify any assets that the Uzbek group or its
members control, though they said they doubted that the group kept or raised
money in the United States.

More broadly, the designation sends a signal to other states that the United
States considers the group dangerous, hoping that they too will try to restrict
its activities.

The agency reviews groups every two years, as required by Congress. This is the
first time, said Michael A. Sheehan, the State Department's coordinator for
counterterrorism, that it has not waited for that review to add a group.

Mr. Sheehan said the decision was intended to encourage the group "and all
organizations to eschew terrorism as an instrument for their political goals."
The move, he said, was not a signal that the United States "is against
opposition forces to governments around the world, including Islamic groups."

"What we're against is their use of terrorism as an instrument," he said, adding
that if the group or any other stops using terrorism, "we will drop them from
the list."

The stated goal of the Islamic Movement, a coalition of several thousand from
Uzbekistan and other Central Asian states, is to overthrow the secular
government in Uzbekistan and establish a Taliban-style state there and in other
former Soviet republics of Central Asia, which is about 85 percent Muslim.

In its annual report on terrorism issued this summer, the State Department
criticized the Islamic Movement for its "anti-Western and anti-Israeli
rhetoric."

One administration official, speaking on condition of anonymity, said there had
been recent evidence that Mr. bin Laden had been shifting focus from the Middle
East and North Africa to Central Asia. Several former Soviet republics are being
destabilized by a resurgence of militant Islam and a flourishing drug trade. The
Uzbek group has received financial support from Mr. bin Laden, American and
Uzbek officials said, as well as from groups and individuals in Pakistan,
Turkey, Saudi Arabia and other countries.

Most of its members are said to live in Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and Afghanistan.
Its recruits have been trained in Mr. bin Laden's Afghan camps as well as in
Pakistan, whose weak military government faces its own Islamic pressures.
Training has also taken place in Uzbekistan's conservative Ferghana Valley,
where poverty and unemployment have given militants appeal.

The Uzbek government holds the Islamic Movement responsible for five car
bombings in Tashkent in February 1999. Uzbekistan claims that the group was
trying to kill President Islam Karimov, who has banned religious political
parties.

The Islamic Movement claimed responsibility for the fall 1999 kidnapping of four
Japanese and eight Kyrgyzstanis. Last month it also kidnapped several American
hikers, but they escaped. Uzbek officials said that in August, Islamic Movement
guerrillas operating from bases in Tajikistan staged several incursions into a
mountainous border region in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan.

Sodiq Safaev, Uzbekistan's ambassador to Washington, called the decision to add
the group to its list of terrorist groups "extremely positive." "It shows that
these are not freedom fighters, as they claim," he said, "but skillful,
well-financed, well-trained and well-armed killers." Uzbekistan is happy, he
added, that Washington "now has a clear stand."

Last April, Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright pledged $3 million in new
military assistance for Uzbekistan and a total of nearly $10 million to help
Central Asian governments fight terrorism and narcotics trafficking. But she
also called upon governments in the region to establish greater respect for
human rights and civil liberties. The State Department's most recent rights
report calls Uzbekistan an "authoritarian" state whose police officers torture
prisoners.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); UZBEKISTAN (97%); CENTRAL ASIA (93%); ASIA (93%);
SAUDI ARABIA (92%); AFRICA (92%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);

COMPANY: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  (93%);
ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (93%); AL-QAEDA (57%);

ORGANIZATION: ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN  ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN
(93%); ISLAMIC MOVEMENT OF UZBEKISTAN (93%); AL-QAEDA (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); UZBEKISTAN (97%); CENTRAL ASIA (93%); ASIA
(93%); SAUDI ARABIA (92%); AFRICA (92%); NORTHERN AFRICA (79%); MIDDLE EAST
(79%);

SUBJECT: TERRORISM; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS  TERRORISM (92%);
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (92%); RELIGION (92%); AL-QAEDA (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM
(89%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (89%); BANKING & FINANCE (87%);
TALIBAN (78%); ANNUAL REPORTS (78%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (78%); PASSPORTS &
VISAS (78%); DEPORTATION (73%); COUNTERTERRORISM (73%); PUBLIC FINANCE AGENCIES
& TREASURIES (72%); TREASURY DEPARTMENTS (67%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%);

PERSON: MILLER, JUDITH; BIN LADEN, OSAMA  OSAMA BIN LADEN (91%);

LOAD-DATE: September 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Map of Tashkent highlighting Uzbekistan: The Islamic Movement of
Uzbekistan is on Washington's terror list.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1987 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               September 30, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Abroad at Home;
Bush And the World

BYLINE: By ANTHONY LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 17; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 707 words


When Slobodan Milosevic's forces ravaged Croatia in 1991, and then began their
campaign of genocide in Bosnia, President Bush decided that the United States
would do nothing meaningful to stop him. It was one of the most shameful
episodes in the history of American foreign policy.

If George W. Bush is elected president, the indications are that he would follow
his father's example. That appears from his own words and the views of those who
would advise him.

"We should not send our troops to stop ethnic cleansing and genocide in nations
outside our strategic interest," Governor Bush said earlier this year.

Condoleezza Rice, Mr. Bush's campaign adviser on foreign policy, won applause at
the Republican Convention when she said: "America's armed forces are not a
global police force. They are not the world's 911."

But the key figure is Gen. Colin Powell, the almost certain Bush choice for
secretary of state. I am a great admirer of General Powell -- but not of what
has come to be called the Powell Doctrine. It is that American soldiers should
not be used abroad except in overwhelming force when fundamental U.S. strategic
interests are threatened.

As chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in the first years of the Clinton
administration, General Powell strongly opposed the use of U.S. forces to stop
the Serbian rape, torture and murder in Bosnia. He not only worked inside the
government but wrote a newspaper article opposing involvement. His opposition
was crucial in President Clinton's decision to abandon a campaign pledge and
stay out of the Bosnian tragedy.

The consequences of U.S. inaction through the Bush and early Clinton years were
terrible. Hundreds of thousands of Bosnians were killed or forced to flee. In
the end, shamed by the mass murder of Bosnians in Srebrenica, the U.S.
negotiated the Dayton accords and sent forces to help police them -- under much
less favorable conditions than would have existed years before.

Mr. Milosevic, moreover, concluding that the United States was a paper tiger,
went on to his campaign of terror in Kosovo. That led to still deeper U.S.
military involvement.

The premise of President Bush's decision to ignore the Milosevic aggression when
it began in 1991 was that it was a European problem and should be handled by our
European allies. But the Europeans will not act without American leadership, as
events proved.

The same thinking is evident now in the Bush campaign. Dick Cheney, the
vice-presidential nominee, said last month that it was time to consider
recalling our ground troops from Bosnia and Kosovo, leaving the job to the
Europeans. If we followed that course, the situation in both territories would
quickly unravel.

That the United States cannot be "the world's policeman" is an easily accepted
slogan. But realistically, there is no substitute for American leadership and
involvement if the worst of human horrors are to be stopped.

Genocide in Bosnia does not engage our strategic interests as would, say, a
threat to our supply of oil. When those two oil men, George W. Bush and Dick
Cheney, talk about the vital interests that alone would justify the use of
American forces abroad, they may well be thinking precisely of oil.

The odd thing is that Governor Bush and his campaign colleagues talk with great
emphasis about the need to build up our armed forces. To do what?

The most frequent threats to peace and stability in the post-cold-war era are
arising from internal ethnic, religious and other conflicts. East Timor, Bosnia
and Kosovo are all remote from traditional U.S. strategic interests. But if
ignored, those conflicts could have destabilized large areas important to us:
Indonesia, Southeastern Europe. To turn our heads away is not the course of
realism.

And there is another consideration that makes the inclinations of George W. Bush
unrealistic. Americans do not like to see mass cruelties ignored by the one
country that can stop them. Perhaps that is why President Bush, when he and
Brent Scocroft published a book on his foreign-policy record, did not even
mention Bosnia.

If Americans know that horrors are happening, they are not going to be content
with a president who says, "I am not my brother's keeper."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (93%); EUROPE
(93%); KOSOVO (92%); CROATIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);

COMPANY: BUSH CHOICE (91%);   JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF  (55%); JOINT CHIEFS OF
STAFF (55%);

ORGANIZATION: JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF  (55%); JOINT CHIEFS OF STAFF (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (94%); SERBIA (93%);
EUROPE (93%); KOSOVO (92%); CROATIA (92%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   ARMED FORCES (90%); GENOCIDE (90%);

 US PRESIDENTS (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS
(90%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (89%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (78%); US PRESIDENTIAL ELECTIONS (78%); PRESIDENTIAL
ELECTIONS (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%);
DEFENSE & MILITARY POLICY (77%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS
(69%); POLITICAL PARTY CONVENTIONS (69%); TORTURE (64%); POLICE FORCES (54%);

PERSON: GEORGE W BUSH (91%); BILL CLINTON (79%); DICK CHENEY (58%); CONDOLEEZZA
RICE (57%);

LOAD-DATE: September 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             1995 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 5, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Bishop in Exile Prays for Panama's Poor

BYLINE: By DAVID GONZALEZ

SECTION: Section A; Page 14; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1421 words


A rough ink sketch of Moses, encircled by prayers and petitions, covers the
small window in the living room of Bishop Romulo Emiliani, a prominent Roman
Catholic cleric in Panama who has ministered to a rugged jungle diocese along
the border with Colombia. It is a fitting image these days as he ponders his own
hurried exodus from the country he loves.

But the violence from Colombia's long-running civil conflict has increasingly
crept into Panama, and with it came the death threats against Bishop Emiliani,
who has spoken out against the violence. Now he fears that the increased
American anti-drug efforts in Colombia may unintentionally make life worse for
Panama and its neighbors.

While he once journeyed regularly by jeep, boat or foot through his remote
diocese -- a pastor in a lawless wilderness -- he now lives in exile in a dark,
two-room basement apartment. He went from being Panama's most visible and
outspoken critic of the Colombian conflict -- which threatened the stability of
the Darien jungle in Panama -- to living quietly in a city whose location he
prefers not to disclose.

By day he studies theology and ministers to a congregation that does not even
know he is a bishop. At night he relaxes with poetry, including the writings of
Saint John of the Cross, the 16th century Spanish mystic whose poem "The Dark
Night of the Soul" seems an apt choice for his uncertain status.

"We all have our dark nights," said Bishop Emiliani, 52. "I feel like someone
who was scoring the most goals and now I'm on the bench. Now I see my team
falling behind. It's hard to know that although I was once the voice of
conscience, I had to be taken out because of fears for my safety."

He fears that darkness may also envelop Panama and the rest of Central America
with the increased aid the United States is giving the Colombian government to
help fight the drug that has enriched both the guerrillas of the Revolutionary
Armed Forces of Colombia, known as the FARC, and the paramilitary groups there.
The conflict has already spilled over into Panama's relatively unprotected
border, bringing violence and refugees, kidnappings and the smuggling of weapons
and drugs.

Should the violence in Colombia escalate, Bishop Emiliani said, it will only
further weaken Central America -- which has yet to fully recover from its own
wars during the 1980's -- as more Colombian criminals and combatants turn to the
region for weapons and a safe haven.

"The big business now is the arms that come from Central America left over from
the various wars in the area," he said. "The situation is very conflicted
because the region has high unemployment, underdevelopment and a lot of people
who were left with nothing after the wars. Given the present conditions in
Central America, I think that in 10 years the zone will become a highly
dangerous dictatorship of the underworld."

In recent weeks, Panamanian authorities have arrested 20 people after
intercepting several weapons caches -- from assault rifles to rocket-propelled
grenades -- that they believe came from Nicaragua and were destined for
Colombian guerrillas. Panamanian police uncovered the largest such cache in the
nation's history in the city of Chame in early September, which included 271
AK-47 assault rifles, 318 grenade launchers, 73,000 rounds of ammunition and
more than a ton of TNT. Other caches have included cocaine, which the police
believe was in partial payment for the weapons.

The discoveries have led the government of neighboring Costa Rica to set up
checkpoints along the Pan American Highway and call for a regional effort
against the arms trade. Panamanian officials have pledged to help, and have
begun by asking United States law enforcement agencies for assistance.

The situation is delicate for Panama, whose leaders have insisted that they wish
no part of the Colombian conflict. Carlos Bares, the director of Panama's
National Police, said that the border with Colombia has been quiet for now,
although there have been press reports of growing activity in the area by
Colombian paramilitary troops. He admitted that the Panamanian border police
could use more training and equipment.

"The problems of Colombia are Colombia's problem," he said. "But if arms come
through here, wherever they are headed, it is our obligation to stop them."

But a FARC commander said recently that the Colombian guerrillas would continue
buying weapons in Panama and that they refused to rule out the possibility of
violence spilling into the country once the American-supported antinarcotics
effort begins.

"We have to buy arms," Commandante Andres Paris was quoted as saying in the
Panamanian newspaper El Panama America. "Or do you think we are going to defend
ourselves throwing popcorn?"

Such talk represents the kind of escalation that Bishop Emiliani had been
warning about in Panama in his sermons, pastoral letters and radio addresses for
years. His worries had earned him a reputation for being alarmist, but he
refused to keep quiet since his network of missionaries, lay people and aid
workers in the diocese gave him an almost unrivaled perspective on the Darien
jungle region.

"Is it a war against the drug traffic or against the guerrillas that could
become worse than Vietnam?" Bishop Emiliani said. "The fear is that it would
become a war against the guerrillas, and then the conflict would be
internationalized."

Bishop Emiliani has noted that over the years the FARC had been accustomed to
using the jungle for rest and resupply, for checking in with friendly Panamanian
informants and to buy food, clothing and arms. But the recent arrival of
paramilitary groups bent on seeking vengeance has increased violence and
tensions, themes that came to dominate sermons where he exhorted "those groups
of armed Colombians" to "keep your hands off the Darien."

Before long friends were telling him to watch out, since they had heard
troubling talk about retaliations. Then came the anonymous phone calls,
including one he received shortly after accompanying a group of Panamanian
police as they tried to intercept a drug shipment.

"It was an ugly call where they said they were tired of me speaking out," he
said. "They said I should dedicate myself to the temple. That they would slit my
throat if not. But for me, the temple of God is the people, not that I was going
to get into that over the phone. To say I should be inside some little church
saying Mass, that is a very poor vision of what the church should be."

It was, however, frightening enough to have the Vatican suggest that he leave
Panama for at least six months out of concern for his safety. His departure in
July has left his fellow clergy fearful, while others who are also concerned
about the border worry that the Panamanian government officials will ignore or
play down the troubles.

"Bishop Emiliani was very important because he had the best network of
information in the Darien," said Otilia Tejeira, a human rights advocate in
Panama City. "Now nobody knows what's going on. Now all you hear is what the
government says."

Inside his small apartment, Bishop Emiliani grows restless as he grapples with
being so far away from the jungle he loves. He said that the region's
governments have yet to look beyond their borders to the threat posed by the
arms merchants who enlist local help in ferrying weapons and drugs.

Recently, he has begun to send messages to Panama, urging not only more regional
cooperation but also a renewed effort by the authorities to alleviate the
poverty and hopelessness that prevails on the margins of society, whether in the
jungles or the slums.

"This is a Central American problem, and people have not been too creative," he
said. "In the church, we have not reached the people. The governments do not
have too many tools at their disposal. They lack the capacity and talent and are
too burdened with foreign debt. The governments are preoccupied with keeping
themselves in power through little battles without making any clear plans for
development."

He writes these messages on a desk cluttered with papers and books including a
biography of Pope John Paul II and "100 Ways to Motivate Yourself." Not that he
needs any further prompting, considering one to-do list he has taped to the
window, alongside the religious drawings. It reads, "Heal Central America."

"It's a big goal, granted," he said. "Someone once said you need to aim your
arrows at the moon so at least you might miss and hit a star."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: PANAMA (99%); COLOMBIA (97%); CENTRAL AMERICA (93%); UNITED STATES
(93%);

COMPANY: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

ORGANIZATION: ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH

GEOGRAPHIC: PANAMA; COLOMBIA;   PANAMA (99%); COLOMBIA (97%); CENTRAL AMERICA
(93%); UNITED STATES (93%);

SUBJECT: BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; DRUG ABUSE
AND TRAFFIC; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; COLOMBIA-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-US; FOREIGN AID  RELIGION (95%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (90%); CATHOLICS &
CATHOLICISM (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (89%); SMUGGLING
(77%); TERRITORIAL & NATIONAL BORDERS (77%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (76%); CIVIL
WAR (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (76%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (75%); REFUGEES (72%); DRUG
TRAFFICKING (70%); DRUG POLICY (70%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (66%); TERRORIST
ORGANIZATIONS (65%); POETRY (65%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (64%); KIDNAPPING & ABDUCTION

 (60%);

PERSON: GONZALEZ, DAVID; EMILIANI, ROMULO (BISHOP)

LOAD-DATE: October 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Bishop Romulo Emiliani now lives in exile in a place he keeps
secret. He was threatened for opposing the civil conflict creeping into Panama.
(David Gonzalez/The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2001 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 6, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Sierra Leone to Try Juveniles Separately in U.N. Tribunal Plan

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 7; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 539 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Oct. 5


The Security Council got a blueprint today for a war crimes tribunal for Sierra
Leone, the fourth such special court to be established in the last decade of
world civil conflict.

The release of the plan by Secretary General Kofi Annan had been tied up for
nearly a week as legal experts and children's rights advocates argued over the
lowest age at which a war crimes suspect could be tried.

Children barely big enough to shoulder a weapon have been involved in a very
brutal civil war in Sierra Leone marked by amputations of limbs and the
terrorizing of villages.

The government of Sierra Leone at first wanted all people "most responsible" for
war crimes brought to trial at whatever age. The United Nations legal department
recommended that 15- to 18-year-olds, if found guilty, be sent to rehabilitation
centers rather than prison.

Rights groups and aid organizations, led by Unicef, the children's fund, were
strongly opposed to trials of anyone under 18.

Many of the youngest soldiers, aid officials said, have been coerced and often
drugged to take part in atrocities.

The plan, sent to the Council today, gives the court jurisdiction over anyone 15
or older, but classifies those younger than 18 as juvenile offenders, to be
tried in a separate juvenile chamber and sentenced to community service, foster
care, training or other forms of rehabilitation.

Under Mr. Annan's plan, which will now be debated by the Security Council, the
Sierra Leone tribunal would have two trial chambers and one appeals chamber.
Each trial chamber would have three judges, one appointed by Sierra Leone and
the other two by Mr. Annan. The appeals chamber would have five judges, three
appointed by Mr. Annan.

The tribunal would have a chief prosecutor appointed by the secretary general
and a deputy prosecutor appointed by Sierra Leone, in consultation with the
United Nations.

The court would be based in Sierra Leone, but there are provisions to hold
hearings elsewhere if circumstances demand it.

In addition to murder, torture and terrorism, crimes within the court's
jurisdiction include rape, sexual slavery, mutilation, hostage-taking, pillage
and attacks on civilians.

The new court, a hybrid with responsibility shared by Sierra Leone and the
United Nations, would have a stronger international component than a tribunal
still struggling to be born for Cambodia, because the Cambodian government
demanded a more central role in trying the Khmer Rouge.

On the other hand, the Sierra Leone court would not operate like tribunals
established for the Balkans and Rwanda, which are entirely under United Nations
control.

The Sierra Leone tribunal will need at least $22 million to operate for the
first year, officials say. Mr. Annan's legal experts disagreed with a Security
Council plan to finance it with voluntary contributions, fearing that this would
be unreliable. The plan sent to the Council recommends billing United Nations
member countries for the costs of the court, which is considered the most
practical course.

Alternatively, Mr. Annan said, nations could contribute the salaries of judges
and staff members, in effect paying for the court in kind.

The Security Council will review these options.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SIERRA LEONE (99%); CAMBODIA (92%); RWANDA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL

 (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%); UNITED
NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND  (56%); UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS  (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY
COUNCIL  (93%); UNITED NATIONS (93%); UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (93%);
UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND  (56%); UNITED NATIONS CHILDREN'S FUND (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SIERRA LEONE;   SIERRA LEONE (99%); CAMBODIA (92%); RWANDA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; COURTS; POLITICS AND GOVERNMENT  WAR CRIMES
(93%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); JURISDICTION (89%); SENTENCING (78%); GENOCIDE
(78%); CIVIL WAR (78%); PRISONS (78%); FAMILY LAW (78%); COMMUNITY SERVICE
SENTENCING (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (78%);
JUVENILE JUSTICE (78%); SEXUAL ASSAULT (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%); WAR &
CONFLICT (78%); CHILD WELFARE (76%); INTERNATIONAL ASSISTANCE (74%); SLAVERY
(73%); ALTERNATIVE SENTENCING (73%); JUVENILE CRIME (73%); HOSTAGE TAKING (72%);

 TERRORISM (71%); MURDER (58%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (78%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; ANNAN, KOFI (SEC GEN)  KOFI ANNAN (92%);

LOAD-DATE: October 6, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2018 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 12, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Milosevic on Trial? Don't Feed the Fires

SECTION: Section A; Page 28; Column 6; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 136 words



To the Editor:

Re "European Union Greets Yugoslav Government" (news article, Oct. 10):

The European Union embraced the new government in Belgrade with euphoria. The
unconditional pledge of billions of dollars and rushing of European foreign
ministers to Belgrade is wrong and counterproductive. Pushing aside demands for
the extradition of Slobodan Milosevic and for the release of thousands of
Kosovar political prisoners is too big a concession.

Europe's embrace of the new power in Belgrade can be viewed in Bosnia and Kosovo
as a premature and de facto reward to Serbian nationalism for years of war,
"ethnic cleansing" and genocide in the territories of the former Yugoslavia. If
true, it's a continuation of failed European policy in the Balkans.

ARBEN SELIMAJ
New York, Oct. 10, 2000


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (96%); EUROPE (96%); EUROPEAN UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); KOSOVO
(94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (79%);

CITY: BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (94%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN UNION  EUROPEAN UNION  (94%); EUROPEAN UNION (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA; KOSOVO (SERBIA);   SERBIA (96%); EUROPE (96%); EUROPEAN
UNION MEMBER STATES (94%); KOSOVO (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (93%); BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (79%);   BELGRADE, SERBIA (94%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; POLITICAL
PRISONERS  EUROPEAN UNION (91%); LETTERS & COMMENTS (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%);

 EXTRADITION (87%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (86%); GENOCIDE (85%); CIVIL WAR (85%);
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (85%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (74%); STATE DEPARTMENTS &
FOREIGN SERVICES (73%); WAR CRIMES (69%);

PERSON: MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN; SELIMAJ, ARBEN  SLOBODAN MILOSEVIC  (92%);

LOAD-DATE: October 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Letter

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2020 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 14, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

Bosnia War Crimes Suspect Kills Himself on Arrest

BYLINE: Reuters

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 448 words

DATELINE: SARAJEVO, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Oct. 13


A Bosnian Serb war-crimes suspect detonated a hand grenade and killed himself as
peacekeepers tried to arrest him, NATO officials said today.

Four German soldiers were wounded in the explosion, two of them seriously. A
spokesman for the German Defense Ministry said their condition was not
considered life-threatening.

NATO-led peacekeeping troops swept into Foca late Thursday to arrest the
suspect, Janko Janjic, 43, who had been indicted on charges of crimes against
humanity, including torture and rape, by the United Nations war crimes tribunal
in The Hague.

"During the course of the arrest, Janjic detonated a hand grenade, which killed
him," a NATO statement said.

The police in Foca said the incident had occurred in the house of Mr. Janjic's
brother Oliver, who was also wounded after Mr. Janjic detonated the grenade.
Oliver Janjic's wife, Nada, was detained by peacekeeing troops but was later
released.

The police said the troops had taken Mr. Janjic's body away.

A neighbor said the peacekeepers had blown away her front door and Mr. Janjic's
with explosives.

Nada Janjic said the soldiers had also fired once. NATO said the soldiers had
not used their weapons.

Mr. Janjic became the third war crimes suspect to die during an attempted arrest
by peacekeepers. In 1997 the Bosnian Serb police chief, Simo Drljaca, was shot
by British special forces in Prijedor in the northwest. French soldiers shot
Dragan Gagovic, also a Serb, in Foca in 1999.

In his indictment, Mr. Janjic was accused of committing crimes during the first
year of the 1992-95 war in Bosnia. He was a subcommander of military police and
a paramilitary leader in Foca, a Serbian nationalist haven about 30 miles south
of Sarajevo, when he was alleged to have taken part in the torture and rape of
many Bosnian Muslim women, NATO said.

The war crimes court said Mr. Janjic was one of eight people indicted on rape
charges in Foca. Two are dead, three are standing trial at The Hague, and three
are still at large.

Foca was the scene of some of the most notorious ethnically motivated crimes
during the Bosnian conflict. Serbian paramilitaries overran the town in April
1992 and killed or expelled virtually every Muslim.

It has been on the blacklist of the international reconstruction effort in
Bosnia after the war because it is believed to harbor several suspects indicted
on war crimes charges.

The police statement said three windows at the United Nations office in Foca
were shattered today.

Local news organization have reported that even the Bosnian Serb wartime leader,
Radovan Karadzic, who is among those charged with war crimes, sometimes stayed
in a village near the town.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); GERMANY (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (92%);
SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); FRANCE (79%);

CITY: SARAJEVO, BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%);

COMPANY: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%);

ORGANIZATION: NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION  (94%); UNITED NATIONS  (57%);
UNITED NATIONS (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (97%); GERMANY (94%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO
(92%); SERBIA (92%); NETHERLANDS (92%); FRANCE (79%);   SARAJEVO, BOSNIA &
HERZEGOVINA (92%); THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (72%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (95%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES (91%); ARRESTS (91%); ARMED FORCES (90%); PEACEKEEPING (90%); MILITARY
WEAPONS (90%); WOUNDS & INJURIES (90%); PARAMILITARY & MILITIA (89%); SEXUAL
ASSAULT (89%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%);
LITIGATION (78%); SHOOTINGS (78%); DEFENSE DEPARTMENTS (78%); SEX OFFENSES
(78%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); WAR & CONFLICT (78%);
CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (77%); POSTWAR RECONSTRUCTION (76%); TORTURE (76%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (75%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (73%); POLICE FORCES
(58%);

PERSON: OLIVER JANJIC (93%); NADA JANJIC (57%);

LOAD-DATE: October 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2022 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

We're No. 1, and Paying for It

BYLINE: By Ronald Steel; Ronald Steel teaches international relations at the
University of Southern California and is the author of "Temptations of a
Superpower" and "In Love with Night: The American Romance with Robert Kennedy."

SECTION: Section 4; Page 17; Column 2; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 1035 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON


It was an eerie coincidence. On Wednesday night, Al Gore and George W. Bush
debated foreign policy for some 40 minutes. The next day, the tense
confrontation between Israelis and Palestinians erupted into virtual open
warfare, and in Yemen, the American Navy destroyer Cole was bombed in a
terrorist attack that took the lives of 17 sailors.

In retrospect, the debate last week didn't come close to touching on the real
repercussions of an interventionist foreign policy. It's not that such a policy
is wrong. But the terrorist attack on Thursday does demonstrate that in foreign
policy, as in domestic policy, there is no free lunch; every policy exacts a
price.

Terrorist attacks are not capricious, nor are they even irrational. They have
happened with regularity over the years. In 1998, the American embassies in
Kenya and Tanzania were bombed and 224 people were killed. In 1996, a truck bomb
exploded outside an American military compound in Saudi Arabia, killing and
injuring more than 500 people. In 1993, the World Trade Center in Manhattan was
bombed by foreign terrorists.

All these acts were directly related to the active role the United States plays
in the world, and they were intended to punish and change that role.

Neither George Bush nor Al Gore wants to change that role in any kind of real
way -- but they, and we as a country, have failed to address its repercussions.
Instead, in this presidential campaign, we have focused on essentially
rhetorical differences.

In the debate, Mr. Gore presented himself as a committed liberal interventionist
in the Woodrow Wilson tradition. He defended the American intervention in Bosnia
on humanitarian grounds, and also went on to argue that "genocide or ethnic
cleansing . . . can bring into play a fundamental American strategic interest,
because I think it's based on our values."

Indeed, the promotion of American values throughout the world seemed to be the
centerpiece of his foreign policy. The United States should "have a sense of
mission in the world" and use its "values" and its strength to "project the
power for good that American can represent," he proclaimed.

Nonetheless, he defended the administration's decision not to intervene in the
Rwanda genocide, in which an estimated 600,000 people were murdered. He did so
on the grounds that our "national security interest" was not involved.

This explanation hardy differed from that of Mr. Bush, who also opposed
humanitarian intervention in Rwanda and supported the intervention in Bosnia
(because of our interests in NATO). Although he opposed sending troops to Haiti
to promote democracy, he supported interventions in Lebanon, Grenada, Panama and
the Persian Gulf.

"We can't be all things to all people in the world," Mr. Bush declared, nor
should we "walk into a country and say, we do it this way, so should you."

For all their supposed differences, Mr. Gore and Mr. Bush agree more than they
disagree. They both believe in a powerful military, in strong alliances held
together by America's armed forces, direct economic and political intervention
where it serves American interests and the active discouragement of any
potential rival power.

Mr. Bush may have spoken gently during the debate about the virtues of
displaying "humility." But what he meant was the humility of the strong, not of
the weak. Moreover, both men labored to portray their vision of American foreign
policy as good not only for the United States but for the world.

The attack in Yemen serves as areality check. It reminds us that the very
"values" in which we take pride can be viewed by others as hypocritical or
corrupt or even evil. And it reminds us that our power to project our values can
been seen as a mortal threat to the values of others, however objectionable we
may regard those values.

Those we describe as terrorists do not see themselves in such terms. They are,
in their own eyes, what Ronald Reagan once called the Nicaraguan contras: "the
moral equivalent of our Founding Fathers."

Even among our friends, admiration for our values is not unbounded. The attack
on a McDonald's store in France by a disgruntled citizen was widely applauded
there as an act of cultural resistance. For most of the world, America is the
800-pound gorilla that they must appease as they lie down with it uneasily every
night.

It can hardly be otherwise. If the United States is to play a powerful role in
the world -- and both candidates, along with virtually all Americans, want this
-- it must do things that will annoy and even infuriate others.

This is true no matter what we do. It is particularly true if the United States
more actively pursues what Mr. Gore has referred to as the policy of "forward
engagement" -- of "addressing problems early in their development before they
become crises."

This is another way of describing an activist, interventionist foreign policy of
the sort that a great imperial power pursues to protect its interests and nip
opposition in the bud.

But such policies exact a price. One of them is involvement in wars and crises
over issues that we hardly understand; another is being subjected to the
feverish contempt of those who scorn what we are and hate us for what we do.

This is the way the world works, and it does little good, except perhaps for our
self-esteem, to proclaim, as Mr. Gore did in the debate that, "this nation is
now looked on by peoples on every other continent and the peoples from every
part of this earth as a kind of model for what the future could be."

Nor can we realistically be a "humble nation," in Mr. Bush's phrase, in anything
but rhetoric if we expect to retain our full power and influence. The suicide
bombers in Yemen help remind us that virtue is not its own reward.

Great powers may be admired or emulated, but they are rarely loved. Both George
Bush and Al Gore know this, even though they think that voters' tender
sensibilities may be offended to hear it. But we and they have to recognize our
nation as the great imperial power it has become.

And as Edmund Burke observed during the high tide of British power and
influence, "A great empire and little minds go ill together."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); RWANDA (92%); YEMEN (92%); ISRAEL (92%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); HAITI (79%);
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%); LEBANON (79%); KENYA (71%); GULF STATES
(56%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (78%); NEW YORK, USA (75%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (75%);

COMPANY: US NAVY (58%);

ORGANIZATION: US NAVY (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); RWANDA (92%); YEMEN (92%); ISRAEL (92%);
PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (92%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); HAITI (79%);
TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%); LEBANON (79%); KENYA (71%); GULF STATES
(56%);   INDIAN OCEAN (78%); NEW YORK, USA (75%);   NEW YORK, NY, USA (75%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   TERRORISM (91%); TERRORIST ATTACKS
(91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (90%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (90%); BOMBINGS (90%);
EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%); FOREIGN POLICY (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); ARMED FORCES (77%); BOMBS &
EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (77%); NAVIES (77%); NATIONAL SECURITY (73%); EMBASSIES &
CONSULATES (73%); NAVAL VESSELS (72%); GENOCIDE (68%); CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS
(64%);

PERSON: AL GORE (89%); GEORGE W BUSH (78%);

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawing (Thomas Fuchs)

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2023 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 15, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

WEDDINGS;
Laura Sager, Stephen Cohen

SECTION: Section 9; Page 10; Column 4; Society Desk

LENGTH: 189 words


Laura Sager and Stephen Bruce Cohen, law professors, were married yesterday at
the bridegroom's home in Washington by Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg of the
Supreme Court.

The bride, who specializes in employment discrimination law, teaches the civil
rights clinic at the New York University School of Law. The bridegroom, a
faculty member at the Georgetown University Law Center in Washington,
specializes in federal income tax law.

The bride is keeping her name. She graduated from Wellesley College and received
her law degree from the University of California in Los Angeles. She is the
daughter of the late Sophie and Jacob Lippman, who lived and worked in New York.
Her father was a lawyer in private practice; her mother, a book editor.

The bridegroom was a deputy assistant secretary of state for human rights in the
Carter administration. He graduated from Amherst College and the Yale Law
School. His parents, Alma and Sylvan Cohen, live in Philadelphia, where his
father is chairman of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Investment Trust.

The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: PEI (NYSE) (69%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS531120 LESSORS OF NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS (EXCEPT
MINIWAREHOUSES) (69%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (90%);

CITY: PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA (77%);

COMPANY: PENNSYLVANIA REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUST (69%);   GEORGETOWN
UNIVERSITY  (57%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA  (57%); GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (57%);

 UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (57%);

ORGANIZATION: GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY  (57%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA  (57%);
GEORGETOWN UNIVERSITY (57%); UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   NEW YORK, USA (93%); PENNSYLVANIA, USA (92%);

 CALIFORNIA, USA (90%);   PHILADELPHIA, PA, USA (79%); LOS ANGELES, CA, USA
(77%);

SUBJECT: WEDDINGS AND ENGAGEMENTS  LAW SCHOOLS (92%); WEDDINGS & ENGAGEMENTS
(91%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (90%); TEACHING & TEACHERS (90%); LAW
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (88%); LAWYERS (88%); SUPREME COURTS (88%); MARRIAGE (88%);
GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (87%); REAL ESTATE (73%); TAX LAW (73%); CIVIL
RIGHTS (72%); EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION (72%); EMPLOYMENT (70%); INCOME TAX
(55%); TAXES & TAXATION (55%); REAL ESTATE INVESTING (50%); INVESTMENT TRUSTS
(50%); REAL ESTATE INVESTMENT TRUSTS (50%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);

PERSON: SAGER, LAURA; COHEN, STEPHEN BRUCE  RUTH BADER GINSBURG (72%);

LOAD-DATE: October 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo (Jane Page)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2043 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                October 26, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

$100 Million Voted for Serbia, but With War-Crimes Strings

BYLINE: By STEVEN A. HOLMES

SECTION: Section A; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 520 words

DATELINE: WASHINGTON, Oct. 25


Congress approved a $100 million aid package to Serbia today, but made it
contingent on the new Yugoslav government's cooperation in apprehending those
indicted on charges of war crimes, including the country's former president,
Slobodan Milosevic.

The new money for Yugoslavia was contained in a $14.9 billion spending bill that
includes foreign aid and was approved by a vote of 65 to 27 in the Senate and
302 to 101 in the House.

While much of the attention surrounding the bill was focused on a provision
ending restrictions on abortion-related activities of international family
planning groups and a huge increase in the money made available to the poorest
third world countries to reduce their debt, the bill contained a cornucopia of
other items. Among them were these substantial outlays:

*A $60 million increase in American military aid to Israel, pushing military
assistance up to $1.9 billion -- the largest item in the foreign aid budget.

*A jump in funds for international child survival and disease programs to $963
million, an increase of $248 million. The program includes $300 million for
prevention and treatment of H.I.V./AIDS, mainly in Africa.

*A $20 million increase in the budget of the Peace Corps, bringing its financing
up to $265 million.

*Increased funds for international narcotics control by $20 million, bringing
the total up to $325 million.

*About $135 million in disaster assistance for Southern Africa, including
Mozambique, which was ravaged by floods this year.

In addition to the increases in financing, the measure includes a number of
contentious policy pronouncements. Among them is a requirement that after next
March, American aid to Serbia will depend, among other things, on cooperation
with the international war tribunal. Separate aid packages were voted for Serbia
and Montenegro, the two components of Yugoslavia.

In order to keep the aid flowing, the Yugoslavs must furnish documents related
to war crimes, help in the location of witnesses and provide access for tribunal
investigators. In addition, the government must provide help in the "surrender
and transfer of indictees or assistance in their apprehension."

"We want to support the new Serbian government," said Senator Patrick Leahy, a
Vermont Democrat who pressed for the conditions on Serbian aid. "But only if it
respects the rights of its neighbors and human rights."

Congressional experts acknowledge that it may be difficult for Yugoslavia's new
president, Vojislav Kostunica, and his deputies to comply with some of the
provisions.

"They don't have control of basic institutions," said one Congressional staff
member. "So the idea of cooperation with war crimes tribunal is problematic."

Congressional officials said that apart from the wording of the family-planning
provisions of the spending bill, the administration had very little input in
shaping the legislation.

"We called O.M.B. an hour before we went to the floor and briefed them on what
was in the bill," said one Congressional staff member referring the Office of
Management and the Budget. "That was it."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFRICA
(92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); MOZAMBIQUE (79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%);

STATE: VERMONT, USA (79%);

COMPANY: PEACE CORPS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: PEACE CORPS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: SERBIA;   SERBIA (95%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); UNITED STATES
(94%); AFRICA (92%); MONTENEGRO (79%); MOZAMBIQUE (79%); SOUTHERN AFRICA (79%);
   VERMONT, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: FOREIGN AID; WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS  WAR CRIMES (92%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL
ASSISTANCE (91%); APPROVALS (90%); BUDGETS (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%);

 US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (89%); LEGISLATION (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (89%);
APPROPRIATIONS (89%); INDICTMENTS (89%); DISASTER RELIEF (78%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (77%); FAMILY PLANNING (76%); FAMILY
(75%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (73%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (67%); NATURAL DISASTERS

 (64%); ABORTION (55%);

PERSON: HOLMES, STEVEN A; MILOSEVIC, SLOBODAN (PRES); KOSTUNICA, VOJISLAV (PRES)

 PATRICK LEAHY (59%);

LOAD-DATE: October 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2053 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 October 29, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

NEWS SUMMARY

SECTION: Section 1; Page 2; Column 5; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 586 words



INTERNATIONAL   3-13

Kosovo Albanians See Vote as Proof of Self-Rule
Kosovo Albanians swarmed around polling stations in cheerful moods to take part
in municipal elections, the first poll of any sort they have had for eight years
and the first experienced away from Communist or Serbian police authorities.   4


Victory for Protestant Leader
David Trimble, head of the Ulster Unionists, Northern Ireland's largest
Protestant party, narrowly held on to his leadership in a vote of confidence,
but only after adopting a far harder line toward Sinn Fein, the political wing
of the Irish Republican Army.   4

F.B.I. Blast Inquiry Hindered
Yemen's government has refused to allow the F.B.I. to attend interviews with
suspects about the suicide bombing that killed 17 American sailors on the
destroyer Cole, raising fears that evidence could be delayed, misunderstood, or
suppressed.   10

Roiling Tensions in Mideast
The emotional funerals of four Palestinians who were shot dead on Friday proved
the flashpoint for renewed clashes in the West Bank and Gaza, leaving at least
29 Palestinians injured in Gaza, including a 14-year-old boy who was shot in the
head.   10

NATIONAL   14-32

Drive Under Way to Raise Turnout of Black Voters
Democrats and civil rights organizations have begun a sweeping effort to
increase the turnout of black voters. In several close states, Vice President Al
Gore's chances may hinge on the effort's effectiveness.   1

The candidacy of Gov. George W. Bush came into being partly on its own several
years ago, at first surprising even Mr. Bush.   1

Neither campaign seems sure whether Ohio is still a swing state, so strategies
and spending are fluctuating widely.   20

Pet Projects in Congress
Democratic lawmakers hold their own with Republicans when it comes to securing
money for pet projects back home.   1

Diet Fraud on the Rise
A surging demand for a weight loss "silver bullet" has fueled a rapid rise in
fraudulent advertising.   1

Eagle Hunt May Be Allowed
Hopi Indians may be allowed to collect baby eagles at a national monument for
use in a rite in which the birds are killed.   14

Break-In at Microsoft
Microsoft said the break-in of its network occurred over a few days and not
several weeks.   28

NEW YORK/REGION   33-41

Mrs. Clinton Accuses Lazio Of Exploiting Terrorist Attack
Hillary Rodham Clinton and Representative Rick A. Lazio clashed over an attempt
by the New York Republican Party to link Mrs. Clinton to the terrorist attack on
a United States destroyer in Yemen earlier this month. Mrs. Clinton denounced
the tactic as a "new low" in the campaign, but Mr. Lazio said he would not
apologize for it.   1

Nassau G.O.P. Sheds Colors
Republican candidates have dropped the electric blue and orange that had come to
symbolize both Nassau County and its reigning party. The new colors are soothing
pastels and earth tones, a switch that is not inconsequential; it is a visible
sign of their rush to abandon the county's once vaunted Republican machine.   33


OBITUARIES   42

William T. Hurtz
A founder of the trendsetting United Productions of America animation studio, he
was 81. The animator's career stretched from Walt Disney in the 1930's to
"Rugrats" in the 1990's, with stops in between for Mr. Magoo, George of the
Jungle and Cap'n Crunch.   42

Chess   41
Weather   43
Cong. Vote   38

http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: MSFT (NASDAQ) (52%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS511210 SOFTWARE PUBLISHERS (52%); SIC7372 PREPACKAGED SOFTWARE
(52%);

COUNTRY: KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%);
YEMEN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (92%);

COMPANY: MICROSOFT CORP (52%);   FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (83%); FEDERAL
BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (83%); SINN FEIN (57%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (57%);
IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY (57%);

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (83%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (83%); SINN FEIN (57%); IRISH REPUBLICAN ARMY  (57%); IRISH
REPUBLICAN ARMY (57%);

GEOGRAPHIC: KOSOVO (94%); ALBANIA (94%); PALESTINIAN TERRITORY, OCCUPIED (93%);
YEMEN (92%); ISRAEL (92%); UNITED STATES (92%); NORTHERN IRELAND (92%); SERBIA &
MONTENEGRO (79%); MIDDLE EAST (79%);   NEW YORK, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  VOTERS & VOTING (91%); ELECTIONS (90%);
CAMPAIGNS & ELECTIONS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); NEWS BRIEFS (90%); LAW
ENFORCEMENT (90%); TERRORISM (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (89%); SHOOTINGS (88%);
GUNSHOT WOUNDS (88%); SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (77%); POLITICAL CANDIDATES
(77%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (77%); CITY GOVERNMENT (77%); HEAD INJURIES (76%);
BIRDS (75%); BOMBINGS (75%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY
(75%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); CIVIL RIGHTS (73%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(72%); CITIES (72%); ARMED FORCES (70%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (70%); FALSE OR
MISLEADING ADVERTISING (62%); NATIONAL PARKS (60%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (55%);
   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (51%);

PERSON: HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (79%); AL GORE (58%); GEORGE W BUSH (57%);

LOAD-DATE: October 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Summary

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2062 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 2, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

F.B.I. and Yemen Said to Be Near an Agreement on Investigation of the Cole Blast

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 920 words

DATELINE: ADEN, Yemen, Nov. 1


Yemen's prime minister said today that American and Yemeni negotiators were
close to working out an agreement under which agents of the Federal Bureau of
Investigation could attend Yemeni security police questioning of witnesses and
suspects in the suicide bombing of the destroyer Cole, with the right to write
down "follow up" questions that Yemeni investigators could put to those under
questioning.

The compromise appeared to go a long way toward one of the most pressing demands
put to Yemen's government in recent days by the F.B.I. task force assigned to
Yemen to investigate the Oct. 12 bombing that killed 17 American sailors. The
Yemeni concession came after two weeks of impasse on issues relating to sharp
limits imposed on the F.B.I. by Yemeni officials, and after personal appeals
that President Clinton made on the issue to Yemen's president, Ali Abdullah
Saleh.

The proposed compromise was outlined by Yemen's prime minister, Dr. Abdul Karim
al-Iryani, in an interview with CNN today in Sana, the Yemeni capital.

Dr. al-Iryani also said that the explosive used in the bombing of the Cole had
been identified as C-4, a military-type plastic explosive. According to
explosives experts, C-4 is manufactured in only a handful of countries,
including the United States, and is subject to strict international controls
designed to prevent it from being acquired by terrorists.

The prime minister also said there had been no attempt to obscure facts behind
the bombing by delivering an incomplete harbor surveillance videotape of the
attack to the F.B.I. He said that the tape came from a camera that was operated
by a private shipping company in the port. A report in The New York Times on
Tuesday, based on discussions with American officials in Aden, said the tape was
from the harbor police.

These officials said that the fact that the tape began after the bombing, and
appeared to have been heavily edited, was one of the concerns that the F.B.I.
had raised with the Yemenis in pressing for fuller cooperation.

Dr. al-Iryani said the camera in question was not pointed at the Cole when the
bombing took place, and thus did not capture the moment of the attack, and was
redirected only after the explosion.

The prime minister said that the F.B.I.'s discovery that C-4 had been used in
the bombing was one of the factors that had led American and Yemeni
investigators to conclude that the attack on the Cole had been planned by an
Islamic terrorist group with links to the Muslim guerrilla struggle in the
1980's that ousted Soviet troops from Afghanistan.

Terrorist groups spawned by the conflict in Afghanistan have been known in the
past to have illegally acquired C-4 from producing countries, including Iran.
American officials have said from the outset of the inquiry that such groups
were the principal suspects in the bombing.

Working from that assumption, and from warnings of fresh attacks on American
military targets that he issued less than three weeks before the bombing, the
F.B.I. has focused its attention on the possibility that the bombing was
inspired or planned by Osama bin Laden. The Saudi-born Mr. bin Laden, who lives
in hiding in Afghanistan, is on the F.B.I.'s most-wanted list, accused of
directing the bombing of two American embassies in East Africa in 1998 that
killed 224 people.

But Dr. al-Iryani said it was too early to conclude that Mr. bin Laden was the
mastermind behind the attack on the Cole.

The CNN interview appeared to clarify some of the confusion -- and worsening
friction between American and Yemeni investigators -- that has enveloped the
Cole bombing inquiry. In particular, Dr. al-Iryani seemed keen to dispel
suggestions, including some from senior American officials, that the Yemeni
government, possibly because of its own history as a major haven for Islamic
terrorist groups, has dragged its feet on the investigation.

One inference taken by frustrated F.B.I. officials was that the limits imposed
on F.B.I. access were designed to limit what the Americans could learn about
past, or even present, links between powerful figures in Yemen and the terrorist
groups.

But Dr. al-Iryani said that the limits were a matter of Yemeni law, which he
said prohibited foreign police forces from pursuing cases in Yemen. Up to and
including today, American officials said, the 50 F.B.I. agents still active on
the case in Yemen have been excluded from all interviews, and limited to reading
summaries or edited transcripts of the questioning done by the Yemeni agency
overseeing the investigation, the Political Security Organization. Among other
things, this arrangement raised F.B.I. concerns that any suspects who might
eventually be extradited to the United States for trial could claim that
evidence developed against them in Yemen was obtained by torture or other forms
of physical coercion, abuses of which the Yemeni security agency has been
frequently accused in Western human rights reports.

When President Saleh failed to ease the limits on the F.B.I. after earlier
American appeals, President Clinton intervened directly, sending a confidential
letter to Mr. Saleh last Thursday, and telephoning him on Saturday, to press
American demands for what Mr. Clinton, in public remarks on Monday, called "a
genuine joint investigation."

After Dr. al-Iryani's remarks today, an American official in Aden said that
having F.B.I. agents present at questioning sessions would be a "satisfactory,
if not a perfect" solution.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: YEMEN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAN, ISLAMIC
REPUBLIC OF (79%);

CITY: SANAA, YEMEN (79%);

COMPANY: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  A/S C AARSLEW-JENSEN  (68%); A/S C
AARSLEW-JENSEN (68%);   FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU
OF INVESTIGATION (94%);

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION
(94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: YEMEN;   YEMEN (99%); UNITED STATES (95%); AFGHANISTAN (92%); IRAN,
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF (79%);   SANAA, YEMEN (79%);

SUBJECT: BOMBS AND EXPLOSIVES; TERRORISM; COLE (USS); UNITED STATES
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS; UNITED STATES ARMAMENT AND DEFENSE; US-INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS-YEMEN  SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (93%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (92%);
INVESTIGATIONS (92%); BOMBS & EXPLOSIVE DEVICES (91%); HEADS OF STATE &
GOVERNMENT (91%); MILITARY WEAPONS (90%); WITNESSES (90%); TERRORISM (90%);
BOMBINGS (90%); INTERROGATION OF SUSPECTS (90%); PRIME MINISTERS (90%);
EXPLOSIVES (90%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (90%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%);
INTERVIEWS (78%); MILITARY VESSELS (77%); WAR & CONFLICT (77%); ARMED FORCES
(74%); US PRESIDENTS (73%); REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (72%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS
(72%); MARINE SHIPPING (69%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (62%); RELIGION (60%);

PERSON: BURNS, JOHN F; AL-IRYANI, ABDUL KARIM (DR); SALEH, ALI ABDULLAH (PRES);
CLINTON, BILL (PRES)  BILL CLINTON (71%);

LOAD-DATE: November 2, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2063 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 3, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Puerto Asis journal;
To Make a Point, the Rebels Are Strangling a Town

BYLINE: By JUAN FORERO

SECTION: Section A; Page 4; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 959 words

DATELINE: PUERTO ASIS, Colombia, Nov. 2


At the San Francisco de Asis Hospital, doctors say antibiotics are running
dangerously low. Gasoline, normally $1.50 a gallon, is being sold out of
darkened doorways, for close to $5.

Adding to the problems, the town's electric grid is out of commission, and
bakeries and restaurants, even ice-cream stands, are being forced to shut down.

In the poorest neighborhoods, where laborers live from day to day, families are
starting to go hungry.

For more than a month, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia, or FARC, have
blocked all roads in and out of this frontier town of 38,000, in the heart of
Colombia's largest coca-growing region. The stranglehold is meant to browbeat
the government of President Andres Pastrana into dropping its $7.5 billion plan
for eradicating the coca crop, something it says it will never do, and at the
same time to push the government into putting down the paramilitaries battling
the guerrillas in this southern province, something the government says it is
handling.

As a result, the town's food and fuel are running out, despite daily flights
arriving with supplies. The provisions that do make it to market, residents say,
are so marked up that many people cannot afford them.

"For us, the poor people, we spend only what we can make in a day, and now
everything that's coming here is out of reach," Juan Ciro, 38, a carpenter who
has been out of work, said today. "We can't even buy a kilo of rice or a kilo of
sugar. It's double what it used to be."

Now, with the rebel blockade in its fifth week, town leaders are warning that
riots or worse might break out unless the central government embarks on talks
with the guerrillas.  Unless the problems are quickly solved, they warn, the
crisis could be repeated in other regions as the rebels react to the
government's ambitious program to curtail the coca trade that brings them an
estimated $500 million a year.

"I think if the situation continues like it has for 10 or 15 more days, we're
going to have an explosion," Mayor Manuel Alzate said. "This can happen all over
the country, in other departments, and it will be out of the government's hands
by that time."

In Bogota, the crisis is readily acknowledged, with Fernando Medellin, head of
the government's relief agency, Solidarity, calling the roadblocks a "death
sentence against anyone who is looking for food." Government officials, though,
tout an airlift that has brought nearly 300 tons of food to Puerto Asis and the
rest of Putumayo Province. The government has also said it is working to help
repair the power grid; it was damaged somehow and the rebels have not let anyone
in to fix it.

"What we've done, and I think we've done it well, taking into account the
difficult situation, is to guarantee basic public services," said Humberto de la
Calle, the interior minister, earlier this week. "At the minimum, the government
understands the anguish and displeasure of the inhabitants, who have been used
like canon fodder by the guerrillas."

The people of Puerto Asis take a different view, believing that Bogota has
forgotten them once again.

But even in tough times in a region long buffeted by guerrillas and
paramilitaries, Puerto Asis has never had to suffer weeks without food and
electricity. Stores may be open and the streets may still buzz with motorcycles,
but people here describe themselves as living in a town besieged, powerless and
unable to function normally.

"We're like a town in Roman times, cut off and surrounded until we're starved
out," Deyanira Perdomo said.

This week, town officials held two large meetings in the main church to search
for ideas for ending the crisis. Boiling with anger, speaker after speaker made
drastic suggestions, including shutting down the airport, as a way to get the
country's attention. Some residents hoisted signs reading, "We are a species on
the brink of extinction," and "We've been kidnapped."

"We have to do something to pressure the government, which has abandoned us,"
one resident, Jaime Guerra, said. "This is not just a place filled with
narco-traffickers and guerrillas. This is a place filled with people who work
hard, who are trying to raise a family."

Rejecting most of the suggestions, Mayor Alzate and other town leaders are
pushing a milder answer: sending a caravan of cars from Puerto Asis and other
communities in Putumayo to Bogota, starting next Wednesday, to attract attention
to their plight.

"The message is for the government to intervene in the armed blockade," Mayor
Alzate said. "We just want them to talk to the FARC about their tactics, to tell
them that they are violating all human rights conventions.

In the meantime, large groups of soldiers, bandoleers across their chests and
toting machine guns, patrol the streets day and night. Store shelves, especially
in the bodegas in outlying districts, have run out of toilet paper, bottled
water, fruits and vegetables and milk. Chicken or beef, readily available in
this rural area, is often not for sale because merchants cannot refrigerate.

"Food here? Nothing," one merchant, Alba Quintero, said today as she stood next
to empty shelves. "As soon as the blockades came, it all ran out. To have a
decent something to eat is not possible. It's all finished."

The lack of electricity is, for some, the worst problem. Water has to be drawn
from wells because pumps are not operating, a factor believed responsible for an
increase in hepatitis and diarrhea. Many people say they feel most cut off at
night, as they sit in their darkened homes.

"There seems to be no way out, and we don't have the things we need," Alaida
Luis said. "There's nothing. No light. We can't even see the news. We don't even
know what's going on."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: COLOMBIA (95%);

CITY: BOGOTA, COLOMBIA (90%);   MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%);

COMPANY: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%);

ORGANIZATION: REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF COLOMBIA (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: COLOMBIA; PUERTO ASIS (COLOMBIA);   COLOMBIA (95%);   BOGOTA,
COLOMBIA (90%);   MEDELLIN, COLOMBIA (79%);

SUBJECT: CIVIL WAR AND GUERRILLA WARFARE; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; COCAINE AND
CRACK COCAINE  REBELLIONS & INSURGENCIES (90%); REVOLUTIONARY ARMED FORCES OF
COLOMBIA (90%); COCAINE (90%); ANTIBIOTICS (78%); PHYSICIANS & SURGEONS (78%);
CITY GOVERNMENT (77%); REGIONAL & LOCAL GOVERNMENTS (77%); FOOD CHARITIES (76%);

 WAR & CONFLICT (76%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (75%); CIVIL WAR (75%); SUBSTANCE
ABUSE (74%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (74%); RESTAURANTS (72%); ELECTRICITY TRANSMISSION
& DISTRIBUTION (72%); DRUG CROP ERADICATION (69%); RIOTS (63%);

PERSON: FORERO, JUAN; PASTRANA, ANDRES (PRES)  MANUEL ALZATE (62%);

LOAD-DATE: November 3, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: A woman who had just given birth in Puerto Asis -- the baby
died -- was losing blood and was transported by military plane to Bogota along
with refugees. The hospital in Puerto Asis, which is under rebel blockade, did
not have blood. A soldier guarded a street in the city, which most residents
have fled. (Photographs by Robert Stolarik)

Map of Colombia highlighting Puerto Asis: In blockaded Puerto Asis poor families
are starting to go hungry.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2066 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 November 5, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Fat People Say an Intolerant World Condemns Them on First Sight

BYLINE: By CAREY GOLDBERG

SECTION: Section 1;Page 36;Column 1;National Desk

LENGTH: 2834 words

DATELINE: NORWOOD, Mass.


Walk in Deidra Everett's shoes a moment: You know that you dress nicely; that
you are well-spoken; that you are clean and friendly and funny and smart. Yet
when you go for a job interview, your potential employer's eyes tend to sweep
your person and fill with horror.

You can joke about it -- "the look" -- but it has happened so many times that
you have almost given up. The unemployment rate in Massachusetts is under 3
percent. Your office administration skills are in desperate demand. But you, as
you are often reminded by stares and gibes from strangers, are fat. Fat.

"I'm an upbeat and confident person," said Ms. Everett, 33 years old, 5-foot-10
and about 440 pounds. "But you get kicked enough and even the strongest people
say, 'You know, I just don't want to be kicked anymore. I'll be strong in my own
little world.' "

Deidra Everett's personal trials fit into a picture that scholars and advocates
have been building for years. Over all, their work increasingly suggests that
weight may now draw more open and widespread discrimination than race or gender
or age. And opposition to such discrimination is mounting.

There have been lawsuits, "size acceptance" talks, and a current campaign by a
fat woman for bigger seat belts in cars, as well as the recent pushes in San
Francisco and elsewhere to pass ordinances banning discrimination based on a
person's size.

The prejudice turns up in almost all spheres of life, from the classroom to the
office to the streets.

Being fat "seems to have a consistent strong effect, more consistent than any
other form of discrimination I've seen, though part of that may be because
people feel freer to talk about it," said Mark Roehling, an assistant professor
of management at Western Michigan University, who last year published an
analysis of the extensive research on weight discrimination.

But the efforts to fight the discrimination appear tiny in a country where more
than half the population is now considered overweight, and nearly 18 percent
obese. Unlike other groups that face discrimination, fat people have not
organized extensively to demand their rights. Their most prominent advocacy
group, the National Association to Advance Fat Acceptance, has only about 5,000
members.

And the task before such advocates is daunting. Studies indicate that opinions
about fat people turn negative in childhood and stay negative: As early as
nursery school, they have found, children prefer drawings of peers in
wheelchairs, on crutches or with facial disfigurements to those of fat children.

"Fat hatred is being taught to our children," said Miriam Berg, president of the
Council on Size and Weight Discrimination, a national nonprofit group. "I know
from how children react to me: at age 1 1/2, babies love me and smile at me; you
come to 2 1/2 and already they look at me with fear; it begins that young,
unless they grow up in a household with people of different sizes."

It could be said that fat hatred begins even before birth: According to a
national survey, 16 percent of the general adult population would abort a child
if they knew it would be untreatably obese, said Dorothy C. Wertz, an ethicist
and sociologist at the University of Massachusetts Medical School who
specializes in genetics and who performed the study. By comparison, she said, 17
percent would abort if the child would be mildly retarded.

By elementary school, another study showed, children use words like "dirty,"
"lazy," "ugly," "stupid" and "sloppy" to describe the silhouette of a fat child.

By adolescence, fat teenagers like Emily Zimmer, an eighth grader who lives near
Seattle, may be used to the teasing, but moments of mortification still abound.
Recently, Emily said, she went to a fair and found that the restraints on the
roller coaster were designed for bodies smaller than hers, so she could not
ride.

"It was just so embarrassing," she said. "I was with my brother, and he thought
I was mad. And I said no, not mad; I was just dejected, depressed. What if
somebody I knew had seen that happen?"

Such humiliations do not occur daily, she said, but she has become paranoid,
trying to avoid them at all cost. Things do seem to be getting better as she
grows up: "People are respecting me more because they realize I'm not just fat;
I'm a human being," she said. "I have talent, I have a 4.0 grade point average,
and I play a musical instrument, for crying out loud. I hope that impresses them
a little bit."

But for all her brains, one thing still baffles her: "I don't understand what
people are trying to do by making fun of fat people," she said. "It's not going
to make them thin; if anything, it's going to make it worse."

Yet the teenage compulsion to be cruel to fat peers appears powerful. Consider a
volley of 1998 messages still posted on the USA-Talk chat Web site about a fat
eighth grader in Willowick, Ohio:

"He is the most disgusting slob I know," one posting reads. "Maybe it's the six
chins, or thunder thighs. Any way you look at him, you have to be disgusted. A
group of us are planning a little prank at the next pep-assembly. We're going to
jump on him, drag him into the locker room and strip him naked. We'll then shove
him out into the gym for all the school to see. Maybe then people will see what
a disgusting person he is."

Other writers eventually censured the person who posted the message, but first,
there was support like this: "Oh, and you failed to mention the fact that his
gold chain around his neck is buried under a mound of fat."

A National Education Association position paper says that "for fat students, the
school experience is one of ongoing prejudice, unnoticed discrimination, and
almost constant harassment."

"From nursery school through college," the paper continued, "fat students
experience ostracism, discouragement and sometimes violence."

Indeed, studies have shown that fat students are less likely to go to college
and that their parents are less likely to pay for it; once there, they face
still more hostile attitudes from their fellow students; a 1988 study found that
students would prefer to marry an embezzler, a cocaine user, a shoplifter or a
blind person rather than an obese person.

Trouble in the Workplace

The job market presents other challenges. Studies have found that fat white
women tend to earn significantly less than their thinner counterparts. One study
found that highly obese women earn 24 percent less while the moderately obese
earn about 6 percent less. Another survey found that among 81 employers, about
16 percent considered obesity "an absolute bar to employment" and 44 percent
considered it conditional medical grounds for passing over an applicant.

Dr. Roehling's review of 29 such studies found evidence for discrimination at
every stage of the work process: hiring, placement, promotion, discipline and
wages.

"I talk to managers here in Michigan, and they tell me flat out they wouldn't
hire people because they're fat," he said.

The elements of such discrimination may be complex. Dr. Roehling said that
employers described several concerns, from worries about the costs of their
health insurance premiums to worries that their customers will respond
negatively to a fat employee.

The interplay of cause and effect can also be complex: is a woman fat because
she is poor, for example, or poor because she is fat? In general, it does seem
that obesity causes poverty and other disadvantages rather than the
disadvantages that cause obesity, said Esther Rothblum, a psychology professor
at the University of Vermont who has done extensive research on the stigma
associated with weight.

The evidence, she said, shows clearly that being fat makes people "downwardly
mobile," because of obstacles they face to education, work and marriage.
(Studies indicate that being fat does not seem to hinder developing friendships
and good relations with colleagues, she noted.)

For the Deidra Everetts of the world, the outcome is simple: seeking to avoid
"the look," she tells potential employers about her weight in preliminary phone
interviews.

"They hear the word 'fat' and they're like, 'Gasp!' I can't believe you said
that!' " she said. "Eventually, they say, 'You know the job I was calling you
about? I'm really thinking it isn't something you'd be interested in.' "

It feels like discrimination, she said, but how can she prove it? Unless the
employer curses her and says, " 'You're not going to get hired until you lose
300 pounds,' " Ms. Everett said, "unless someone says that -- and even if they
do, it's legal. They can look me right in the eye and say, 'You're too fat!' "

Indeed they can -- anywhere except Michigan, Washington, D.C., Santa Cruz,
Calif., and San Francisco, which are the only places to have passed laws against
weight-based discrimination.

San Francisco, which passed its ordinance in May, did so at the instigation of
some members of what Larry Brinkin, the member of the city's Human Rights
Commission staff who handled the issue, calls the "fat liberation movement." Its
advocates had been pressing for years for such a law, he said, but really gained
traction after an incident in which a local health club put up a billboard
depicting a space alien and declaring, "When they come, they'll eat the fat ones
first."

Though the sign was clearly meant to be comical, advocates picketed the health
club, giving momentum to the push for a law. City hearings at which dozens of
fat people testified to the discrimination they had encountered, and the failure
of all their attempts to lose weight, added impetus, as well.

Some in San Francisco disapproved, saying that the law was frivolous and that
fat people could solve their problems simply by losing weight. The San Francisco
Chronicle editorialized against the law, saying that fat people would be
healthier if they lost weight, and that "it is true that genetics can be a
factor in obesity, but that is not always the case."

The law passed the city's Board of Supervisors unanimously, however, and now,
Mr. Brinkin said, the commission is working on implementing it, wrestling with
such issues as whether theaters should be asked to have a row of free-standing
seats without arms that can accommodate large people.

Though they lack such special laws to protect them in most places, fat people
are increasingly taking discriminators to court, experts say. They have no solid
estimates on the numbers of such cases but put them in the dozens each year
nationwide. About 150 people call the Council on Size and Weight Discrimination
with complaints each year, though not all will sue.

The case law on obesity discrimination has accumulated to the point that a book
about it came out this year, "Tipping the Scales of Justice: Fighting
Weight-Based Discrimination" (Prometheus Books), by Sondra Solovay, a lawyer in
Berkeley, Calif. It argues that "discrimination against fat people is the civil
rights hurdle of the new millennium."

Thus far, Ms. Solovay says, the outcomes of weight discrimination cases vary
from place to place, in large part because there is no federal law protecting
fat people.

Perhaps the trickiest question is whether obesity should be considered a
disability. Courts have ruled that the Americans With Disabilities Act provides
protection in some cases, particularly those concerning highly obese people, but
not in others, depending on the circumstances.

What is clear, Ms. Solovay said, is that using a disability claim has tended to
provide the best legal success. But "there are huge ideological objections" to
using such an argument, she added, because many fat people want to argue not
that they are disabled, but that they are perfectly able to do the same work as
thinner colleagues.

Little Help From the Law

Many of the daily battles some fat people face do not lend themselves to the
courtroom, however -- from plane seats that are too narrow to strangers who
spout cruel taunts to doctors who refuse to believe that many diets only
backfire. And then there are the insurers.

"The hardest thing to live with as a fat person is that you can't get health
insurance," said Ms. Berg of the Council on Size and Weight Discrimination.
"When people call me up and say, 'My H.M.O. kicked me out; what should I do?' I
have nothing to tell them. Nothing."

A person's weight does influence many health insurers, and a significantly
overweight applicant can be turned down, said Janet Trautwein, director of
federal policy for the National Association of Health Underwriters. "It's not an
appearance thing," she said. "It's just strictly a health status factor, and
it's used in combination with other factors like, 'Do you smoke, have high blood
pressure, high cholesterol or diabetes?' "

In some states, she said, insurers may charge higher premiums for overweight
members.

Elizabeth Fisher, a programmer in Baton Rouge, La., decided not to let one such
moment of daily difficulty go by. She was buying a new car, and found that the
one she wanted, a Honda Odyssey minivan, did not make a seat belt big enough for
her; nor would Honda offer an extender, as many other companies do.

This summer, Ms. Fisher petitioned the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration to require carmakers to offer the option of longer seat belts on
new vehicles and seat-belt extenders on existing ones. Her fight had such
resonance that it has gained national publicity.

"This issue is much larger than one fat woman who can't buckle her seat belt,"
said Ms. Fisher, who is expecting a decision soon from the agency. "There are
millions of people in the United States who weigh more than 215 pounds, the
current upper weight limit required for seat belts by N.H.T.S.A. And because fat
is more prevalent in certain racial and ethnic populations, more common in women
than in men, and more common in older people than young, denying fat people the
protection of being included within the limits of federal seat-belt regulations
disproportionately affects these disadvantaged groups."

Other efforts are under way outside the courtrooms. On the East Coast, Lisa G.
Berzins, director of women's behavioral medicine at Manchester Memorial Hospital
in Connecticut and a specialist in eating disorders, uses a special approach to
open schoolchildren's eyes. She appears before them dressed in a fat suit that
makes her appear to weigh 250 pounds, and talks about body image and the
pernicious influence of the media in creating unattainably thin ideals. Then she
leaves the stage and comes back as her real size 6, and talks with the children
about how their perceptions of her changed.

"When I come back and I'm thin they're really stunned and really pay attention
and are much more respectful," Dr. Berzins said. "It gets into a discussion
about how they view heavy people in general."

Dr. Berzins is interested in creating programs to teach that size and shape are
part of the diversity children should respect, but she has had trouble getting
financing. In any case, she said, such efforts are "microscopic" compared with
the large numbers of people who continue to see weight "as almost like a moral
issue -- it's like you're virtuous if you restrain yourself and you're sinful if
you give in."

In that sense, those who fight against fat discrimination acknowledge that one
of their toughest challenges is the internalized self-hatred of the fat people
themselves.

"It can be devastating to the self-esteem of a child to feel they are less
worthy, and there's something wrong with them because their body is large, and
to feel they're being held responsible for that fact," said Joanne Ikeda, a
nutritionist at the University of California at Berkeley who works with
overweight children. "It can lead to depression. It can end up with children
taking bizarre steps to try to control the way their body is turning out."

Even for those like Deidra Everett who have come to peace with the fact that
they cannot diet their way to thinness, the road remains hard.

A fat friend called her the other day, Ms. Everett said, and told her that she
had been sitting in a restaurant when a neighboring diner started cursing at her
for "eating all the food in this restaurant."

He was smoking a cigarette and threw it at her, and when she became upset, said,
"Oh, now the big fat expletive is going to cry!"

"I wanted to cry myself," Ms. Everett said.

Some people justify attacking fat people by saying it is their choice to be fat,
Ms. Everett said, "but who in the name of God would choose to live a life like
this?"

Previous articles in this series examined an extreme surgical treatment for
weight loss, new obesity research, exercise and weight, chronic dieters, the
diet business and the psychology of eating. Later articles will examine culture
and class relationships to fat and the obesity problems in developing countries.

The series will remain available online: www.nytimes. com/obesity


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (79%);

STATE: LOUISIANA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);
CALIFORNIA, USA (72%);

CITY: BATON ROUGE, LA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: NATIONAL ASSOCIATION FOR FEMALE EXECUTIVES (51%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (79%);   LOUISIANA, USA (79%); MASSACHUSETTS, USA
(79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%); CALIFORNIA, USA (72%);   BATON ROUGE, LA, USA (79%);



SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes. from NYTimes.   DISCRIMINATION (90%);

 INTERVIEWS (89%); CHILDREN (84%); EMPLOYMENT (74%); OBESITY (74%); EMPLOYMENT
INTERVIEWS (72%); UNEMPLOYMENT RATES (72%); LITIGATION (72%); TEACHING &
TEACHERS (70%); ORDINANCES (69%); SUITS & CLAIMS (67%); COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY
PROFESSORS (66%); CHILDHOOD OBESITY (65%); BUSINESS EDUCATION (61%); NONPROFIT
ORGANIZATIONS (60%); MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY EQUIPMENT (50%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW
(71%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (65%);

PERSON: DEIDRA EVERETT (70%); EMILY ZIMMER (60%);

LOAD-DATE: November 5, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

SERIES: THE FAT EPIDEMIC: Fighting the Stigma

CORRECTION-DATE: November 17, 2000, Friday

CORRECTION:

An article on Nov. 5 about discrimination against overweight people referred
incorrectly to Sondra Solovay, the author of "Tipping the Scales of Justice:
Fighting Weight-Based Discrimination." Although a law school graduate, she is
not a lawyer.




GRAPHIC: Photos: Elizabeth Fisher of Baton Rouge, La., petitioned the government
to require carmakers to offer longer seat belts or seat belt extenders. (Bill
Feig for The New York Times); Deidra Everett of Norwood, Mass., said she told
potential employers about her weight in preliminary phone interviews, a move
that often led to interviewers telling her that she would not be interested in
the job. (Rick Friedman for The New York Times)

TYPE: Series

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2072 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 7, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

Trial Reopens Pain of 1995 Bosnian Massacre

BYLINE: By MARLISE SIMONS

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1284 words

DATELINE: PARIS, Nov. 6


The Bosnian Serb general who is standing trial for Europe's worst mass killing
since World War II looked pale and diminished in the courtroom, all the more so
as he bent down, again and again, to rub the stump that was once his right leg.

At the United Nations war crimes tribunal in The Hague, Judge Almiro Rodrigues
of Portugal called for a break. He knew that the missing limb often caused the
general, Radislav Krstic, powerful phantom pains.

Pain, searing and immeasurable, has coursed through Courtroom I in recent months
as tribunal prosecutors seek their first conviction for genocide and the panel
searches for answers to questions about the killing of some 7,000 unarmed Muslim
men near Srebrenica, in eastern Bosnia, after the Bosnian Serbs captured the
town in July 1995.

The killings became a badge of international dishonor, for the victims were
officially under the protection of the United Nations when they were turned over
to the Serbs.

Almost all were shot, and buried in mass graves that have been slowly exhumed by
tribunal investigators.

General Krstic, 52, is the highest-ranking Serb so far to face the tribunal,
established in 1993. After faltering at first for lack of money and support, the
tribunal has now 34 men in custody and its trials are beginning to pry open some
of Bosnia's most horrendous secrets.

In one sense, the three-judge panel trying the general is examining the role of
a military commander. But the judges are also expected to define a much larger
issue: whether the "ethnic cleansing" campaign of the 1992-1995 Bosnian war
constituted genocide -- one of the charges against General Krstic.

For the prosecution, the trial is the culmination of five years of research,
with investigations including exhumation of more than 2,000 bodies and analysis
of military intelligence from half a dozen countries.

To date, 56 of more than 80 witnesses have been heard, their accounts providing
the most detailed reconstruction yet of the fate of the tens of thousands of
Muslims crammed into what the United Nations had proclaimed one of its six "safe
areas" in Bosnia.

Military analysts have given sober, minute accounts of the highly planned
Bosnian Serb takeover of Srebrenica. Survivors have told their stories; broken
men and women have cried on the witness stand and visibly moved everyone in the
room -- lawyers, guards, clerks and translators.

One Muslim woman, a witness whose name was not disclosed, ended her painful
testimony about her missing husband and two sons by asking the judge if she
could pose a question herself. It was about her son who was only 13 when Serbian
soldiers pulled him away from her side.

"I plead that you ask Mr. Krstic if there is any hope," she said to the judge,
choking, "at least for that child which they took alive from my hands. I dream
about him. He speaks to me. Does Mr. Krstic know if he is somewhere, alive?"

The accused just sat motionless, his head down.

Proceedings have now entered a new phase as General Krstic has taken the witness
stand in his own defense. The general, who has pleaded innocent to all charges
-- genocide, crimes against humanity and grave breaches of the Geneva
Conventions on the conduct of war -- has not contested that atrocities occurred,
for which the evidence is overwhelming.

His defense is that the 15,000-man Drina Corps, of which he was chief of staff
and deputy commander when it overran Srebrenica on July 11, 1995, was not
involved in the area after that date.

On July 12, he said, most of his troops were withdrawn and sent to take Zepa,
another United Nations "safe area" nearby. By then, General Krstic said, Gen.
Ratko Mladic, the Bosnian Serb army commander-in-chief and his aides had taken
control. They brought in their own units and established a parallel command, he
said.

Prosecutors had known for some time that the defense strategy would be to place
all responsibility on General Mladic, who has also been indicted on charges of
genocide, but who remains at large and is reportedly living in the Serbian
capital, Belgrade.

"The main staff managed the whole operation," General Krstic told the three
judges who act as both judge and jury. "General Mladic took over command of the
units. He was in charge of all the operations in the area."

In addition, General Krstic argued, it was impossible to refuse General Mladic's
orders to kill the Muslims. At one point, the prosecutor, Peter McClosky, asked
the defendant: "What should a general do who received those orders?"

General Krstic replied, "He should refuse the order."

"How difficult would it be to refuse that order from General Mladic?" the
prosecutor asked.

"The consequences would be very severe," the defendant answered.

The general, who lost half of his right leg to a mine in 1994, repeatedly
hoisted himself with some trouble from the witness chair to point out on a
large-scale map that he was at some distance from Srebrenica during the days of
the massacres.

"My conscience was quite clear," he said, explaining why, until his arrest in
1998, he had felt free to travel and to have contacts with United Nations
troops.

Prosecutors and defense attorneys, each flashing documents on the court's
desktop monitors, have clashed over exactly when General Krstic was promoted to
full commander of the Drina Corps and what orders he issued. It is a crucial
point because the mass killings of civilians took place mostly between July 11
and 17. General Krstic said that because he left for Zepa on July 12, he
remained in his deputy role and took effective command of the Drina Corps only
on July 20 or 21. But Mr. McClosky produced an order signed by the Bosnian Serb
leader, Radovan Karadzic, indicating that the general took command of the corps
on July 13.

The prosecutor had another incriminating document, a copy of a written order
from General Krstic, sending his men on search operations in the very area where
most of the killing occurred. It was dated July 13, 1995.

NATO peacekeepers in Bosnia have not detained at least 30 suspects indicted by
the tribunal, including Dr. Karadzic, who is believed to be still in hiding in
Bosnia. But the documents presented in court indicate that they have confiscated
enough papers to assemble a fairly exact picture of operations there during the
three and a half years of war, which killed an estimated 200,000 people and
drove some two million from their homes.

During his two weeks on the witness stand, General Krstic's confidence appeared
to crumble and his answers to the prosecutor grew vague and mumbling.

Last week, the prosecutor stunned General Krstic as he played a taped radio
intercept. He said the tape, provided by the Bosnian Muslim military, was made
on Aug. 2, after the mass executions had ended but Serbian forces were still
hunting down survivors.

A voice is heard saying: "Krstic here." A subordinate, a major, replies: "Oh
hello general, sir." The general's voice asks, "Are you working well down
there?"

The major replies that they have managed to "hook" more people, "some with guns
and some with mines."

"Kill each and every one of them," the voice said to be the general's says,
swearing. "Do not leave a single one alive."

From the witness stand, General Krstic said that the recording was "100 percent
rigged."

"I can't even recognize my own voice," he added. The prosecution, which earlier
in the trial had Bosnian Muslim military testify about their intercept methods,
told the court they would bring an expert in voice recognition. The tape has not
yet been entered in the court record.

The trial of General Krstic, the 12th at the tribunal, is expected go on until
March.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA (79%); PORTUGAL (73%);

CITY: THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS (92%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (91%); UNITED NATIONS (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: BOSNIA & HERZEGOVINA (96%); SERBIA & MONTENEGRO (94%); NETHERLANDS
(92%); EUROPE (92%); SERBIA (79%); PORTUGAL (73%);   THE HAGUE, NETHERLANDS
(92%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%);
GENOCIDE (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); WITNESSES (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS
(89%); TESTIMONY (89%); INVESTIGATIONS (89%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); WORLD WAR II (78%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); JUDGES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS
(78%); WAR CRIMES (78%); MEN (74%); ARMED FORCES (69%); RELIGION (69%); RANKINGS

 (66%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (65%);

LOAD-DATE: November 7, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Radislav Krstic, 52, a Bosnian Serb general, left, is on trial
in The Hague on genocide charges in connection with the killings of 7,000
unarmed Muslims in 1995. He is watched by a United Nations security guard. (Pool
photo)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2075 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 8, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

World Briefing

BYLINE: Compiled by Terence Neilan

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 918 words



EUROPE

FRANCE: MAD COW ALERT -- Reacting to growing concern about the spread of mad cow
disease, President Jacques Chirac, left, made a televised plea for the
government to issue an immediate ban on all livestock feed that contains animal
parts. France already has a ban on such feed for cows, as experts believe that
the disease is transmitted through contaminated feed. The wider ban would be a
way of making sure that feed intended for other animals is not accidentally fed
to cows. Prime Minister Lionel Jospin said health officials would study the
matter.   Suzanne Daley (NYT)


BRITAIN: UNDER-18 COMBATANTS -- Amnesty International urged the British Army to
stop sending recruits under 18 to serve in combat. The London-based rights group
said that in the year to March 1999 the British armed forces recruited 9,466
under-18's, more than a third of the total intake. Amnesty said Britain had a
policy of deploying such recruits in armed conflicts, adding that under the
United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, which Britain ratified in
1991, childhood ends at 18.   (Reuters)

GERMANY: CHURCH PAYOUTS -- The Roman Catholic Church will soon start making
compensation payments to forced laborers it employed under the Nazis, said the
head bishop, Karl Lehmann. The church will be giving each person about $2,200.
Estimates say the church used 10,000 forced laborers and that about 1,000 are
still alive. People have until Dec. 31, 2002, to make claims. The church
initiative is independent of the $4.4 billion foundation being set up by the
government and industry to compensate Nazi slaves and forced laborers.   Victor
Homola (NYT)

RUSSIA: KURSK ABANDONED -- The navy command called off the search for more
bodies aboard the sunken Kursk nuclear submarine, after divers determined that
further searches for bodies would be too dangerous. In all, Norwegian and
Russian divers recovered 12 bodies from the submarine, which sank off northern
Russia in August, killing its crew of 118 sailors.   Sabrina Tavernise (NYT)

MIDDLE EAST

CYPRUS: NEW TALKS -- A new round of talks on the future of the divided island
has opened in Geneva, with a special envoy of Secretary General Kofi Annan
meeting separately with the Greek Cypriot leader Glafcos Clerides and the
Turkish Cypriot leader Rauf Denktash. The envoy, Alvaro de Soto, will be joined
this week by Mr. Annan on his way to the Middle East. The United Nations has one
of the longest-running peacekeeping operations in Cyprus, which has been divided
along ethnic lines for more than a quarter of a century.   Barbara Crossette
(NYT)

THE AMERICAS

VENEZUELA: BROAD POWERS FOR CHAVEZ -- The National Assembly approved sweeping
powers for President Hugo Chavez that will allow him to pass legislation by
decree in areas from economic and financial affairs to government reform. Mr.
Chavez said he needed the decree authority for "the modernization of the
country's legal structures and streamlining public administration."   (Agence
France-Presse)

MEXICO: POLLS FAVOR FOX -- The party of President-elect Vicente Fox Quesada
appears likely to retain a key governor's office, polls show. A week before
elections this Sunday in the state of Jalisco, the candidate of Mr. Fox's
National Action Party, Francisco Ramirez, was leading by 10 percentage points
over the candidate of the Institutional Revolutionary Party, Jorge Arana, a poll
by the newspaper Reforma said. National Action holds only 7 of Mexico's 31
governorships, and the election will be a test of its political strength.   Tim
Weiner (NYT)

ASIA

INDIA: KIDNAP RULING VOIDED -- The Supreme Court overturned decisions by state
courts in the southern Indian states of Tamil Nadu and Karnataka to release 51
accused accomplices of the notorious outlaw Veerappan, who has held the movie
idol Rajkumar hostage for more than three months. Veerappan had made the freeing
of the 51 a condition for releasing Rajkumar. The high court, in its ruling,
said the states had panicked in capitulating to the criminal's demands.   Celia
W. Dugger (NYT)

CHINA: WEB CONTROLS FORMALIZED -- The government formalized its attempts to
control news on Web sites, publishing regulations requiring the sites to use
news from the state-run media, for example, and requiring new sites to get
approval. Most of the procedures have been in place for many months, and have
done little to curb the flow of news and information on the Chinese Internet,
which occurs primarily on bulletin boards and in chat rooms.   Elisabeth
Rosenthal (NYT)

AFRICA

TANZANIA: ELECTION VICTOR -- The governing party was formally declared the
winner of elections that were called a charade and boycotted by the opposition
on the fractious Zanzibar islands. The Zanzibar Electoral Commission said the
ruling Chama Cha Mapinduzi party had won the presidential and parliamentary
polls. It said Amani Karume polled 67 percent of the 370,095 valid votes cast
and was "the legitimate president." Thousands took to the streets to celebrate
moments after Mr. Karume was declared the winner.   (Reuters)

HORN OF AFRICA: U.N. SPECIAL ENVOY -- Legwaila Joseph Legwaila, Botswana's
ambassador to the United Nations, has been appointed Secretary General Kofi
Annan's special envoy for the Horn of Africa, where a peacekeeping force was
stationed after a war between Eritrea and Ethiopia ended last summer.   Barbara
Crossette (NYT)


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: CYPRUS (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (90%); GREECE (79%); TURKEY (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); NORWAY (79%);

STATE: GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (57%);

CITY: LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

COMPANY: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); UNITED
NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

ORGANIZATION: AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL  (57%); AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL (57%); UNITED
NATIONS  (55%); UNITED NATIONS (55%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CYPRUS (94%); RUSSIAN FEDERATION (93%); MIDDLE EAST (92%); UNITED
KINGDOM (92%); EUROPE (92%); FRANCE (90%); GREECE (79%); TURKEY (79%);
SWITZERLAND (79%); GERMANY (79%); NORWAY (79%);   GENEVA, SWITZERLAND (57%);
LONDON, ENGLAND (79%);

SUBJECT: NO INDEX TERMS FROM NYTIMES  BOVINE SPONGIFORM ENCEPHALOPATHY (91%);
LIVESTOCK FEED (90%); LIVESTOCK DISEASE (90%); CHRISTIANS & CHRISTIANITY (88%);
UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (87%); HEALTH DEPARTMENTS (78%); TALKS & MEETINGS
(78%); HEADS OF STATE & GOVERNMENT (78%); LIVESTOCK RESEARCH (78%); PRIME
MINISTERS (77%); ARMIES (76%); WAR & CONFLICT (75%); ARMED FORCES (74%);
MILITARY VESSELS (74%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (74%); NAVIES (74%);
CONFERENCES & CONVENTIONS (72%); CATHOLICS & CATHOLICISM (71%); APPROVALS (70%);

 PEACEKEEPING (69%); NAVAL VESSELS (68%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (67%); RELIGION
(66%); LEGISLATION (60%);   FORCED LABOR (89%);

PERSON: JACQUES CHIRAC (73%); HUGO CHAVEZ (58%);

LOAD-DATE: November 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2093 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 19, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Children's Books;
The Fugitives

BYLINE: By Theodore Rosengarten; Theodore Rosengarten is the author of "All
God's Dangers: The Life of Nate Shaw" and "Tombee: Portrait of a Cotton
Planter."

SECTION: Section 7; Page 62; Column 1; Book Review Desk

LENGTH: 1601 words



 BOUND FOR
 THE NORTH STAR
 True Stories
 of Fugitive Slaves.
 By Dennis
 Brindell Fradin.
 Illustrated. 206 pp.
 New York:
 Clarion Books. $20.
 (Ages 10 and up)

 IN THE HOLLOW
 OF YOUR HAND
 Slave Lullabies.
 Collected by
 Alice McGill.
 Illustrated by
 Michael Cummings.
 Unpaged. Boston:
 Houghton Mifflin
 Company. $18. (All ages)

A DECADE before the Confederates shelled Fort Sumter, the Fugitive Slave Act of
1850 split the nation into two warring sections. Citizens of the free states
were compelled by the new law to help catch runaways from the slave states.
Contrary to the American ideal of freedom, accused runaways detained in the
North were denied both jury trials and the right to testify before the federal
commissioners who were appointed to smooth their passage back to slavery.

In the short run the act accomplished what white Southerners wanted: slaves who
knew what awaited them were deterred from running, and more of those who had
fled earlier were returned to their owners. In the long run, which came swiftly,
the act brought disaster to the South. It turned popular sentiment in the North
from indifference to slavery to opposition to returning escapees. It generated a
wave of "personal liberty" laws to protect free blacks from slave catchers and
to impede state officials from enforcing federal law. It transformed runaways
into living symbols of injustice and messengers from a hellish realm that flew
the American flag and competed for the resources of the central government. It
made abolitionists out of common people who disdained organized abolitionism.

The Fugitive Slave Act cut across the lives of the 16 men and women who fled to
freedom and whose stories are told in Dennis Brindell Fradin's "Bound for the
North Star." In 12 compact, tension-filled chapters based on the runaways'
reminiscences, Fradin recounts their hairbreadth escapes from abuse and
privation. These people were exceptional among the thousands of
African-Americans who risked the torturous trek north because they were
successful. We know their names and their fates. At critical junctures, they
were rescued by sympathetic white people. They survived to write their memoirs.

But their success was invariably incomplete. All but two of Fradin's subjects
fled slavery after 1848, and the effect of the Fugitive Slave Act was to keep
them on the move and deny them security in exile until they reached Canada or
left the continent for England. The dream of going back to their homes in the
South and buying or liberating their loved ones was quashed by strict
antimanumission measures, including stepped-up patrols in the plantation
districts. Free from the daily indignities of slavery, the escapees were to
discover that life in the North and the far North was not a bed of roses.
Bermuda-born Mary Prince, who fled her masters while on a visit to England and,
Fradin says, wrote the first autobiography "by a British black woman,"
"disappeared" into history, which may be a euphemism for poverty and depression.
So did Henry Brown, known as Box, who, on instructions from God, had himself
shipped in a crate from Richmond to Philadelphia; and John Anderson, a fugitive
from Missouri, whose odyssey took him to Canada, to England and, against his
will, to Liberia.

The fugitive slave narrative is a unique American contribution to world
literature. The novelist Harriet Beecher Stowe modeled a character in "Uncle
Tom's Cabin" on Eliza Harris, whose story Fradin tells in detail. Margaret
Garner killed two of her children rather than return them to slavery; her story
inspired Toni Morrison's Pulitzer Prize-winning novel, "Beloved." Fradin, then,
is hardly going over new ground in retelling their tales. Yet his gifts for
concision, for suspenseful pacing and for pushing his story to the edge of
plausibility before drawing it back and letting the reader catch a breath make
the stories feel new even to someone well versed in the sources.

My quibble with Fradin is with his emphasis on the formal role of the
underground railroad in spiriting the runaways to freedom. The U.G.R.R., as he
calls it, as if it had tracks and cars like the L.I.R.R., operated from the
border states northward. Yes, courageous "stationmasters" like Levi and Katie
Coffin harbored thousands of fugitives and shepherded them from "station" to
"station." And Harriet Tubman was speaking in a well-known code when she
remarked that she "never lost a passenger." But the network of conductors and
safe havens did not function the same way in the cotton, rice and sugar kingdoms
of the Deep South, where the majority of slaves toiled.

Enslaved people ran away because slavery drove them crazy and threatened their
well-being. They generally did not run far, because the odds were so great
against them. When historians get around to telling it, the story of local
fugitives and the neighborhood networks that sheltered them will add an
illustrious chapter to the annals of the human drive for liberty.

"In the Hollow of Your Hand," a compilation of 13 lullabies sung by
African-Americans to their children at the end of the slavery period, cautions
us implicitly not to withhold admiration from people who did not run away but
stayed where they were to build families and culture. These "baby songs" were
collected by the professional storyteller Alice McGill in the farm hamlet of
Mary's Chapel, N.C., where she was born and reared. They were sung to her when
she was a child, and she sings them to us, accompanied by guitar, fiddle and
banjo, on a boldly arranged CD that is included with the book. Listening to her
sing as you read along in the text, you realize that these lullabies are love
songs.

Each selection is introduced by an informative note describing an occasion in
her family's routine that called for a particular song. "Lil' Girl Sittin' in de
Briar Bush" was sung to young Alice and her siblings by her father "if we cried
for Mama." It recalls how slave mothers kept their toddlers in a pen built with
branches from briar bushes while the women worked in the fields. A pair of hands
might be too valuable to spare for the unprofitable labor of putting a baby to
sleep, but "on their way to get water or to empty sacks of cotton," the mothers
stopped to release their pent-up love and console their babies with a song.

It is her father's voice that remains with McGill as the sweetest recollection
of childhood -- indicative, perhaps, not only of the strength of his "glorious
singing and storytelling voice" but of the stewardship black men exercised over
their families in the aftermath of slavery. "Pa" thought it was as unnatural to
ask him to change a diaper as it was to expect him to feed a baby, but he
nurtured the children with the musical expression of his tenderest feelings. "Go
to Sleepy," "Did-Dap Dudio," "Who Dat Tappin' "and possibly "Liddy Lay Low" were
passed down by McGill's father.

"Who Dat Tappin' "was one of his favorites. It recalls "the impending secret
visit" of a mother or a father to a child separated from its parents by the
rules of the plantation. An old woman assigned to caring for infants in a
makeshift nursery would announce the adult's arrival with the reassuring words,
"Who dat tappin' at de window? / Who dat knockin' at de door? / Mammy tappin' at
de window. / Pappy knockin' at de door."

The words to many lullabies, if babies could understand them, would bring
nightmares rather than sleep. A soothing voice and a playful melody can declaw
the beast that worries the singer and threatens the child. In "Watch and Pray,"
the "buggah" man is the master who is going to sell mama's children "to 'Bama,"
in the feared cotton country to the south, from which children sent from
Carolina never return. In "Great Big Dog," Mama and Papa shoo away the menace
with the power of their love. "Great big dog come stompin' down de road, /
Stepped so hard he knocked down de houses. / Go 'way, ol' dog, go 'way, ol' dog.
/ You shan't have my baby."

Did singers in this century know that big old dogs signified overseers in
plantation folklore? Or that the "lambies" borrowed from old English songs
("Poor little lambie, dry your eye") referred to stars in the night sky? It is
not necessary to analyze these lullabies to enjoy them. But it will excite some
readers and listeners to know that these latent meanings retain the potential to
deliver insights into the past.

"In the Hollow of Your Hand" is beautifully illustrated by the quilt artist
Michael Cummings. A "picture" made of pieces of cloth, buttons, lace and found
objects construes the dominant image of each song as a child might see it in her
mind's eye. Depth and perspective yield to a single layer of meaning, bright,
stark, crowded with associations. All the scary stuff is brought to the surface,
where the young reader can confront it with the help of the singer. The
juxtaposition of treasured old lullabies and new quilt "pictures" has produced a
book that will become a keepsake in many homes, including mine.

The cover illustration of "Bound for the North Star" is, coincidentally, a
square from the Underground Railroad Quilt, sewn by women in Oberlin, Ohio.
Footprints in the snow left by a runaway slave following the brightest star in
the sky indicate that someone has passed this spot heading north -- it is north
enough here for the ground to be covered with snow, but not north enough for
safety. Of course, the North Star could not be reached by walking, and peace of
mind for the fugitive proved just as elusive.


http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS454113 MAIL-ORDER HOUSES (58%); SIC5961 CATALOG & MAIL-ORDER
HOUSES (58%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); ENGLAND (86%);

COMPANY: CHILDREN'S BOOKS & TOYS INC (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (93%); ENGLAND (86%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   BOOK REVIEWS (91%); SLAVERY (90%);
CHILDREN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); BIOGRAPHICAL LITERATURE (89%);
CAUCASIAN AMERICANS (78%); CHILDREN'S LITERATURE (78%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%);

 US STATE GOVERNMENT (77%); LEGISLATION (76%); APPOINTMENTS (75%); TESTIMONY
(75%); WAR & CONFLICT (71%); PROFILES & BIOGRAPHIES (69%); JURY TRIALS (54%);

PERSON: DENNIS BRINDELL FRADIN (94%);

LOAD-DATE: November 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Drawings (Illustrations by Michael Cummings from "In the Hollow of Your
Hand.")

TYPE: Review

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2094 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 20, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Italy's Mistreatment of Gypsies

SECTION: Section A; Page 26; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 453 words


A year ago, a town in the Czech Republic made international news when it erected
a wall separating its Gypsies from the rest of its citizens. While Gypsies face
discrimination in most of Eastern and Central Europe, their lot is not that much
better in the west. One example is Italy, a country that has historically
embraced minorities. Yet the Italian government has institutionalized the
prejudices many Italians feel toward Gypsies. They face police abuse and hostile
speech from public officials, and many live in segregated housing or camps.

Unlike some other nations, Italy has not simply shut its doors to immigrant
Gypsies, or Roma, as they call themselves, from Eastern Europe. It has taken in
thousands of Gypsies who fled Yugoslavia, and provided them with basic shelter.
But immigrant Gypsies and even some of the tens of thousands born in Italy live
in squalid camps largely separated from the rest of Italy's people. Because many
Gypsies cannot get residence permits of more than a few months' duration, they
are unable to rent normal apartments.

Most camps have no real sanitation and many have no water or electricity. Some
are surrounded by walls or fences, and local officials occasionally restrict the
inhabitants' movements. While criminal behavior is frequent, Italian officials
are too quick to tar all Gypsies with that label. In the smaller and
unauthorized camps, police frequently raid Gypsy quarters at night and destroy
dwellings.

A new report by the European Roma Rights Center, a Budapest-based organization
financed in part by George Soros, details the conditions in many of these camps,
which have also been criticized by the United Nations. While the city of Rome is
building better housing for some Gypsies, the housing is still segregated. By
contrast, Italy has provided decent public housing integrated into Italian
cities for other immigrant groups.

The government furthers the idea of Gypsy separation by officially calling them
"nomads," although most stopped wandering generations ago. Many Italian cities
do not want to take in Gypsies.  Italian society is openly scornful of Gypsies
and studies show that even people who have never met them fear them as thieves.
These prejudices are reinforced by nationalist politicians, especially in the
north. In May, for example, the mayor of a town near Milan said he would pay
five million lira, about $2,2,00, to any farmer who would spray manure on an
area where Gypsies were camped.

Such prejudices keep Gypsies outside Italian society, a situation that
encourages petty crime and fuels more discrimination. The Italian government
needs to break this vicious circle by helping Gypsies become part of their new
country.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: ITALY (99%); EUROPE (93%); CZECH REPUBLIC (92%); CENTRAL EUROPE (90%);
EASTERN EUROPE (79%); HUNGARY (79%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (79%);

COMPANY: EUROPEAN ROMA RIGHTS CENTER (60%);

ORGANIZATION: EUROPEAN ROMA RIGHTS CENTER (60%);

GEOGRAPHIC: ITALY; ITALY;   ITALY (99%); EUROPE (93%); CZECH REPUBLIC (92%);
CENTRAL EUROPE (90%); EASTERN EUROPE (79%); HUNGARY (79%);   ROME, ITALY (79%);

SUBJECT: EDITORIALS; DISCRIMINATION; GYPSIES  EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
ROMANI PEOPLE (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%); IMMIGRATION (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT
(78%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (77%); HOUSING
ASSISTANCE (75%); MISDEMEANORS (71%); AGRICULTURAL WASTES (71%); PUBLIC HOUSING
(70%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS (64%);

PERSON: GEORGE SOROS (50%);

LOAD-DATE: November 20, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Editorial

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2105 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                November 26, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Yemen Links to bin Laden Gnaw at F.B.I. in Cole Inquiry

BYLINE: By JOHN F. BURNS

SECTION: Section 1; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 2060 words

DATELINE: SANA, Yemen, Nov. 25


When an American guided missile destroyer sailed into Aden six weeks ago, the
Pentagon, in effect, was taking a conscious risk. It was making use of the best
natural harbor on the Arabian peninsula, but depending for the ship's safety on
a government that relies on the uncertain loyalties of army officers, Muslim
clerics and tribal leaders with long-standing links to Islamic militant groups.

So far, F.B.I. officials investigating the suicide bombing of the Cole on Oct.
12, in which 17 American sailors were killed and 39 injured, say they have no
evidence -- at least none they have divulged -- that anybody at any official
level participated in the bombing, beyond the low-level suspects already
arrested by President Ali Abdullah Saleh's security police for issuing false
documents and helping with other logistics.

But from the beginning, F.B.I. agents have kept open an alternate possibility --
that the attack may have involved powerful figures inside Yemen with close ties
to Osama bin Laden, the F.B.I's most-wanted terrorist. Despite vigorous Yemeni
denials, the F.B.I. has wanted to know whether any part of the Cole bombing was
supported from within the government, or by powerful men with Islamic-militant
credentials who live under official protection.

From a base in Afghanistan, Mr. bin Laden, the 43-year-old son of a Yemeni-born
Saudi Arabian construction billionaire, reached out to Yemen for thousands of
recruits for his "holy war," first against Soviet troops in Afghanistan, later
against American troops in the Arabian Peninsula and the Persian Gulf. Along the
way, he met men now prominent in Sana, the capital, including a top army
commander, the country's most militant Muslim cleric and a prominent tribal
leader. Western intelligence reports say he gave them money to send Yemeni
recruits to Afghanistan, and back to Yemen when the Afghan struggle ended.

Those so-called Arab Afghans -- about 3,000 Yemenis, and perhaps twice as many
non-Yemeni Arabs, including Algerians, Egyptians, Iraqis, Jordanians, Somalis,
Sudanese and Syrians -- were then enlisted in terrorist attacks aimed at
Communists who had run a separate Yemeni state from Aden between 1967 and 1990,
when the two Yemens merged under President Saleh, the Sana ruler. That pact
reached its culmination in a 1994 civil war. Mr. Saleh finally defeated the
Communists, using large numbers of Arab Afghans formed into Islamic terrorist
units as his shock troops, then rewarding their service and buying their further
loyalty by bringing them into the "big tent" of his disparate government.

The F.B.I's concern over possible links to the Cole bombing appears to have
grown as the Yemeni investigation of the bombing has progressed. The Yemenis,
denying the F.B.I. direct access to interrogations and other key aspects of
their inquiry, say that their investigation is nearly complete, that it shows
that two bearded men who attacked the Cole in a fiberglass skiff were Saudi
Arabian-born Yemenis, like Mr. bin Laden, and that the most useful leads in the
case now lie outside Yemen.

In the last week, the F.B.I.'s concerns were heightened by the government's
decision to open a trial, probably in January, of half a dozen key suspects,
mostly Arab Afghans who had low-level government jobs. American officials say an
early trial, based on evidence the Yemenis say links the bombers to Mr. bin
Laden's network but not to anybody at senior levels in Yemen, could obscure more
than it reveals.

The American officials draw parallels with the Saudi investigation into the 1996
truck-bombing of the Khobar Towers military barracks outside Dhahran, which
killed 19 American servicemen. Saudi officials prevented the F.B.I. from
questioning any suspects and eventually held a trial, executing the alleged
conspirators without giving the Americans any access. But the Khobar Towers
analogy, and the mere suggestion that prominent Yemenis may have connived in the
Cole bombing, have enraged the Yemenis.

This week, Prime Minister Abdul Karim al-Iryani, a Yale-educated biogeneticist,
called an American reporter and denied any suggestion of a coverup. Throughout
his tenure, Dr. al-Iryani has been caught in a political crossfire resulting
from his government's desire for improved relations with the United States -- as
evidenced by the agreement on Navy ships refueling in Yemen -- and its desire
not to provoke Yemenis who are militantly anti-American.

Over the fierce resistance of Yemeni secret police, the prime minister has been
negotiating with the American ambassador, Barbara K. Bodine, for better F.B.I.
access to the Yemeni probe, including the right to have F.B.I. agents watch
Yemeni interrogations through a one-way mirror or a live television relay. Until
now, all the F.B.I. has seen of the interrogations has been edited transcripts.

In the telephone call, Dr. al-Iryani reiterated that "it is nonsense, absolute
nonsense" to suggest that some of Mr. bin Laden's old allies in Sana could have
played a part in the bombing of the Cole. Referring to the Arab Afghans who
settled into Yemen's remote mountains and deserts in the early 1990's as
jihadis, or holy warriors, he said they had been contained since joining the
government.

"Yes, these jihadis have helped us during the secessionist war, and yes, we
decided that they must be absorbed into the government system afterwards and not
let loose to cause trouble," he said. But that did not translate into high-level
Yemeni connivance in the Cole bombing, the prime minister added. "On the
contrary, nobody who planned this attack could conceivably have consulted with
high officials, for the simple reason that they would have known that anyone who
did would have been arrested immediately," he said.

What anybody makes of all this depends, in part, on the assessment of Mr. Saleh,
one of the Arab world's longest-surviving leaders, and his policy of reaching
out to Islamic militants, rather than jailing and executing them, as has
happened in Egypt, Jordan and other Arab states. Although the policy raises
debate elsewhere in the Arab world, it is at least to some extent an outgrowth
of Mr. Saleh's own turbulent political past and the Yemeni elite's history of
assassination and betrayal.

Now 59, Mr. Saleh, then an obscure army officer, became president after an
officers' coup in which one Yemeni president, Ibrahim al-Hamdi, was shot dead in
1977, and a second coup eight months later in which Mr. al-Hamdi's successor,
Ahmad al-Ghashmi, a close ally of Mr. Saleh, was killed by an agent of the Aden
Communists with a suitcase bomb.

That Mr. Saleh is still president 22 years later, despite assassination
attempts, his aides suggest, is partly because he reached out to potential
enemies, rewarding any who stepped into his "big tent" with government
protection and salaries.

But the corollary is that Mr. Saleh has made allies, or at least beneficiaries,
of men with lurid pasts, especially the Arab Afghans. Those alliances paid off
for him when Islamic militant groups allied with his forces and entered Aden on
June 21, 1994, finally reuniting Yemen after centuries of division, while
killing at least 10,000 civilians in the process, according to Western human
rights reports. Years later, the result has been to make the capital a hive of
political, ideological and religious contradictions that were bound to intrigue
American officials.

One of the most powerful expressions of this complex situation was that by the
time Mr. Saleh negotiated the agreement allowing American warships to refuel in
Aden, two of the most powerful people in the capital, after Mr. Saleh himself,
were one-time allies of Mr. bin Laden.

American intelligence reports say both those men traveled to Afghanistan in the
1980's to meet Mr. bin Laden, and assisted in recruiting militants from across
the Muslim world for the Afghan struggle. One of them is Mr. Saleh's half
brother, Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar, a high-ranking army general who is said to have
presidential ambitions himself. Some rivals attribute to General Ahmar, a burly
man in his early 50's, an unsavory record, including financing militant Islamic
groups.

Before the 1994 war, some Yemeni officials and Western intelligence reports say,
the general was in charge of $20 million supplied by Mr. bin Laden to help
settle Arab Afghan fighters in Yemen. Later, as Mr. Saleh's military commander
in southern Yemen, he oversaw the deployment of the Islamic groups in the
climactic battle for the city. More recently, according to some Yemeni reports,
he may have been unsettled by Mr. Saleh's decision to appoint as head of his
presidential guard -- and heir presumptive -- his son Ahmed Ali Abdullah Saleh,
an army officer in his mid-30's.

Yemeni officials say the general retains strong links to his past involvement
with the Arab Afghan network in Yemen, through his marriage to a sister of a
prominent tribal leader, Tariq Nasr al-Fadhli, one of the leading Afghan war
veterans living on a government stipend in Sana. Son of one of the most powerful
sultans in southern Yemen during the British colonial era, Mr. Fadhli, in his
mid-40's, is said by Yemeni and American officials to have met Mr. bin Laden in
Saudi exile in the 1980's and to have fought under him in Afghanistan. Now, he
is a member of the presidential council, a largely symbolic advisory body to Mr.
Saleh.

Later, he returned to Yemen as leader of one of the most active Islamic
terrorist groups. The F.B.I. files say he was the point man in botched December
1992 bombings of two Aden hotels housing more than 100 American troops en route
to Somalia.

Those bombings -- also directed by Mr. bin Laden, the F.B.I. contends -- failed
to kill any Americans only because a detonator went off prematurely, disabling a
huge truck bomb. The man said to have driven the truck, and to have lost a hand
when the detonator exploded, Jamal al-Nahdi, is said by American officials to be
a businessman in Sana.

Another prominent figure with long-standing ties to Islamic groups is a
militantly anti-American cleric, Abdel Meguid al-Zindani. In his late 60's, Mr.
al-Zindani heads a Sana theological school, the University of Faith, a
beneficiary of government financial aid, where for years thousands of students
from across northern Africa and the Middle East have been immersed in the
militant Salafi form of Islam that has inspired many militant Islamic
organizations, including the Armed Islamic Group in Algeria that stands accused
of brutal massacres of Algerian villagers.

What any of those men think of the attack on the Cole is not known. From the day
of the bombing, the Saleh government has contrived to deny Western reporters
free access, watching carefully where they go and whom they see. The only senior
government officials authorized to speak about the Cole bombing have been Mr.
Saleh and Dr. al-Iryani. Dr. al-Iryani, asked about General Mohsen and Mr.
al-Fadhli, said both men had permanently severed their ties with the Arab Afghan
network.

Meanwhile, the questions posed by the Cole bombing have carried American
officials back to calculations made before the warship-refueling program began.
Then, officials like Ms. Bodine, the American ambassador, had to explain to the
Pentagon why it made sense to bring warships into a country that the State
Department itself had described as "a safe haven for terrorist groups," or to
trust a government that has espoused some sharply anti-American policies -- for
example, supporting Saddam Hussein in his 1990 invasion of Kuwait.

The argument that prevailed in Washington was that the Saleh government was
changing, and that it had taken important steps to curb militant Islamic groups
still based in the remote parts of the country. That is Dr. al-Iryani's
contention, and it has strong support from Americans here, who say that Mr.
Saleh would like to tame the Arab Afghans once and for all.

Yet even Americans who pushed hardest for the refueling agreement now question
whether the only assistance the Cole bombers had from Yemenis came from a
handful of lower-level officials. "It was much more complicated than that, and
required a lot of help from inside the country," a senior American official
said. "As for who gave that help, that's like trying to sort out the tentacles
of an octopus."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: YEMEN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); GULF STATES (94%);

 EGYPT (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); JORDAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); SYRIA (79%);

STATE: INDIAN OCEAN (79%);

COMPANY: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION

 (94%);

ORGANIZATION: FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION  (94%); FEDERAL BUREAU OF
INVESTIGATION (94%);

GEOGRAPHIC: YEMEN (98%); UNITED STATES (94%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); GULF STATES
(94%); EGYPT (79%); SAUDI ARABIA (79%); JORDAN (79%); IRAQ (79%); SYRIA (79%);
   INDIAN OCEAN (79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   MILITARY VESSELS (90%); SPECIAL
INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); TERRORISM (90%); BOMBINGS
(90%); NAVAL VESSELS (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (90%); ARMIES (90%); INVESTIGATIONS
(90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%);
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (89%); WAR & CONFLICT (89%); TERRORIST ATTACKS (76%);
AL-QAEDA (76%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (76%); SUICIDE BOMBINGS (71%); WEALTHY
PEOPLE (64%);

PERSON: OSAMA BIN LADEN (90%);

LOAD-DATE: November 26, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photos: U.S. reports say Gen. Ali Mohsen al-Ahmar met Osama bin Laden
and helped him recruit militants. Abdel Meguid al-Zindani, an anti-American
cleric, teaches a form of Islam that has inspired militant organizations. Tariq
Nasr al-Fadhli is said to have fought under Mr. bin Laden.; President Ali
Abdullah Saleh's security police have arrested low-level suspects for issuing
false documents and other aid to the Cole bombers. (Photographs by Khaled
al-Hammadi for The New York Times)

Map of Yemen highlights Sana: The Cole's safety in Yemen hinged on uncertain
loyalties in Sana.

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2107 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 29, 2000, Wednesday, Late Edition - Final

New Jersey Argues That the U.S. Wrote the Book on Race Profiling

BYLINE: By DAVID KOCIENIEWSKI

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 1; Metropolitan Desk

LENGTH: 1304 words

DATELINE: TRENTON, Nov. 28


Weaving its way through the 91,000 pages of documents on racial profiling
released by New Jersey officials is a largely overlooked thread in the national
debate on race and crime -- although states like New Jersey have been the most
egregious offenders, the textbook on singling out minority drivers was written
by the federal government.

New Jersey officials contend that the reason racial profiling is a national
problem is that it was initiated, and in many ways encouraged, by the federal
government's war on drugs. In 1986, the Drug Enforcement Administration's
Operation Pipeline enlisted police departments across the country to search for
narcotics traffickers on major highways and told officers, to cite one example,
that Latinos and West Indians dominated the drug trade and therefore warranted
extra scrutiny.

Since then, the D.E.A. and the Department of Transportation have financed and
taught an array of drug interdiction programs that emphasize the ethnic and
racial characteristics of narcotics organizations and teach the police ways to
single out cars and drivers who are smuggling.

Among the characteristics officers in Operation Pipeline have been trained to
look for: people with dreadlocks and cars with two Latino males traveling
together.

Federal officials contend that they have never taught profiling and that police
departments that use racially discriminatory tactics are misapplying the
D.E.A.'s intelligence reports. Federal officials have taken several steps in
recent years intended to measure the problem, most notably President Clinton's
1999 executive order that any police force that receives federal money for drug
interdiction must keep track of the race of anyone stopped, searched or arrested
by officers.

But even the national American Civil Liberties Union, a persistent critic of
state policies on racial profiling, said much of the blame for the policy fell
on the Drug Enforcement Administration.

And in May 1998, as the Department of Justice was investigating whether the New
Jersey State Police needed a federal monitor to oversee its efforts to deter
profiling, Anthony J. Senneca, agent in charge of the D.E.A.'s Newark office,
wrote to state police officials to praise the troopers' methods and
effectiveness on the turnpike.

The letter singled out the exemplary work of five troopers, including John
Hogan, who one month earlier was involved in the April 1998 shootings of three
unarmed minority men on the New Jersey Turnpike, an incident that propelled
racial profiling onto the nation's political agenda.

David Harris, a University of Toledo law professor who has written extensively
about racial profiling, said that the Drug Enforcement Administration had
conveyed similar mixed messages across the country and that results of the
Operation Pipeline training had led to discrimination in states as diverse as
Illinois, Maryland, Michigan, New Jersey, New Mexico and Texas.

In response to that criticism, the Department of Justice's civil rights division
reviewed D.E.A. procedures, including the Operation Pipeline training, in 1997,
according to Kara Peterman, a department spokeswoman. She declined to
characterize the findings. But two other federal officials said the Justice
Department had concluded that the program was sound and that the Drug
Enforcement Administration did not encourage or teach profiling.

Civil rights advocates say the Justice Department's response stemmed from a
reluctance to criticize an agency it oversees. But New Jersey's attorney
general, John J. Farmer Jr., offers a more empathetic interpretation.

"In a lot of ways, the Justice Department in Washington has been going through
what we in New Jersey went through," Mr. Farmer said today. "The troopers in the
field were given a mixed message. On one hand, we were training them not to take
race into account. On the other hand, all the intelligence featured race and
ethnicity prominently. So what is your average road trooper to make of all
this?"

Few in law enforcement foresaw such an outcome in 1986, when Operation Pipeline
began as a way to use municipal police departments as an aggressive force in the
national crusade against drugs. The program, which has been used to train more
than 25,000 officers in 48 states, offered the police access to Drug Enforcement
Administration intelligence reports, which included detailed descriptions of
ethnic drug gangs and the cartels.

As early as 1987, however, those D.E.A. updates had been transformed into
questionable tactics in New Jersey. One 1987 state police training memo listed
the following as identifiers of possible drug couriers: Colombian males,
Hispanic males, a Hispanic male and a black male together, or a Hispanic male
and female posing as a couple.

Officially, the state police were on record as stating that racial profiling was
illegal and prohibited. But in a 1999 memo, Deputy Attorney General Debra L.
Stone said her investigation of the force found that in the patrol cars and on
the state's highways, "racial profiling exists as part of the culture."

"There's no written policy on it," she said, "but you are taught that if you see
'Johnnies' in a 'good car,' they don't belong and should be stopped."

Mr. Harris, who wrote the A.C.L.U. report titled "Driving While Black," said a
similar pattern of official denials and de facto profiling cropped up in many
states where Operation Pipeline was embraced by local commanders.

"The D.E.A. has been the great evangelizer for racial profiling on the
highways," he said. "They had used the technique in airports to nab drug
couriers and thought this held great promise on the highways. So they taught it
to local departments, and because the D.E.A. agents weren't the ones actually
pulling over the cars, they've never been really held accountable for it."

Drug Enforcement Administration officials emphatically dispute the notion that
they taught or encouraged unequal enforcement of the law.

Michael Chapman, a D.E.A. spokesman, said today that the agency trained officers
not to consider race when deciding whether to pull over a car and to use it as
only one of many factors when considering whether to search a vehicle.

"We teach them that profiling is illegal and it is also bad investigative
technique," Mr. Chapman said.

Nonetheless, much of the Drug Enforcement Administration's emphasis on the race
and ethnicity of drug traffickers endures. During the last five years, the
D.E.A. has stopped distributing training videos in which all the drug suspects
have Spanish surnames. But just last year, the agency's Newark office released
the "Heroin Trends" report, which noted:

"Predominant wholesale traffickers are Colombian, followed by Dominicans,
Chinese, West African/Nigerian, Pakistani, Hispanic and Indian. Midlevels are
dominated by Dominicans, Colombians, Puerto Ricans, African-Americans and
Nigerians."

Meanwhile, federal agencies like the Department of Transportation have also
sponsored drug interdiction programs that make similar observations. And a 1998
report by Gen. Barry R. McCaffrey, director of the White House Office of
National Drug Control Policy, stunned New Jersey officials because it gave
detailed breakdowns of the ethnic and racial backgrounds of sellers, traffickers
and users alike.

Hugh B. Price, president and chief executive of the National Urban League, said
today that he hoped that the public attention focused on New Jersey's racial
profiling would induce the federal government to address the causes of racial
profiling as well as the symptoms, even if part of the blame lay within the
Justice Department itself.

"These are federal civil rights that are at risk and are undermined, and we want
the federal government to put force on this issue," Mr. Price said.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (96%); TEXAS, USA (79%); NEW MEXICO, USA (79%); ILLINOIS,
USA (79%); MICHIGAN, USA (79%);

CITY: TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%);

COMPANY: DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION; TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (US);
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  (59%); AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION  (56%); US
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (56%);

ORGANIZATION: DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION; TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (US);
AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION  (59%); AMERICAN
CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION (59%); US DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION  (56%); US
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%); CARIBBEAN ISLANDS (79%);   NEW JERSEY, USA
(96%); TEXAS, USA (79%); NEW MEXICO, USA (79%); ILLINOIS, USA (79%); MICHIGAN,
USA (79%);   TRENTON, NJ, USA (79%); NEWARK, NJ, USA (79%);

SUBJECT: POLICE; DRUG ABUSE AND TRAFFIC; HISPANIC-AMERICANS; DISCRIMINATION;
BLACKS; FEDERAL AID (US); SEARCH AND SEIZURE; POLICE BRUTALITY AND MISCONDUCT
RACIAL PROFILING (93%); RACE & RACISM (92%); CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES CRIME (91%);
SPECIAL INVESTIGATIVE FORCES (90%); POLICE MISCONDUCT (90%); NARCOTICS
ENFORCEMENT (90%); DRUG INTERDICTION (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (90%); POLICE FORCES
(90%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (90%); DRUG TRAFFICKING (90%); LAW ENFORCEMENT
(90%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (89%); TOLL ROADS & TURNPIKES (89%); DISCRIMINATION
(89%); POLITICAL DEBATES (78%); AFRICAN AMERICANS (78%); MISCONDUCT (77%);
HISPANIC AMERICANS (77%); EXECUTIVE ORDERS (75%); SMUGGLING (75%); DRUG POLICY
(75%); SEARCH & SEIZURE (75%); ETHNICITY (73%); INTELLIGENCE SERVICES (73%); MEN

 (71%); INVESTIGATIONS (70%); SUBSTANCE ABUSE (70%); US PRESIDENTS (69%);
COLLEGE & UNIVERSITY PROFESSORS (68%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS (68%);

PERSON: KOCIENIEWSKI, DAVID  BILL CLINTON (54%);

LOAD-DATE: November 29, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2109 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               November 30, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

Fund for Wartime Slaves Set Up in Japan

BYLINE: By STEPHANIE STROM

SECTION: Section A; Page 16; Column 4; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 766 words

DATELINE: TOKYO, Nov. 29


A potentially far-reaching settlement was reached here today in a court case
brought on behalf of nearly 1,000 Chinese who were forced to work in Japan in
World War II.

The largest general contractor in Japan, the Kajima Corporation, agreed to
establish a fund with 500 million yen, or $4.6 million, to compensate wartime
laborers at its Hanaoka copper mine and their survivors. The Chinese Red Cross
will administer the fund.

The agreement could set a precedent for dozens of similar cases here and in the
United States, where Chinese, Koreans, Filipinos and Americans forced to work on
behalf of the Japanese war effort are seeking compensation from corporations
like Mitsubishi and Mitsui.

"This settlement is extremely significant, because companies similarly accused
are likely to set up similar funds to deal with wartime compensation issues,"
said Yoshitaka Takagi, head of the Association of Lawyers for Coordinating
Action Seeking Postwar Compensation.

Hanaoka gained a place in Japanese history when laborers among the 986 Chinese
taken there in 1944 rebelled against harsh conditions. Four Japanese guards and
one Chinese worker died in an uprising on June 30, 1945, an action that Japanese
troops crushed. But a total of 418 Chinese died at Hanaoka at the hands of
guards before the revolt or as a result of torture afterward.

The settlement today, although small by United States standards, is probably the
largest in Japan, where laws often limit the compensation in legal battles. The
accord amounts to $4,600 for each Chinese worker at Hanaoka.

Mr. Takagi noted that this was the first time in Japan that compensation had
been awarded for a violation of international law, specifically a 1907 Hague
Convention dealing with prisoners' rights in wartime. It is also the first time
that a Japanese company has agreed to compensate Chinese forced laborers. At
least three other cases seeking pay for forced labor in the war have been
settled, all involving Koreans.

Some 50,000 Chinese were forcibly taken to Japan in the war, and an estimated 10
million worked as forced laborers in Japanese companies in Manchuria in Japan's
14-year occupation. Up to 10 percent of them died, according to Chinese lawyers
and historians.

Japan has long struggled to come to terms with its wartime history, and
compensation of the hundreds of thousands of non-Japanese whose lives were
devastated by imperialist expansion has been a particularly thorny issue.

Japanese companies contend that they were merely following the dictates and
policies of the Japanese government and military at the time and could not be
held responsible.

Today, Mr. Takagi endorsed that view. "Forced labor was possible only with the
involvement of the government and the military," he said. "And hopefully the
kind of settlement we have today will bring renewed energy to the pursuit of the
government's responsibility."

A representative of the Foreign Ministry, Yasuhisa Kawamura, said the government
officially expressed its "apologies and remorse" for events in the war, in 1995.
He said he could not comment on the new accord, because the ministry did not
know all the details.

A spokesman for Mitsubishi declined to comment, and Mitsui sought to distinguish
itself from Kajima and other defendants. Both companies have been sued by
Chinese forced to work for them.

"Kajima made its own decision, but these cases are different, each one, and have
different histories," said Kazuo Wakami, a spokesman for Mitsui.

Kajima was careful to note that the settlement absolved it of any legal
responsibility for the tragedies at Hanaoka, and its statement tiptoed around
the issues.

"Since it was a time of war, the environment in which these people were placed
was very severe, and we gave utmost consideration with sincerity," the company
said. "However, there were unfortunate side effects. For example, many people
died of illness."

The company apologized to victims in 1989. But the 11 plaintiffs demanded
compensation, suing in 1995. A district court threw out the case, citing the
statute of limitations. But the appellate court urged Kajima to reach the accord
announced today.

The plaintiffs had originally opposed a fund, concerned that Kajima could
portray it as charity rather than compensation for misdeeds.

In 1999, NKK paid a Korean worker for abuse suffered while working in a military
factory. This year, Fujikoshi reached a settlement in the case of eight Koreans
who worked in a machinery factory. Neither NKK nor Fujikoshi apologized for
their wartime activities, however.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: 1812 (TSE) (72%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS541330 ENGINEERING SERVICES (72%); NAICS237990 OTHER HEAVY &
CIVIL ENGINEERING CONSTRUCTION (72%); NAICS237310 HIGHWAY, STREET & BRIDGE
CONSTRUCTION (72%); NAICS236220 COMMERCIAL & INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING CONSTRUCTION

 (72%); SIC8711 ENGINEERING SERVICES (72%); SIC1629 HEAVY CONSTRUCTION NEC
(72%); SIC1622 BRIDGE, TUNNEL, & ELEVATED HIGHWAY CONSTRUCTION (72%); SIC1611
HIGHWAY & STREET CONSTRUCTION, EXCEPT ELEVATED HIGHWAYS (72%); SIC1542 GENERAL
CONTRACTORS - NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS, OTHER THAN INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS &
WAREHOUSES (72%);

COUNTRY: JAPAN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (79%);

STATE: NORTHEAST CHINA (79%);

CITY: TOKYO, JAPAN (73%);

COMPANY: KAJIMA CORP; MITSUI & CO; MITSUBISHI CORP  KAJIMA CORP (72%);

ORGANIZATION: KAJIMA CORP; MITSUI & CO; MITSUBISHI CORP

GEOGRAPHIC: JAPAN; CHINA;   JAPAN (96%); UNITED STATES (93%); CHINA (79%);
NORTHEAST CHINA (79%);   TOKYO, JAPAN (73%);

SUBJECT: WORLD WAR II (1939-45); SLAVERY; MINES AND MINING; COPPER, BRASS AND
BRONZE; SUITS AND LITIGATION  WORLD WAR II (90%); SETTLEMENT & COMPROMISE (90%);

 WAR & CONFLICT (90%); LAWYERS (78%); LITIGATION (78%); SLAVERY (78%); HISTORY
(78%); SUITS & CLAIMS (78%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (78%); COPPER MINING (76%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (71%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (70%); TORTURE (70%); PRISONS (67%); ARMED FORCES (66%); PUBLIC
POLICY (64%);   FORCED LABOR (89%);   CORRECTIONS (78%); LAW OF WAR (77%);

PERSON: STROM, STEPHANIE  YOSHITAKA TAKAGI (62%);

LOAD-DATE: November 30, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Kazue Nakazawa, widow of Li Kejin, one of the 11 plaintiffs in
the suit against the Kajima Corporation, at court yesterday in Tokyo. (Agence
France-Presse)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2124 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 December 8, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. and Russia Ask Harsh Sanctions on Afghanistan

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 3; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 1136 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 7


The United States and Russia asked the Security Council today to toughen and
broaden sanctions against the Taliban government of Afghanistan, measures that
would cut the country off from most contact with the world.

The common ground taken by the Russians and Americans in demonizing the Taliban
follows their taking exactly opposite sides in the catastrophic civil war that
followed the Soviet invasion of 1979.

A coalition of holy warriors, supplied by the United States, eventually drove
Russian troops out. But a decade later, in a surprising reversal, the Russians
are arming these very warriors because they are fighting Moscow's new enemy, the
Taliban.

The agreement by the Russians and Americans on sanctions is also rare. They both
are concerned about the Taliban's influence across Central Asia and beyond,
concluding that the Islamic movement supports Muslim militancy and international
terrorism. Both Moscow and Washington discount fears that the new sanctions
could harden the Taliban's position and ruin prospects of a negotiated
settlement of the Afghan civil war.

Sergey Lavrov, the Russian ambassador, told reporters today that the new
measures would leave "ample room" for peace talks to continue, a point also made
by American officials.

"The problem is that the Taliban never delivered on a single promise, be this to
start the dialogue, be this to stop fighting, be this to treat women and girls
properly, or any other demand from the Security Council to stop the support for
terrorism," Mr. Lavrov said.

Russians accuse the Taliban of involvement in the war in Chechnya. The United
States is focused on the sanctuary in Afghanistan of the Saudi-born financier of
militancy, Osama bin Laden, who is wanted in the United States on charges of
being behind the bombings of two American embassies in Africa in 1998.

Reaction from the Taliban was swift. In Afghanistan, a minister of the Islamic
movement called Mr. bin Laden "a guest and the upholder of the Afghan holy war"
and said the Taliban could not be forced to hand him over.

In New York, the Taliban's representative, who may be forced to leave the United
States under the new sanctions, said the proposed measures had more to do with
Russian policy in Central Asia than the situation in Afghanistan. He predicted
that the country would close ranks against outsiders and become more defiant.

Under the Russian-American resolution, which is almost certain to pass in the
next week or two, the Council would demand the closing of all Taliban diplomatic
offices around the world and those of Afghanistan's national airline, Ariana.
All flights to or from landlocked Afghanistan, except for relief missions and
religious pilgrimages, would be banned.

A comprehensive arms embargo would be imposed on the Taliban, but not on the
opposition army of former American-backed mujahedeen struggling to keep a
foothold in about 5 percent of the country. To curb the production of heroin in
Afghanistan, the world's biggest opium grower, the sale of a chemical used in
the making of heroin, acetic anhydride, would be banned.

Current sanctions restrict some flights of the Afghan airline and block off any
Taliban financial assets abroad.

The Russian-American resolution demands not only the surrender of Mr. bin Laden,
whose financial assets would be frozen worldwide, but also the closing of all
training camps for Islamic militants. Sanctions would not end until all
conditions were met.

Russian and American diplomats, seeking Beijing's support, have told the Chinese
that these camps also send fighters to Muslim areas of China. India accuses the
Taliban of involvement in the war in Kashmir.

At the insistence of France, which is wary of imposing any more open-ended
sanctions, like those on Iraq, the new measures would have to be reviewed after
a year.

Abdul Hakeem Mujahid, the representative in New York of the Taliban, who have
been denied the United Nations seat still held by the mujahedeen opposition,
said that the actions would increase sympathy for the Taliban across the Islamic
world.

"The U.S. and U.N. are claiming championship of human rights all over the world,
and at the same time they are killing our people with hunger," he said. "Now
they want to prolong the war. They encourage the opposition to fight against the
central government."

"Iran and Russia will benefit most from the sanctions," he said. "The Russian
federation does want instability in Afghanistan. The Russians want to bring
military forces into the region, and put the economic burden of supporting the
army on the Central Asians while controlling those countries. Iran wants
pipelines from Central Asia to go through Iran, not Afghanistan, the shortest
way."

"This will only increase the resentment of the people of Afghanistan," he said.
"We had nothing against the United States. We fought together against Russians.
Ironically, today the U.S. is working alongside Russia against the people of
Afghanistan."

The Taliban generally get little support from Islamic world, compared with the
chorus of defense that has arisen in recent months for the Palestinians. But
today neighboring Pakistan, the Taliban's main arms supplier, also condemned the
proposed sanctions.

Shamshad Ahmad, Pakistan's United Nations representative and a former foreign
secretary, said the sanctions would "scuttle" efforts by a representative of
Secretary General Kofi Annan to start negotiations between the Taliban and their
armed enemies after two decades of civil war.

"We believe that any new sanctions will further isolate and insulate the
Taliban, with whom the world has been seeking to engage constructively, so that
their policies can be influenced and moderated," Mr. Ahmad told reporters today.
He said the measures would "only aggravate the situation, in terms of disrupting
all channels of communication between the international community and the
Taliban."

He added that coming on top of a severe drought in Afghanistan -- one that the
United Nations estimates could put upward of a million people at risk of
starvation -- the harsher sanctions could drive more people out of the country
as refugees. Tens of thousands of Afghans have fled hunger and fighting in
recent months.

An American official said today that the United States would be talking to
Pakistan about getting it to cooperate with the new sanctions, a crucial factor
in determining whether the measures will have any effect. In Islamabad,
government officials say that they will support sanctions only if they are
applied to both sides in the Afghan civil war.

"As a matter of principle," Mr. Ahmad said, sanctions are always unjust, unfair
and counterproductive because they never, never achieve the desired objectives.
They only hurt innocent people."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES (99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%);
CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%); AFRICA (79%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (79%);

CITY: MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (88%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED NATIONS
SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS  (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL  (84%); UNITED
NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL (84%); UNITED NATIONS  (59%); UNITED NATIONS (59%);

GEOGRAPHIC: AFGHANISTAN; RUSSIA;   RUSSIAN FEDERATION (99%); UNITED STATES
(99%); AFGHANISTAN (94%); CENTRAL ASIA (92%); ASIA (92%); AFRICA (79%);   NEW
YORK, USA (79%);   MOSCOW, RUSSIAN FEDERATION (88%);

SUBJECT: EMBARGOES AND ECONOMIC SANCTIONS; UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS; TERRORISM  EMBARGOES & SANCTIONS (91%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
(90%); TALIBAN (90%); MUSLIMS & ISLAM (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); TERRORISM
(89%); TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (89%); RELIGION (89%); UNITED NATIONS
INSTITUTIONS (89%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (88%); TALKS & MEETINGS (78%);
AL-QAEDA (78%); DIPLOMATIC SERVICES (78%); ARMIES (77%); CIVIL WAR (76%);
BOMBINGS (73%); ARMS EMBARGOES (73%); ARMED FORCES (71%); PEACE PROCESS (71%);
RELIGIOUS PILGRIMAGES (71%); ILLEGAL WEAPONS (63%); AIRLINES (60%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA  OSAMA BIN LADEN (89%);

LOAD-DATE: December 8, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Drought is ravaging Afghanistan. In Taliban-controlled country
west of Kandhar, a family of 38 belonging to the Kakar tribe has been traveling
for about two months, without money or medical help. Opponents of tougher
sanctions say they would worsen the suffering and create more refugees. (Dominic
Chavez/The Boston Globe)


                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2130 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 10, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

THE LAW;
White Plains Officer Files Suit, Claiming Years of Ethnic Ridicule

BYLINE: By COREY KILGANNON

SECTION: Section 14WC; Page 5; Column 1; Westchester Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1051 words


KASMIR VASNAIK says he was a rookie officer in the White Plains Police
Department when a sergeant singled him out at morning roll call.

The sergeant asked about his ethnic background, which happens to be Indian and
Iranian. Then he asked the rookie, "Do you think in English?"

Officer Vasnaik heard laughter from his fellow rookies, mostly white men. The
incident, he contends, essentially made it open season to ridicule him for his
minority status.

Officer Vasnaik argues that the season has lasted his entire 13 years on the
White Plains force. The roll call story, which he told last week in the White
Plains office of his lawyer, Jonathan Lovett, is also recounted in a
discrimination lawsuit Officer Vasnaik has filed in Federal District Court in
White Plains.

Officer Vasnaik, 39, is suing six members of the White Plains Police Department
-- five superiors and one officer. He claims they denied him promotions because
of his ethnic background. Also, he contends, they used ethnic slurs against him
and condoned similar actions by other officers.

The lawsuit describes Officer Vasnaik enduring daily abuse from co-workers.

"Towel head, dot head, camel jockey, 'How's your 7-11?' " Mr. Lovett said.
"These were all names used to constantly degrade him. The message was, 'You
don't belong.' "

Mr. Lovett contends that Officer Vasnaik's case is but one example of systemic
racism on the White Plains force, and in other departments throughout the
county.

The lawsuit claims that the White Plains department is "permeated with racial
bigotry," and that discriminatory attitudes among white officers are "encouraged
and condoned." It says only three superior officers are minorities -- two black
and one Hispanic.

The suit names six members of the department, all of whom are white, including
John Dolce, the public safety commissioner; Daniel Hickey, the deputy
commissioner; and James Bradley, the police chief. The suit also names a
lieutenant, a captain and an officer.

When contacted last week, several of them said their lawyer, Brian S. Sokoloff,
had advised them not to comment on the suit. Mr. Sokoloff called the charges
groundless.

"We deny the allegations," he said. "The case has no merit at all. You have to
have evidence, not just allegations."

As more minority residents settle in Westchester, racial discrimination on local
police forces has been a concern of minority groups.

In 1977, a discrimination complaint filed by 10 black officers against the White
Plains department with the State Division of Human Rights was rejected by the
agency's commissioner. And in 1981, a discrimination lawsuit brought by the
federal government forced the White Plains Police to increase the number of
women and minority officers to reflect the percentage in the rest of the city's
work force.

Ralph Purdy, president of the State Federation of Police, a union based in
Briarcliff Manor, defended the leadership of the police force in White Plains,
saying it has brought in more minority and female officers over the last decade
and worked to improve attitudes toward them on the force.

"I've known Dolce and Hickey for years and they're credible, stand-up guys," he
said. "I've never known them to allow something like this," he added, referring
to Officer Vasnaik's complaints.

Officer Vasnaik's claims have generated interest, in part because of his
ethnicity. He said that when he became an officer in 1987, he was the first
Indian to join a Westchester police force. Many of his co-workers, he claims,
did not know what to make of his ethnic background, his darker skin and his
slightly lilting voice.

Once, he came to work to find a totem pole placed in the station house to poke
fun at his "Indian" status. For years, he said, he tolerated the treatment.

"When you have a sergeant or lieutenant saying these things to you, what do you
say back?" he said. "If I responded, it would've been twice as bad. And what
happens when you need backup on the street?

"I figured sooner or later, they'll get over it, and it will be fine," he said.
"If I did not depend on them for my job, I would have stopped it immediately.

Officer Vasnaik, who grew up in Washington and in Briarcliff Manor, spent
several years in a Jesuit boarding school in India.

As a police officer with the Air Force in the early 1980's, he said, he
encountered no racial bias or taunting. Nor did he experience such problems in
the Westchester County Police Academy in Valhalla.

In 1987 he was set to become a New York City officer when the White Plains
department offered him a job. He was soon put in Car 18, a rookie patrol around
the city's housing projects. He was never given another assignment, he said,
even as younger officers have risen through the ranks to more desirable
assignments, including street crime, motorcycle and vice squad units.

Officer Vasnaik complained several times to superiors, once to an internal
affairs officer and another time at a meeting of ranking officers. But he
decided to make a formal complaint this year after failing to win promotion to
sergeant, despite high scores on the exam.

In February, he was interviewed for the sergeant job, he said, and was asked if
he would "hold a grudge" against other officers if he was promoted -- a test,
Officer Vasnaik claims, to see if he would retaliate for years of racial taunts
from other officers.

"I said, 'I would follow the rules,' " Officer Vasnaik said, "and he said, 'You
know what I mean.' "

Officer Vasnaik hired Mr. Lovett after hearing that he had represented other
police officers in discrimination cases, and recently won a sizable settlement
for an Indian police officer in the Rye Police Department.

Officer Vasnaik, who teaches defensive tactics at the police academy, said he
still has some friends in the department. "There are a lot of good officers in
the department," he said. "I still have friends who say, 'Kas, don't let it get
to you.' "

But, he added, these days he is often ostracized. Many officers and commanders
do not speak to him. Conversations stop when he enters the room.

"I've put up with it a long time, but there comes a time when you have to put a
stop to it," he said. "I like being a police officer, but I'm not deserving of
what they're putting me through."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%);

STATE: NEW YORK, USA (93%);

COMPANY: WHITE PLAINS POLICE DEPARTMENT (94%); WESTCHESTER COUNTY POLICE ACADEMY

 (58%);

ORGANIZATION: WHITE PLAINS POLICE DEPARTMENT (94%); WESTCHESTER COUNTY POLICE
ACADEMY (58%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (93%);   NEW YORK, USA (93%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   SUITS & CLAIMS (93%); ETHNICITY
(90%); ETHNIC GROUPS (90%); LITIGATION (90%); POLICE FORCES (90%); RACE & RACISM

 (89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); CITY GOVERNMENT (78%); RACIAL DISCRIMINATION IN
EMPLOYMENT (77%); LAWYERS (74%); LABOR FORCE (71%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (89%);



PERSON: JONATHAN LOVETT (57%);

LOAD-DATE: December 10, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Officer Kasmir Vasnaik, who is of Indian and Iranian descent, is
suing the White Plains Police Department, claiming discrimination. (George M.
Gutierrez for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2134 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 11, 2000, Monday, Late Edition - Final

Clinton Weighing Options On World Criminal Court

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 5; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 457 words


President Clinton has not ruled out signing a treaty creating the world's first
International Criminal Court, the leader of the American negotiating team says.

"No decision has been made at present whether or not to sign the treaty," David
Scheffer, an expert on ethnic conflict who has served as the State Department's
first ambassador at large for war crimes issues, said in an interview on Friday.

The administration has until Dec. 31 to sign without ratifying the treaty
establishing the court, the first tribunal created solely for the purpose of
trying individuals for genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity. After
Jan. 1, a country must ratify in order to sign.

As Mr. Scheffer ends nearly five years of work on the court, the likelihood that
the United States will be a full partner in it is bleak, especially if there is
a Republican administration. Republicans in Congress have vowed that they will
never approve the treaty, which the Pentagon also dislikes.

Further, House and Senate leaders have drawn up legislation to prevent any
American court or government official from cooperating with the tribunal. "If it
were adopted," Mr. Scheffer said of that bill, "I think it would have an
injurious effect on U.S. national interests and it would set back the cause of
international justice unnecessarily. It intrudes upon the president's
constitutional powers to conduct foreign policy."

The Pentagon and Congressional Republicans have not budged from their insistence
on an absolute guarantee that no American in service abroad, military or
civilian, will ever be tried. Other nations reject that demand as inimical to
the integrity of the court.

In the last two weeks, Mr. Scheffer has led the American team through the final
session in which the Clinton administration will take part. The next round of
talks, in February, will fall to a new administration.

It has been a frustrating time for Mr. Scheffer, who has won praise for his work
in helping to shape a court acceptable to most other nations, even while it was
rejected in Washington, where President Clinton chose not to campaign for it.
The American team has played a major part in drawing up the definitions of
crimes and the court's rules of procedure.

"Through five years of intensive negotiation on this treaty and on the
supplemental documents," Mr. Scheffer said, "the United States has labored
constantly to achieve two major objectives. One: establish a truly legitimate
engine for international justice on a permanent basis, and two: ensure that
there are appropriate safeguards in the treaty and the treaty regime so that
American personnel are not subject to any unwarranted investigation or
prosecution by the court."



http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (93%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (93%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; TREATIES  TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (92%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); LAW COURTS & TRIBUNALS

 (90%); US PRESIDENTS (90%); POLITICAL PARTIES (90%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (90%);

 INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (89%); INTERVIEWS (79%); TALKS
& MEETINGS (79%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (79%); GENOCIDE (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS
(78%); STATE DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (78%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (78%);
TRIAL & PROCEDURE (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); INVESTIGATIONS (78%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (77%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (76%); FOREIGN POLICY (76%);
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (73%); LEGISLATION (73%); CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS (73%);



PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); CROSSETTE, BARBARA; SCHEFFER, DAVID  BILL CLINTON
(91%);

LOAD-DATE: December 11, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2137 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

For Clinton's Last Act

BYLINE: By Robert S. McNamara and Benjamin B. Ferencz;  Robert S. McNamara
served as defense secretary under Presidents John Kennedy and Lyndon Johnson.
Benjamin B. Ferencz was a prosecutor at the Nuremburg war crimes trials.

SECTION: Section A; Page 33; Column 1; Editorial Desk

LENGTH: 565 words


With the stroke of a pen, President Bill Clinton has a last chance to safeguard
humankind from genocide, crimes against humanity and the ravages of war itself.
He must simply sign a treaty, finalized in Rome in 1998, to create a permanent
International Criminal Court.

If he signs the treaty before Dec. 31, the government does not have to ratify
the treaty at this time. After that date, any country has to both ratify and
sign the treaty to become a member. This is no small consideration, since
Senator Jesse Helms, chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, has promised
to block any attempt to ratify the pact.

Why does Mr. Helms object to a permanent international criminal court? He and
others are worried that an unchecked international court could infringe on basic
American constitutional rights for fair trials. For instance, they want ironclad
guarantees that the court would never try American soldiers. Pentagon officials
fear that Americans might be falsely accused of crimes, thus inhibiting our
humanitarian military missions.

These worries are unfounded. The tribunal of 18 world jurists only have
jurisdiction to charge those who commit specific crimes that outrage the
international community as a whole. Under the treaty, no one can be convicted
without clear proof of intent to commit the illegal act. The prosecutor is
subject to judicial and budgetary controls that promise both competence and
objectivity.

And most important, each nation retains the primary right to try its own
nationals in a fair trial under its own laws. There are some crimes, like sexual
slavery and forced pregnancy, that the treaty covers, which are not specifically
enunciated in our own country's military laws and manuals. Robinson O. Everett,
a former chief judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Armed Forces,
has recommended incorporating these crimes into our federal laws, assuring that
any American military personnel charged with a crime could be tried by American
courts.

Genocide is universally condemned but there is no universal court competent to
try all perpetrators. The Nuremberg war crimes trials, inspired by the United
States and affirmed by the United Nations, implied that "never again" would
crimes against humanity be allowed to go unpunished.

Today, we have special courts created by the United Nations Security Council
that have very limited and retroactive jurisdiction. For instance, war crimes
tribunals are now coping with past atrocities in Yugoslavia and Rwanda. But
these tribunals are hardly adequate to deter international crimes wherever they
occur.

The president must help deter future atrocities. At the United Nations and
elsewhere, he and Secretary of State Madeleine Albright have repeatedly called
for an international court to carry forward the lessons of Nuremberg. Now, he
has a chance to take action. More than 100 nations, including all our NATO
allies, have already signed. Some 25 nations have ratified; others are well on
the way. The court cannot begin trying cases until at least 60 nations have
ratified.

If President Clinton fails to sign the treaty, he will weaken our credibility
and moral standing in the world. We will look like a bully who wants to be above
the law. If he signs, however, he will reaffirm America's inspiring role as
leader of the free world in its search for peace and justice.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (79%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (57%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (84%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT
(84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (96%); RWANDA (79%);   ROME, ITALY (57%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; TREATIES  TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (94%); HUMAN
RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (91%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (90%); EDITORIALS & OPINIONS (90%);
INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (90%); WAR & CONFLICT
(90%); ARMED FORCES (89%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (89%); GENOCIDE (89%);
JURISDICTION (89%); US PRESIDENTS (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); MILITARY
& VETERANS LAW (89%); WAR CRIMES (89%); UNITED NATIONS INSTITUTIONS (89%);
ETHNIC CONFLICTS (89%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (78%); CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS (78%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); FOREIGN RELATIONS (77%); APPELLATE DECISIONS (77%);
MILITARY COURTS (77%); FOREIGN POLICY (75%); US FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (73%);
SLAVERY (73%); APPEALS COURTS (72%); JUDGES (72%);

PERSON: CLINTON, BILL (PRES); MCNAMARA, ROBERT S; FERENCZ, BENJAMIN B  BILL
CLINTON (90%);

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

TYPE: Op-Ed

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2140 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 12, 2000, Tuesday, Late Edition - Final

U.S. Envoy Tackles Objections To Tribunal on War Crimes

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section A; Page 6; Column 3; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 437 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS, Dec. 11


When the Clinton administration's special envoy on war crimes wrapped up his
last negotiating session on the formation of an International Criminal Court
last week, he left on the table a new proposal intended to assuage fears of
Americans opposed to the court.

The envoy, David Scheffer, has been negotiating for five years to bridge a
widening gap between Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright, a supporter of
the court, and the Pentagon and Congressional Republican leaders who either
reject the court on principle or want guarantees that no American will ever be
tried by it.

The court would be the first permanent international tribunal set up to try
individuals on charges of genocide, war crimes and other crimes against
humanity. Opponents fear that with United States power a large target anywhere,
Americans on duty abroad would be vulnerable to frivolous or ideologically
motivated prosecutions.

Mr. Scheffer said in an interview he believed that the safeguards against such
cases already existed, because the court reserves the rights of nations to
conduct their own trials of military personnel accused of crimes abroad, as the
United States does in courts-martial. But for good measure, the American
delegation proposed on Thursday two tests of admissibility before a citizen of
any country could be surrendered for trial.

Mr. Scheffer called his proposal, to be discussed further in February, an
"insurance policy" that should calm fears by doubling a procedure already in the
treaty, which was adopted in June 1998 in Rome. More than 100 nations have
signed and 25 have ratified the treaty. The United States has done neither, as
President Clinton deferred to the Pentagon and Congress.

"This proposal is important," Mr. Scheffer said of the American plan, "because
it will provide assurances to contributors to international peace and security,
contributors to international peacekeeping operations, that if any of their
personnel are charged with crimes, that the court will undertake a rigorous
review of the admissibility of the case before any individual is in fact
surrendered to the court. We're simply saying at this moment of surrender, check
that admissibility box again."

Many nations support the idea, which would not require a revision of the court's
statute.

Mr. Scheffer, who has worked on codifying the crimes to be dealt with by the
court, as well as in drawing up ad hoc criminal tribunals for the Balkans,
Rwanda, Cambodia and Sierra Leone, said he hoped that a new administration in
Washington would preserve his office when his term ends next month.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (79%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (92%);

CITY: ROME, ITALY (50%);

COMPANY: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

ORGANIZATION: INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT  (91%);

 INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (91%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (99%); RWANDA (79%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA
(92%);   ROME, ITALY (50%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; TREATIES  WAR CRIMES (93%); INTERNATIONAL LAW

 (91%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (90%);
MILITARY & VETERANS LAW (90%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (89%); PEACEKEEPING (78%);
MILITARY OFFENSES (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%); MILITARY COURTS (78%); CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (77%); INTERVIEWS (76%); GENOCIDE
(73%); TREATIES & AGREEMENTS (69%); ARMED FORCES (67%);

PERSON: CROSSETTE, BARBARA; CLINTON, BILL (PRES); SCHEFFER, DAVID; ALBRIGHT,
MADELEINE K (SEC)  BILL CLINTON (78%);

LOAD-DATE: December 12, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2144 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

               December 14, 2000, Thursday, Late Edition - Final

2 Countries Accused In Rwanda Inquiry

BYLINE: AP

SECTION: Section A; Page 9; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 199 words

DATELINE: ARUSHA, Tanzania, Dec. 13


The chief prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda today
accused two African countries of protecting suspects indicted for Rwanda's 1994
mass killings.

Carla Del Ponte, the prosecutor, said the countries, which she did not identify,
"make arrests very difficult."

The tribunal was set up in November 1994 to try people alleged to have been
involved in the government-orchestrated massacres that claimed the lives of more
than 500,000 people, mostly Tutsi and politically moderate Hutu.

Those involved in the violence fled the country when rebels led by Paul Kagame
-- now Rwanda's president -- seized power and restored order. Genocide suspects
have since been found in other African countries and Europe.

Many of the Hutu extremists who participated in the killings are believed to be
involved in the war in Rwanda's neighbor, Congo.

Ms. Del Ponte also revealed for the first time that the tribunal is
investigating members of Mr. Kagame's Rwandan Patriotic Army for possible crimes
against humanity committed during the fight to stop the massacres. She said she
had discussed the cases with Mr. Kagame during a recent visit to Kigali,
Rwanda's capital.

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF (79%);

CITY: KIGALI, RWANDA (79%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (84%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL TRIBUNAL FOR RWANDA (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: RWANDA;   RWANDA (94%); AFRICA (93%); TANZANIA, UNITED REPUBLIC OF
(79%);   KIGALI, RWANDA (79%);

SUBJECT: WAR CRIMES AND CRIMINALS; BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION; CIVIL WAR AND
GUERRILLA WARFARE  GENOCIDE (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (90%); INVESTIGATIONS

 (90%); INDICTMENTS (90%); WAR CRIMES (90%); WAR & CONFLICT (90%); INTERNATIONAL
COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS (78%);

 CIVIL WAR (74%);

PERSON: DEL PONTE, CARLA  PAUL KAGAME (87%); CARLA DEL PONTE (68%);

LOAD-DATE: December 14, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2148 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 15, 2000, Friday, Late Edition - Final

Agency Finds Many Health Plans Should Cover Contraceptive Costs

BYLINE: By TAMAR LEWIN

SECTION: Section A; Page 1; Column 4; National Desk

LENGTH: 1189 words


Millions of American women who have been paying for birth-control pills out of
their own pockets may have a claim for insurance coverage, under a ruling by the
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission that employers are discriminating
against women when they offer insurance coverage for preventive health care like
drugs to lower blood pressure, but exclude prescription contraceptives.

Employers "may not discriminate in their health insurance plan by denying
benefits for prescription contraceptives when they provide benefits for
comparable drugs and devices," the commission said in its ruling on Wednesday.

While the decision applies only to the two women whose complaints the commission
considered, it provides guidance to employers on the commission's views on the
broad reach of the Federal Pregnancy Discrimination Act, which forbids workplace
discrimination against women because of pregnancy, childbirth or related
conditions.

"It's not binding on the courts, but they will give it deference," said Ellen
Vargyas, a lawyer at the commission. "The hope is that employers and employees
will look at this and want to comply with the law, that this will be their
guide."

The issue of gender equity in prescription drug coverage became a rallying point
for women's rights groups two years ago, after many of the same employers that
exclude women's contraception from their health plans moved quickly to provide
coverage for Viagra, which is used to combat impotence.

"What's so important is that the E.E.O.C. has reaffirmed that women's health
care has to be treated as seriously, and comprehensively, as men's health care,"
said Marcia Greenberger, co-president of the National Women's Law Center in
Washington. "It's a matter of fairness and equity and women's rights."

Last year, the law center and 60 other advocacy groups petitioned the commission
for a policy statement making it clear that the Pregnancy Discrimination Act and
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act prevent employers from excluding
contraceptives from their health plans if similar health services are covered.

This week's ruling produced much of what the petition sought -- but only on the
two complaints before the commission, both brought by nurses represented by
Planned Parenthood. Neither the nurses nor their employers are identified.

Planned Parenthood filed a similar suit last summer on behalf of Jennifer
Erickson, a pharmacist at the Bartell Drug Company in Seattle. In that case,
which is pending, Bartell, a family-owned drugstore chain in Washington, said
that it had tried to provide the health benefits its employees consider most
valuable, and believed its health plan was nondiscriminatory. Bartell's also
pointed out that it does not cover Viagra, infertility treatment or cosmetic
surgery.

But under the commission's decision, those would not be the relevant
comparisons. Rather, the commission would have the courts look to other kinds of
preventive care covered in employers' health plans.

Because the health plans available to the two nurses covered such preventive
health care as vaccinations, drugs to lower blood pressure or cholesterol,
weight-loss drugs, routine physical exams and lab tests, the decision said, they
could not exclude contraception.

"Contraception is a means to prevent, and to control the timing of, the medical
condition of pregnancy," the decision said. "In evaluating whether respondents
have provided equal insurance coverage for prescription contraceptives,
therefore, the Commission looks to respondents' coverage of other prescription
drugs and devices, or other types of services, that are used to prevent the
occurrence of other medical conditions."

The employers defended their exclusion of contraceptives on the ground that they
covered only "abnormal" health conditions. But the commission rejected that
argument, pointing out that, for example, surgical sterilization is covered by
the plan, as is Viagra, even without a finding of impotence.

The commission also rejected the employers' cost arguments, since Congress did
not make cost a defense to claims under the Pregnancy Discrimination Act.

"You can buy years and years of contraceptives for the cost of one unintended
pregnancy," Ms. Vargyas said.

A 1998 study by the Alan Guttmacher Institute found that the average cost of
adding contraceptive coverage to a health-care plan would be $1.43 per employee
per month. But smaller studies by insurers, however, have found the costs to be
substantially higher.

While indemnity insurance plans generally cover most prescription drugs, a 1994
study by the Guttmacher Institute found that only about half of all large group
insurance plans cover any of the five contraceptive methods available to women
by prescription: oral contraceptive pills, the intrauterine device, Depo
Provera, Norplant and the diaphragm. And only about a third cover the pill,
which costs about a dollar a day. Even among health maintenance organizations,
which offer the most comprehensive coverage, only 39 percent cover all five
methods, and 7 percent do not cover the pill.

Until the commission's finding, it had mostly been left to the legislatures to
take up the issue of gender equity in prescription drug coverage.

Since 1998, several states have passed laws requiring most insurance plans that
pay for prescription drugs to include contraceptive coverage: California,
Connecticut, Delaware, Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Nevada, New
Hampshire, North Carolina, Rhode Island and Vermont. In Congress, the Equity in
Prescription Insurance and Contraceptive Coverage Act has been stalled since
1997.

Most likely, though, the issue of contraceptive coverage will continue to be
fought out in the courts. The Catholic Church and many religious groups that
oppose birth control have objected vehemently to any attempt to force
contraceptive coverage.

Business and insurance groups, too, oppose the addition of mandated benefits:
"Any mandate, no matter how well-intentioned, raises the costs for everyone and
increases the number of people without insurance," said Richard Coorsh, a
spokesman for the Health Insurance Association of American.

Kate Sullivan, director of health-care policy at the United States Chamber of
Commerce, said, "Every time the government does inject itself into the debate,
it makes the coverage more expensive for the group as a whole and leaves less
opportunity for employers to make discretionary decisions for their work force
group."

And even the two cases that prompted the employment commission's ruling are
still in the administrative process. If, for some reason, the employers refuse
to comply, the two nurses could still take their claims to court.

Roger Evans, the litigation director of Planned Parenthood, said yesterday that
the ruling was a major victory for women -- and threatened that unless Congress
passes the contraceptive-equity law, giving all insured women the right to
contraceptive coverage, his group will continue to file lawsuits.

"This is a wonderful decision, but the fight's not over yet," he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

INDUSTRY: NAICS446110 PHARMACIES & DRUG STORES (80%); SIC5912 DRUG STORES &
PROPRIETARY STORES (80%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (94%);

STATE: WASHINGTON, USA (79%);

CITY: SEATTLE, WA, USA (79%);

COMPANY: BARTELL DRUG CO (80%);   US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
(84%);

ORGANIZATION: US EQUAL EMPLOYMENT OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION (84%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (94%);   WASHINGTON, USA (79%);   SEATTLE, WA, USA
(79%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   CONTRACEPTION (94%); HEALTH
INSURANCE (91%); GENDER & SEX DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT (90%); INSURANCE
COVERAGE (90%); PREGNANCY & CHILDBIRTH (90%); PRESCRIPTION DRUGS (90%); WOMEN'S
HEALTH (90%); GENDER EQUALITY (90%); EMPLOYMENT (90%); DISCRIMINATION (90%);
WOMEN (90%); CIVIL RIGHTS (89%); PREVENTION & WELLNESS (89%); FEMINISM & WOMEN'S
RIGHTS (89%); PETITIONS (88%); PRESCRIPTION DRUG INSURANCE (78%); EMPLOYMENT
DISCRIMINATION (78%); FERTILITY & INFERTILITY (78%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(78%); PHARMACISTS (78%); REPRODUCTIVE TECHNOLOGY (78%); MEN'S HEALTH (77%);
NURSES & NURSING (77%); PHARMACIES (76%); PHARMACIES & DRUG STORES (76%);
LAWYERS (74%); RETAIL PHARMACEUTICALS (73%); UROGENITAL DISORDERS & INJURIES
(73%); PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY (72%); MEN (72%); FAMILY COMPANIES (60%);
COSMETIC & RECONSTRUCTIVE SURGERY (50%);   DISCRIMINATION LAW (90%);

PERSON: ELLEN VARGYAS (57%);

LOAD-DATE: December 15, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2177 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

CHURCH AND STATE;
Drawing a Line In Tenafly

BYLINE: By GEORGE JAMES

SECTION: Section 14NJ; Page 8; Column 2; New Jersey Weekly Desk

LENGTH: 1167 words

DATELINE: TENAFLY


For Chaim Book, an Orthodox Jew, an eruv is simply a symbolic enclosure
consisting primarily of existing utility poles and wires to delineate an area
where observant Jews can push baby strollers and wheelchairs and carry objects
outside their homes on the Sabbath.

"With an eruv, my wife and I can take our children, who are 4, 2 and 1, to
synagogue services, visit friends," said Mr. Book, a 35-year old Manhattan
lawyer who is the treasurer of the Tenafly Eruv Association and its spokesman.
"Without an eruv, somebody has to stay home with the baby."

His remarks may sound innocuous enough, but in this affluent Bergen County
community of 13,500 on the New Jersey palisades, the eruv has become a divisive
symbol -- even among Jewish residents.

The debate culminated last month in a unanimous vote against the eruv by the
borough council -- two members of which are Jewish -- followed by a Federal
lawsuit by the eruv association against the town charging discrimination.

Mayor Ann A. Moscovitz, who is Jewish, denies there is any discrimination
against Orthodox Jews involved and maintains that the council acted in good
conscience after studying the pros and cons at two spirited public hearings
attended by a hundred people each.

Walter Lesnevich, the borough attorney, explained the vote this way: "The main
reason is the eruv would be for just a segment of the town, not everyone. The
town has always prided itself on being inclusive."

The creation of such enclosures has prompted sharp debate around the country and
elsewhere in New Jersey, including most recently a housing development in East
Windsor where the local government eventually intervened on behalf of the eruv.

In Long Branch, the council gave approval to an eruv but was sued by the
American Civil Liberties Union on the ground it violated the separation of
church and state. A Federal judge, however, ruled in 1987 that the eruv was not
a religious symbol but a religious accommodation protected by the constitution.

"The dispute in Tenafly is the exception, not the rule," said Charles Goldstein,
North Jersey director of the Anti-Defamation League, who supported the eruv at
public hearings.

Hundreds of eruvim exist around the state, Mr. Goldstein said, including
neighboring towns like Englewood, Teaneck, Paramus, Fair Lawn and Fort Lee and
around the country including an area in Washington encompassing the White House.

"The bottom line is that an eruv is a religious accommodation," said Mr.
Goldstein, "And there is no logical reason, constitutional basis or legal
impediment to allowing an eruv to either be constructed or maintained in Tenafly
or for that matter in any town."

Mr. Lesnevich, the borough attorney, said, however, that he believed the Long
Branch decision did not apply in Tenafly's case.

"It deals with whether a town may allow an eruv to be erected," Mr. Lesnevich
said. "Our case is whether a town must allow an eruv to be erected. Big
difference."

The eruv the association had completed last September without the town's
sanction incorporates most of Tenafly, which is 4.6 square miles, and links with
the eruv in the city of Englewood to the south.

Opposition to the eruv at public hearings in November and December was at times
acrimonious, with some Jewish residents contending an eruv would attract an
influx of Orthodox Jews, who they feared would change the character of the
community.

A resident who described himself as "a proud, practicing Jew" was quoted in The
Record, a daily newspaper published in Hackensack, after the hearing as saying
the eruv was the "antithesis of inclusion" and created "a separation in Tenafly,
us from them, the tribe from the rest of the community." Another man who
identified himself as a Holocaust survivor whose mother was Orthodox said the
eruv violated the spirit of the Sabbath.

Supporters, who said the issue was one of religious tolerance, included some
residents, the United Jewish Appeal of Bergen County and North Hudson, the
Jewish Community Center on the Palisades and several Christian ministers,
including the president of the Bergen County Council of Churches.

In an affidavit filed with the suit, Mr. Book said he believed anti-Orthodox
sentiments were also held by some town officials, including the mayor.

In a telephone interview, the mayor said such comments hurt and said that she
herself had been a victim of anti-Jewish discrimination when she first tried to
buy a house in Tenafly 38 years ago.

"Some dreadful things were said by the community, Jewish members of the
community, that upset me," Mayor Moscovitz said. "I was very upset because I
heard the kind of phrases being used by my fellow Jews that were used against me
at one time."

Mayor Moscovitz, who did not have to vote on the eruv and declined to give her
stand on the issue, said she believed that the controversy had damaged the town,
which she feels has been tolerant to all groups.

When two members of the Tenafly Eruv Association first approached the mayor in
June 1999, according to Mr. Book's affidavit, she did not appear to be opposed
to giving a ceremonial proclamation granting permission, but said she would take
it up with the council.

Reaction by the public to the eruv was "universally antagonistic" at the next
work session of the council, according to the affidavit. Some council members
questioned whether the council even had jurisdiction in the matter.

In late summer 1999, Mr. Book researched state law and concluded no formal
approval was necessary from Tenafly and so the association sought the ceremonial
approval, to fulfill religious requirements, from Bergen County Executive
William (Pat) Schuber, who granted it.

In April 2000, the association sought and eventually received permisssion from
Bell Atlantic to use certain poles for the eruv. In June, Cablevision agreed to
attach strips of plastic wire to the telephone poles as markers. The affidavit
filed by Mr. Book says the markers are unobtrusive and indistinguishable from
other wires on the poles.

Town officials learned of the eruv last September when some men were seen
putting up wire near the nature preserve. At that point the association was told
it had to make a formal application to the council.

On Dec. 12, the council voted 5-0 (one member was absent) to bar the eruv and
the next day set about getting it dismantled. Four days later the Tenafly Eruv
Association filed suit in federal district court in Newark claiming
discrimination and obtained a temporary restraining order preventing the town
from dismantling the eruv.

In granting the temporary restraining order, Federal District Judge William G.
Bassler said, "It is incredible to this court that at this state of First
Amendment jurisprudence in the state of New jersey, where countless towns have
permitted the construction of eruvs, that the Borough of Tenafly is taking the
position that they cannot be constructed."

A hearing is set in federal court on Tuesday.


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%);

STATE: NEW JERSEY, USA (93%);

CITY: NEW YORK, NY, USA (92%);

COMPANY: TENAFLY ERUV ASSOCIATION (95%);

GEOGRAPHIC: TENAFLY (NJ);   UNITED STATES (93%);   NEW JERSEY, USA (93%);   NEW
YORK, NY, USA (92%);

SUBJECT: JEWS; CHURCH-STATE RELATIONS; WHEELCHAIRS; BABY CARRIAGES, STROLLERS
AND CARRIERS; SABBATH OBSERVANCE  JEWS & JUDAISM (93%); CITY GOVERNMENT (90%);
DISCRIMINATION (90%); RELIGION (90%); LAWYERS (89%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); SUITS & CLAIMS (89%); PUBLIC HEARINGS (88%); CHURCH & STATE (88%);
CHILDREN (77%); LITIGATION (76%); FREEDOM OF RELIGION (76%); REGIONAL & LOCAL
GOVERNMENTS (74%); MAYORS (73%); JUDGES (71%);   ASSOCIATIONS & ORGANIZATIONS
(90%);

PERSON: JAMES, GEORGE  CHAIM BOOK (61%); ANN A MOSCOVITZ (59%); WALTER LESNEVICH

 (56%);

LOAD-DATE: January 1, 2001

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Utility poles are used to mark off an eruv, a zone that allows
observant Jews to push strollers and wheelchairs and carry objects outside their
homes on the Sabbath. (John W. Wheeler for The New York Times)

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2178 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                December 31, 2000, Sunday, Late Edition - Final

Crusader Hopes to Put Aggression on World List of War Crimes

BYLINE: By BARBARA CROSSETTE

SECTION: Section 1; Page 13; Column 1; Foreign Desk

LENGTH: 989 words

DATELINE: UNITED NATIONS


The meaning of evil was seared into Benjamin B. Ferencz's conscience on the
battlefronts of World War II and in the horror of newly liberated Nazi
concentration camps. Half a century later, now in the halls and conference rooms
of the United Nations, he is still wandering in search of closure on that era.

Mr. Ferencz, one of the few survivors of the American prosecution team at the
Nuremberg trials after the war, wants aggression to be declared a war crime. The
idea, Mr. Ferencz has discovered, is not easily accepted.

Genocide and crimes against humanity are concepts that seem to fit the legal
mindset. But aggression, the overarching crime of crimes in his view, is still
too broad, Mr. Ferencz has found. He regularly gets ejected from meetings as he
tries to press his argument, most recently at a conference here planning a new
International Criminal Court, which will not -- at least initially -- consider
charges of aggression among cases it hears.

"The most important crime in the world is the crime of aggressive war," he said,
disdainful of those who say there is no clear definition of aggression. He has
written a two-volume work on the issue, among other books. "So this seems to me
to be important," he said, "that at this belated time in life -- I'm past 80
years of age -- I focus on this."

Mr. Ferencz (pronounced fer-RENZ) tells the story of his life as if it were a
comedy routine. He once said that at barely five feet tall he was too short to
be noticed by the Nazis. He still enjoys ridiculing himself and said his wife
tells him, "Why don't you act your age and go to Florida?"

The self-deprecating humor contrasts with the intensity of his life's work --
teaching international law (most recently at Pace University), campaigning for
the restitution of property seized by the Nazis and, lately, waging an uphill
battle to convince Americans that they should not opt out of international
jurisprudence or world leadership in the battle against war criminals.

"I am guided by a fundamental principle that law is better than war," he said.
"Every step toward that goal is a step forward. Every step backward jeopardizes
the safety of humankind."

International lawyers who sometimes sigh at his persistence or call him a
self-promoter say they have to agree that he has experience and credentials few
share.

Mr. Ferencz -- who speaks French, Spanish, German, Hungarian and Yiddish -- was
born in poverty in 1921 in a thatched house in a village caught in the flux of
borders in Transylvania. "My sister was born in the same house a year and a half
earlier," he said. "She was born a Hungarian. When I was born, I was a
Romanian."

"We came here as poor immigrants," he said. "My parents were illiterate. No
skills, no nothing -- except two little children." He continued: "I was raised
in New York, Hell's Kitchen, a high-density crime area. I recognized early that
I wanted to do crime prevention. I was interested in juvenile delinquency
primarily because I was surrounded by juvenile delinquents. I went to City
College, I went to Harvard Law School -- I got a scholarship."

With a degree in criminal law, he joined the Army in 1943 and was sent into
battle as a corporal. "I was plucked out because I had done research for a
Harvard law professor for a book on war crimes," he said. "I had read every book
that had ever been published on war crimes in the Harvard law library. I was
sent to General Patton's headquarters to set up a war crimes unit. They soon
recognized my talent and promoted me to sergeant."

That job sent him into concentration camps to grab as much documentation as he
could before it was destroyed. Sometimes that meant digging up bodies with his
hands. When his job was done, he said, "I decided to get the hell out of
Germany."

He went AWOL, to the United States, where the Army found him and asked him to go
back as part of the Nuremberg team under Telford Taylor, a principal prosecutor
at the Nazi war crimes trials.

"I got hooked on Telford Taylor," Mr. Ferencz said. Mr. Taylor gave him the
go-ahead to prosecute what became known as the Einsatzgruppen case, in which 22
men in the Nazi SS, including six generals, were convicted of mass murder, and
13 were sentenced to death. Mr. Ferencz's papers from that era have been turned
over to the Holocaust Museum in Washington.

Today, Germany has given him public recognition. The Germans are among those
Europeans campaigning to make aggression a crime under the new International
Criminal Court. The battle could take a decade.

"Every tyrant in the world should begin to commit aggression as fast as he can
because for the next 10 years or so, there is no court in the world that will
try him," Mr. Ferencz said.

As the International Criminal Court moves closer to reality, this week and next
-- with the notion of adding aggression as a crime shelved for the time being --
Mr. Ferencz is distressed by the reluctance of his adopted country and the
Clinton administration to be part of the criminal court.

"The United States was in fact the leader in creating the rule of law in
connection with war at the Nuremberg tribunals and inspired the world," he said,
"and the president of the United States under our Constitution is vested with
the sole authority to negotiate and sign treaties. But the authority seems to
have slipped away."

The Republican-led Senate and the Pentagon want no part of a court that could
potentially put Americans on trial.

"So the president, who came to the United Nations and told the world he wanted
to see this court before the end of the century, appears in the eyes of many
people to be unreliable and deceptive," Mr. Ferencz said.

"We lose our respect in the world. I'm hoping that President Clinton will make a
gift to the American public before he leaves. It's a gift of hope that the
United States will maintain its leadership and support the rule of law."

http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (77%);

STATE: NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%);

COMPANY: UNITED NATIONS  (58%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

ORGANIZATION: UNITED NATIONS  (58%); UNITED NATIONS (58%); INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL COURT  (56%); INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT (56%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (93%); GERMANY (77%);   NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%);

SUBJECT: Terms not available from NYTimes.   WAR CRIMES (91%); WORLD WAR II
(90%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (90%); INTERNATIONAL LAW (89%); WAR & CONFLICT
(89%); HOLOCAUST (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); ETHNIC CONFLICTS

 (78%); INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (77%); CRIMINAL OFFENSES (76%); HUMAN RIGHTS
VIOLATIONS (75%); LAWYERS (73%); GENOCIDE (72%);

PERSON: BENJAMIN B FERENCZ (95%);

LOAD-DATE: December 31, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2193 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                 March 25, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final
                              Correction Appended

Warren Magee, a Lawyer in Unpopular Cases, Dies at 91

BYLINE: By PAUL LEWIS

SECTION: Section A; Page 15; Column 3; National Desk

LENGTH: 880 words


Warren Egbert Magee, a lawyer who represented Nazi war criminals, corrupt
politicians and Senator Joseph R. McCarthy, died on Feb. 25 in Washington. He
was 91.

Mr. Magee represented the last seven Nazi war criminals condemned to death at
the Nuremberg trials and then hanged after World War II. He also defended Baron
Ernst von Weizsacker, state secretary to the German Foreign Office and the
Nazis' Ambassador to the Vatican.

In 1949 Mr. Magee failed to save Representative Andrew J. May, the Kentucky
Democrat who was chairman of the House Military Affairs Committee during World
War II, from a prison sentence for bribery and corruption, though President
Harry S. Truman later pardoned him.

Mr. Magee acted for the anti-communist crusader Senator McCarthy, a Wisconsin
Republican, in the $2 million libel suit that Mr. McCarthy brought against
Senator William Benton, Democrat of Connecticut. The suit asserted that Mr.
Benton had slandered his rival by calling for his removal from the Senate.

Mr. Magee's willingness to represent unpopular defendants stemmed from his
enjoyment of testing the law's limits, his daughter, Dianne M. Nordyke, told The
Washington Post. "He was a lawyer first," Ms. Nordyke said.

A native of Washington, Mr. Magee graduated in 1929 from what is now American
University's Law School and was admitted to the District of Columbia bar in
1930. After working at the Justice Department, he entered private practice in
1938, forming what later became the firm of Magee & Bulow. He retired in the
late 1980's.

In 1946 and 1947, he tried to save the last major Nazi war criminals from death
for crimes against humanity, sentences imposed by the International Military
Tribunal.  Those condemned to die, all former senior officers in the SS,
included Oswald Pohl, blamed for the destruction of the Warsaw Ghetto and the
killing or deportation of more than 56,000 Jews; Otto Ohlendorf, responsible for
the murder of some 90,000 people; and Paul Blobel, convicted of ordering the
deaths of 60,000 Jews.

Mr. Magee delayed their executions until 1951 with a barrage of appeals in the
American courts. In one instance, by arguing that the United States was bound to
respect the new West German Constitution, which banned the death penalty, he won
a reprieve after the condemned men's wives had paid what they were told would be
their last visit.

On June 6, 1951, the United States Supreme Court refused to grant any further
stays of execution. The next day the seven prisoners were hanged in the
courtyard of Landsberg prison in Bavaria. They were the last of the 275 World
War II criminals executed by the United States.

In 1948 Mr. Magee was back in Nuremberg to represent Baron von Weizsacker, one
of 21 Nazi diplomats and officials accused of lesser war crimes. Mr. Magee
argued that his client had sought to brake the excesses of his Nazi superiors.

Baron von Weizsacker was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment, but Mr. Magee
later succeeded in getting this reduced to five years.

In his book "Hitler's Pope: The Secret History of Pius XII" (Viking, 1999), the
British historian John Cornwell paints a reasonably creditable picture of the
baron, saying his great fear was that moves against the Italian Jews would be an
unbearable strain on the pope's promise of impartiality toward the war.

Mr. Magee's propensity for representing unpopular and difficult clients made him
a natural choice to represent Senator McCarthy in his 1953 libel suit against
Senator Benton, who had called Mr. McCarthy a corrupt liar who deserved to be
expelled from the Senate.

In his 1976 book "Men Against McCarthy," Richard M. Fried of Illinois
University, paraphrasing von Clausewitz, said that the two senators regarded the
court case as "politics carried on by other means" and sought to politicize the
hearings. Mr.  Benton even suggested calling Winston Churchill to testify.

As that year's presidential election campaign heated up, Judge Matthew McGuire
of the United States District Court for the District of Columbia decided to
delay his ruling on disputed points in the case "for some little time," which
meant until after the election. When Mr. Benton lost his Senate seat that
November, Mr. McCarthy decided there was no point in pursuing the litigation,
which risked doing him more harm than good.

Mr. Magee appeared in several other unusual cases.

In 1947 he represented the publisher Douglas MacCollum Stewart on perjury
charges arising from an accusation that he had accepted money from the German
charge d'affairs in Washington in the early days of World War II to finance a
magazine urging the United States to keep out of the war.

In 1950 he represented Louis P. Lochner and Frank E. Mason, who had compiled the
book "The Goebbels Diaries," based on the presumed papers of the Nazi leader
Joseph Goebbels, papers that Russian troops in Berlin had ordered a junk book
dealer to remove from the ruins of the Propaganda Ministry in 1946. The United
States government contended that the papers were war loot and that any profits
made from a book based on them should go toward war reparations.

Mr. Magee is survived by his second wife, Leslie Magee, and two children from
his marriage to Sue Mayfield Wren, who died in 1946.


http://www.nytimes.com

TICKER: WPO (NYSE) (55%);   GHC (NYSE) (55%);

INDUSTRY: NAICS517110 WIRED TELECOMMUNICATIONS CARRIERS (55%); NAICS515120
TELEVISION BROADCASTING (55%); NAICS511120 PERIODICAL PUBLISHERS (55%);
NAICS511110 NEWSPAPER PUBLISHERS (55%);   SIC2711 NEWSPAPERS: PUBLISHING, OR
PUBLISHING & PRINTING (55%);

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (97%); HOLY SEE (91%); GERMANY (90%);

STATE: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, USA (79%); BAVARIA, GERMANY (79%); KENTUCKY, USA
(79%); NUREMBERG, GERMANY (57%);

COMPANY: WASHINGTON POST CO (55%);   GRAHAM HOLDINGS CO (55%); NASH HOLDINGS LLC

 (55%);   DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA BAR  (54%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA BAR (54%);

ORGANIZATION: DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA BAR  (54%); DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA BAR (54%);

GEOGRAPHIC: UNITED STATES (97%); HOLY SEE (91%); GERMANY (90%);   DISTRICT OF
COLUMBIA, USA (79%); BAVARIA, GERMANY (79%); KENTUCKY, USA (79%); NUREMBERG,
GERMANY (57%);

SUBJECT: DEATHS (OBITUARIES); BIOGRAPHICAL INFORMATION  DEATHS & OBITUARIES
(98%); WORLD WAR II (93%); LAWYERS (91%); WAR CRIMES (91%); INTERNATIONAL
RELATIONS (90%); CORRUPTION (90%); US DEMOCRATIC PARTY (90%); POLITICAL
CORRUPTION (90%); POLITICS (90%); LEGISLATIVE BODIES (90%); SENTENCING (89%);
CAPITAL PUNISHMENT (89%); CRIMES AGAINST HUMANITY (89%); LAW SCHOOLS (78%);
SUPREME COURTS (78%); INTERNATIONAL COURTS & TRIBUNALS (78%); CRIMINAL
CONVICTIONS (78%); BRIBERY (78%); JUSTICE DEPARTMENTS (78%); DEPORTATION (78%);
LITIGATION (78%); LAW ENFORCEMENT (78%); US REPUBLICAN PARTY (78%); JAIL
SENTENCING (78%); MILITARY COURTS (77%); EMBASSIES & CONSULATES (76%); STATE
DEPARTMENTS & FOREIGN SERVICES (76%); PARDONS (73%); RELIGION (71%); LAW COURTS
& TRIBUNALS (70%); LIBEL & SLANDER (69%); GRADUATE & PROFESSIONAL SCHOOLS (65%);

 HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS (63%); MURDER (58%);   CORRECTIONS (78%);

PERSON: MAGEE, WARREN E; LEWIS, PAUL  WARREN EGBERT MAGEE (95%); JOSEPH R
MCCARTHY (90%); WILLIAM BENTON (75%);

NAME: Warren Egbert Magee

LOAD-DATE: March 25, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

CORRECTION-DATE: March 29, 2000, Wednesday

CORRECTION:

Because of an editing error, an obituary on Saturday about Warren Magee, a
lawyer who represented unpopular clients, misstated his place of death. It was
Tampa, Fla.; he had practiced in Washington.


GRAPHIC: Photo: Warren E. Magee, right, with Representative Andrew J. May, whom
Mr. Magee represented in a corruption case after World War II. (Associated
Press, 1947)

TYPE: Obituary (Obit); Biography

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company


                             2204 of 2210 DOCUMENTS

                               The New York Times

                August 19, 2000, Saturday, Late Edition - Final

PUBLIC LIVES;
Headstrong Rebel Who Became Her Father's Defender

BYLINE: By JAMES STERNGOLD

SECTION: Section A; Page 8; Column 1; National Desk

LENGTH: 931 words

DATELINE: ALBUQUERQUE


BY her own admission, Alberta Lee was a contentious handful as a teenager and a
willful, self-absorbed young woman whose lack of direction concerned her
conservative immigrant parents.

"I was the spoiled brat of the family," Ms. Lee, 26, stated bluntly. "I had a
hard time getting on my feet."

She finds it easy sharing such reflections because in the past 18 months she has
left that needy girl light-years behind. She speaks proudly of the sense of
purpose that has transformed her into a confident woman, then notes bitterly
that the man whose own life-changing experiences forced her to grow has not been
able to share the experience. That is because the man, her father, is being held
in a federal prison.

Ms. Lee is the daughter of Wen Ho Lee, the scientist formerly with Los Alamos
National Laboratory who is charged with mishandling some of the country's most
sensitive nuclear weapons secrets. A small, reed-thin man tucked into a plain
gray suit, Mr. Lee has sat in a federal courtroom here much of this past week
seeking, for the third time since his arrest in December, to be released on
bail. He is represented by a team of lawyers and one lioness who now gives
speeches, raises funds for her father's defense, exhorts his lawyers, meets with
civil rights groups and cajoles or browbeats reporters.

Ms. Lee, who says she still cannot hold back the tears when she visits her
father, says she is determined to do more than just see him exonerated. Because
she and his supporters believe he has been singled out by the government because
he is Chinese-American, she wants to use his case to fight against
discrimination.

Her determination has astounded those who know her.

"There's a positive side to all this, how my sister sort of matured," said her
brother, Chung Lee, 27, a soft-spoken medical student. "I never would have
imagined she could have done this. It's amazing, really."

Victor Hwang, the managing attorney of the Asian Law Caucus in San Francisco, a
civil rights group that filed a brief supporting Dr. Lee's assertion that he is
a victim of racial discrimination, said Ms. Lee has "been one of the most
interesting people to work with. She's the first person I've seen who has had
this kind of growth. She's still in shock and denial, like, 'How can this
happen?' But then she goes back and works very hard."

Ms. Lee described herself as a somewhat rebellious, emotional young woman while
growing up in Los Alamos, sometimes more than her conservative father could
handle. She recalled how once, when a friend showed up with torn jeans, her
father was aghast and offered to patch them up right then and there. "That's how
conservative he is," Ms. Lee said. "It also shows how, you know, clueless he
is."

But while her father was in many ways a man of tradition who spoke Mandarin at
home, Ms. Lee never had strong feelings about her Chinese heritage. She attended
the University of California at Los Angeles, where she took a few courses on
Asian-American history, but said they made little impression. "I just felt that
the problems with discrimination didn't apply to me," she said.

It was only when her father became entangled in the criminal investigation that
she began to see her ethnicity in a different way.

She was working as a technical writer with a computer company in North Carolina,
in late 1998, living with her boyfriend, now her fiance, when she started
getting worried phone calls from her father and brother. Her father was being
investigated, she was told. Suddenly she felt herself once again in the
uncomfortably familiar role of family drama queen. She urged her father to get a
lawyer, but was ignored.

"My dad and I told her, 'Just chill out,' " said her brother, Chung. "I'd just
be telling her she was overreacting."

Ms. Lee found the experience doubly painful. "Maybe that's the theme of this
whole story, that I had to fight my whole life for someone to listen to me in my
family, even on this," she said. "I don't mean to sound superbitter, but I feel
that way."

ONCE her father's name surfaced, after officials said they suspected that he had
given nuclear secrets to China, she found that not only were people listening,
but that they eagerly sought her out. She gave her first speech on her father's
birthday, last December, just a few weeks after he was arrested. Her real coming
of age, she said, occurred a few months later, when she was asked to address a
group of Asian-Americans at Harvard.

"That was really when I realized you could make an impression on a crowd," she
recalled. "I really felt like, 'Now, I have a voice, I have a purpose.' I
realized I wasn't just speaking for my father. I was speaking for
Asian-Americans, too."

So now she is booked for speaking engagements through October, while still
holding a job as a technical writer in San Francisco, and helping support some
family members.

"Honestly, I don't think she was viewed within the family as someone they would
really listen to before this," said Brian Sun, the family's lawyer. "But Wen Ho
tells me now how proud he is. He just asks me to make sure she doesn't overdo
her involvement. He wants her to have her own life."

As ever, Ms. Lee has her own ideas and is talking about becoming a civil rights
lawyer.

"She really believes her father's fate rests with her," Mr. Hwang said. "She
feels tremendous pressure. The main flaw I find in her is she hasn't developed
much selectivity in who she will deal with. She won't let any opportunity go by
without making the effort. I'm afraid she's going to burn herself out."


http://www.nytimes.com

COUNTRY: UNITED STATES (92%); CHINA (79%);

STATE: NEW MEXICO, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (73%);

CITY: SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (50%);

COMPANY: LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY  LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY  (83%);
LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY (83%);

ORGANIZATION: LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY  LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY
(83%); LOS ALAMOS NATIONAL LABORATORY (83%);

GEOGRAPHIC: CHINA; UNITED STATES;   UNITED STATES (92%); CHINA (79%);   NEW
MEXICO, USA (92%); CALIFORNIA, USA (73%);   SAN FRANCISCO, CA, USA (50%);

SUBJECT: ATOMIC WEAPONS; ESPIONAGE  WOMEN (90%); HUMAN RIGHTS ORGANIZATIONS
(89%); DISCRIMINATION (89%); LAWYERS (87%); ASIAN AMERICANS (77%); RACE & RACISM

 (77%); FAMILY (77%); SCIENCE NEWS (73%); SCIENCE & TECHNOLOGY (73%); SUITS &
CLAIMS (73%); MILITARY WEAPONS (72%); CIVIL RIGHTS (70%); BAIL (69%); NUCLEAR
WEAPONS (69%); ARRESTS (68%); ESPIONAGE (67%);   RACISM & XENOPHOBIA (77%);
CORRECTIONS (69%);

PERSON: LEE, ALBERTA; LEE, WEN HO; STERNGOLD, JAMES  WEN HO LEE (94%);

NAME: Alberta Lee

LOAD-DATE: August 19, 2000

LANGUAGE: ENGLISH

GRAPHIC: Photo: Alberta Lee, daughter of the scientist charged with mishandling
nuclear secrets. (Steve Northup for The New York Times)

TYPE: Biography

                   Copyright 2000 The New York Times Company
